Body and Health in
Yoga, Ayurveda, and Tantra

i
;
’ i

Lo ih)

' !

‘ 4itl
tie
|
iii

RELIGIOUS
THERAPEUTICS

SUNY series in Religious Studies
Harold Coward, editor

RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
Body and Health
in Yoga, ¯Ayurveda, and Tantra
G R E G O R Y
P.
F I E L D S
S t a t e
U n i v e r s i t y
o f
N e w
Yo r k

Published by
State University of New York Press, Albany
© 2001 State University of New York
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever without written permission. No part of this book may be
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any
means including electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior permission 
in writing of the publisher.
For information, address State University of New York Press, 
90 State Street, Suite 700, Albany, N.Y. 12207
Production, Laurie Searl
Marketing, Dana E. Yanulavich
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Fields, Gregory P., 1961–
Religious therapeutics : body and health in yoga, Ayurveda, and Tantra/Gregory P. Fields.
p. cm. — (SUNY series in religious studies)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 0–7914–4915–7 (alk. paper) — isbn 0–7914–4916–5 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Medicine, Ayurvedic. 2. Medicine—Religious aspects—Hinduism. 3. Yoga.
4. Tantrism. 5. Body, Human— Religious aspects—Hinduism.
1. Title. 11. Series.
r606.f53
2001
615.5'3—dc21
00–049234

v
CONTENTS
List of Figures and Tables
ix
Acknowledgments
xi
Symbols and Notes on Sources
xiii
Abbreviations
xv
Introduction
THE IDEA OF RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
1
Religion and Medicine
2
A Model of Religious Therapeutics
6
Chapter One
BODY AND PHILOSOPHIES OF HEALING
11
Body in Western Philosophy of Medicine
11
Presuppositions about the Body
11
Descartes on Body and Medicine
14
Body in the History of Western Medicine
17
Iconoclastic Concepts of Body in Yoga, Tantra, and ¯Ayurveda
21
Traditional Indian Views of Person and Body
21
Yoga’s Use of the Body to Transcend Itself
27
Tantra’s Enlightenable Body
29
Body as the Ground of Well-being in Åyurveda
36

Chapter Two
MEANINGS OF HEALTH IN ¯AYURVEDA
45
Inquiry into Health
47
Determinants of Health
50
Biological and Ecological Determinants
50
Life, Development, and Longevity
Equilibrium
Adaptation
Non-susceptibility
Vitality, Endurance, and Relaxation
Medical and Psychological Determinants
58
Normality
Freedom from Pain
Wholeness and Integration
Awareness and Mental Clarity
Sociocultural and Aesthetic Determinants
69
Relationality
Creativity
Generativity
Enjoyment
Metaphysical and Religious Determinants
75
Self-identity
Freedom
¯Ayurvedic Religious Therapeutics
78
Chapter Three
CLASSICAL YOGA AS A RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTIC
83
Meanings and Forms of Yoga
85
Meanings of ‘Yoga’
85
Yoga in the Vedas, UpaniÓsads, and Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a
87
Yoga in the Vedas
Yoga in the UpaniÓsads
Yoga in the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a
Traditions of Yoga Practice
91
A Matrix of Classical Yoga as a Religious Therapeutic
94
Metaphysical and Epistemic Foundations
94
Yoga’s Therapeutic Paradigm
Yoga’s Diagnosis of the Human Condition
The Yogic Remedy
Soteriology
99
Self-realization by Healing the Afﬂictions (Kle´sas)
vi
religious therapeutics

Value Theory and Ethics: Health and the Good in Yoga
105
First Limb: Moral Self-restraints—Yama
Second Limb: Moral Commitments—Niyama
Physical Practice: The Soteriological Role of Body and 
Health in Yoga
112
Third Limb: Postures—¯Asana
Fourth Limb: Regulation of Vital Energy 
Through Breath—Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama
Fifth Limb: Withdrawal of the Senses—Praty¯ah¯ara
Cultivation of Consciousness: The Polarity of Sam¯adhi and 
Vy¯adhi (Illness)
122
Sixth Limb: Concentration—Dh¯araÓn¯a
Seventh Limb: Meditation—Dhy¯ana
Eighth Limb: Meditative Trance—Sam¯adhi
Liberation as Healing in Classical Yoga
131
Healing and Yoga’s Therapeutic Paradigm
131
Wholeness and Holiness
134
Identity and Freedom
136
Chapter Four
TANTRA AND AESTHETIC THERAPEUTICS
139
Body and T¯antric Yogas
140
Features of T¯antric Practice
140
Sexuality in Tantra
143
KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga
146
Mantra Yoga
149
Aesthetic Therapeutics in Tantra
153
Therapeutic Elements of Tantra
154
Sacred Music
155
Sacred Music as a Religious Therapeutic
157
How Is Sacred Music Therapeutic?
159
Breath, Music, and Healing
160
Body as Instrument of Sacred Music
161
Elements of Healing in Sanskrit Chant
163
Healing in Identiﬁcation of Self with Cosmos
164
Sound as a Bridge Between Substantial and Non-substantial Being
165
Conclusion
COMMUNITY:
RELATIONALITY IN RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
167
contents
vii

Notes
175
Sources
191
Indices
Subject Index
201
Sanskrit Terms
211
Index of Names
217
Sanskrit Texts
221
viii
religious therapeutics

FIGURES
1.1
Åyurveda’s three dh¯atus or doÓsas
43
4.1
Ír¯ı Yantra
143
TABLES
Major dimensions of religious therapeutics
1–2
Branches of religious therapeutics
8, 167
The eight branches of Åyurvedic medicine
37
The four branches of Åyurvedic medical knowledge
46
Six phases of the day according to Maharishi Åyurveda
81
Branches of religious therapeutics based on classical
Yoga’s eight limbs
84
The ﬁve v¯ayus or vital forces
120
The eight stages of sam¯adhi
127
The four stages of samprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi
129
Yoga’s therapeutic paradigm in the Yoga-bh¯aÓsya
132
Yoga’s therapeutic paradigm in the Yoga-s¯utras
134
The seven cakras 
148
ix

This page intentionally left blank.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks ﬁrst to K. N. Upadhyaya, Emeritus Professor of Philosophy, Uni-
versity of Hawaii. Also of the Department of Philosophy at the Univer-
sity of Hawaii, I thank Roger T. Ames, Eliot Deutsch, and Steve Odin.
Special thanks to Cromwell Crawford, of the Department of Religion at
the University of Hawaii. Thanks to Southern Illinois University at Ed-
wardsville for two Summer Research Fellowships for travel to India and
revision of the manuscript. Thanks to R. Neelameggham for contribu-
tion of the font for diacriticals, and to Hariharan Írinivasan for techni-
cal assistance. Thanks to Harold Coward of the University of Victoria,
editor of the Series in Religious Studies, and Nancy Ellegate and Laurie
Searl of the State University of New York Press. Thanks to John Thomas
Casey of the Department of Theological Studies at Loyola Marymount
University for his drawing of Íri Yantra, and to Tammy Epperson for the
cover concept. For generous help with the index, thanks to Katrina
Lemke and Juli Jacobson. I am very thankful for the abundance and op-
portunities that allowed me to do this work. Great thanks to family and
friends for countless instances of help, and to all those who have con-
tributed in many ways to the completion of this book.
xi

This page intentionally left blank.

SYMBOLS AND NOTES ON SOURCES
Radical
√
indicates Sanskrit verbal roots or Indo-European
root words.
Single brackets [
] in translations enclose words added for clariﬁcation.
Quotations from the Yoga-s¯utras are translated by Gregory P. Fields.
Quotations from the Yoga-bh¯aÓsya and the Tattva-vai´s¯arad¯ı are from the
English translation Patañjali’s Yoga S¯utras by R¯ama Pras¯ada (New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1912, 1978).
Quotations from the Åyurvedic text Caraka-saÓmhit¯a and its commentary
Åyurveda-d¯ıpik¯a are from the translation of R. K. Sharma and Bhagwan
Dash: Caraka-saÓmhit¯a of Agnive´sa: Text with English Translation and
Critical Exposition Based on CakrapaÓnidatta’s Åyurveda D¯ıpik¯a, 3 vols.
(Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Vol. 94, 1976). Clariﬁcations
are provided based on the translation of P. V. Sharma: Caraka-saÓmhit¯a:
Agnive´sa’s Treatise Reﬁned and Annotated by Charaka and Redacted by
DÓrÓdhabala, 4 vols. (Varanasi: Chaukhamba Orientalia, Jaikrishnadas
Åyurveda Series, Vol. 36, 1994, 1995), in consultation with etymological
and secondary sources.
Quotations from the T¯antric texts Mah¯anirv¯aÓna Tantra and ÓSÓatcakra-
nir¯upaÓna are from, respectively: The Great Liberation (Madras: Ganesh
and Co., 1913, 1953), and The Serpent Power (Madras: Ganesh and Co.,
1918, 1964), both translated by Arthur Avalon (Sir John Woodroffe).
Etymological analyses of Sanskrit terms are based on:
English-Sanskrit Dictionary by V. S. Apte. New Delhi: Publica-
tions India, reprint 1989.
xiii

A Practical Sanskrit Dictionary by Arthur Anthony Macdonnell.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1924, 1990.
A Sanskrit-English Dictionary by Sir Monier Monier-Williams.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1899, 1974.
The Roots, Verb-Forms and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit
Language by William Dwight Whitney. New Haven, CT: Ameri-
can Oriental Society, 1885, 1945.
Secondary sources are cited in endnotes, and primary sources are cited in
the body of the text, identiﬁed by the abbreviations on the next page.
xiv
religious therapeutics

ABBREVIATIONS
AV
Atharva-veda
AD
Åyurveda-d¯ıpik¯a
BhG
Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a 
CS
Caraka-saÓmhit¯a
HYP
HaÓtha Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a
MNT
Mah¯anirv¯aÓna Tantra
RV
ÓRg-veda
SK
S¯aÓmkhya-k¯arik¯a
SKB
S¯aÓmkhya-k¯arik¯a-bh¯aÓsya
SCN
ÓSaÓt-cakra-nir¯upaÓna
TV
Tattva-vai´s¯arad¯ı
Up.
UpaniÓsads
BÓrhad. Up. BÓrhad¯araÓnyaka
Ch¯and. Up. Ch¯andogya
KaÓth. Up. KaÓtha
Mait. Up. Maitri
MuÓnÓd. Up. MuÓnÓdaka
Ívet. Up. Ívet¯a´svatara
Tait. Up. Taittir¯ıya
VC
Viveka-c¯uÓd¯amaÓni
YBh
Yoga-bh¯aÓsya
YS
Yoga-s¯utras
xv

This page intentionally left blank.

1
Introduction
THE IDEA OF RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
World religious traditions abound with connections between healing and
spirituality—for instance, the work of Jesus as savior and healer. Another
example is Navajo religion’s focus on healing as restoration of well-being
to persons who suffer some form of digression from the ﬂow of the life-
force. The Hindu religio-philosophical tradition, operating from the
premise that life is suffering, is a rich source of therapeutics to remedy the
human condition. The Hindu subtraditions are in general concerned with
well-being of persons in their spiritual dimension, and thus emerges a
concept of ‘spiritual health.’ This study examines relations among body,
health, and religiousness in Åyurveda, classical Yoga, and Tantra. These
three traditions treat the relationship between embodied life and sacred
life in ways that are interestingly different from standard Western views.
And because of their emphasis on physicality, these three traditions are
also unusual in the Hindu context, since Hinduism has a strong inclina-
tion to conceive of spiritual Self-realization or God-realization as entail-
ing transcendence of physicality.
The idea of religious therapeutics embraces principles and practices
that support human well-being with recognition of the common ground
and cooperation of health and religiousness. Dimensions of religious
therapeutics include the following:
Major Dimensions of Religious Therapeutics
• Religious meanings that inform philosophy of health and medicine
• Religious means of healing

• Health as a support to religious life
• Religiousness itself as a remedy for the suffering of the human condition
The idea of religious therapeutics can apply to any number of relations
among health, healing, and religiousness. Taking a broad view, a whole
tradition can be examined from the standpoint of its therapeutic impetus,
or the term religious therapeutic can designate speciﬁc principles and
practices, such as meditation, or use of prayer for healing.
In recent decades, there has been a surge of interest in health and
healing in the context of spirituality. Humankind has an increasingly
sharp awareness of threats to the health of the earth and its inhabitants,
and of spiritual poverty as one of the factors underlying damage to envi-
ronmental and human health. Contemporary thought and culture show
strong interest in healing—physical, psychological, environmental, soci-
etal, political, and religious. The model of religious therapeutics is of-
fered as a heuristic or interpretive lens for identifying and understanding
relations among healing and religiousness in Hindu and other world tra-
ditions. Philosophically, the many constellations of factors in the com-
mon domain of religion and medicine reveal a great deal about the
human being—embodied and spiritual. In addition, I hope that an evolv-
ing model of religious therapeutics will contribute to a more satisfactory
account of health, applicable to human life in its many dimensions, in-
cluding the spiritual, thus informing productive work in philosophy of
medicine, health education, health-care, and health-related pastoral care.
RELIGION AND MEDICINE
Religion and medicine are distinct ﬁelds of human endeavor, but the need
for well-being of body, mind, and spirit marks the common ground of
medical and religious effort. The idea of religious therapeutics is evident
is Paul Tillich’s position on the intimate relation of religion and healing.
His view is based on New Testament accounts of healing, which he says
should not be taken as miracle stories, but as illustrations of Jesus’ iden-
tity as the universal healer. Human beings in their ﬁnitude require
‘particular’ healing, that is, healing of speciﬁc ailments through surgical,
pharmaceutical, psychotherapeutic, and like means. But the human being
in his or her ultimate nature needs salvation or liberation in a total and
ultimate sense. Jesus as healer embodies the meaning of savior: the (Gk.)
s¯ot¯er or healer is the one who makes healthy and whole.1
2
religious therapeutics

The idea of religious therapeutics demands inquiry into the relation-
ship of soteriology (the theory of salvation) with health and healing. The
common ground of salvation and healing is evident in etymological anal-
ysis. The words ‘soteriology’ and ‘savior’ are derived from the Greek verb
s¯ozein, ‘to save.’2 The Latin equivalent is salv¯are, which is the source of
the word ‘salvation.’3 The Indo-European root √sol- (variant √sal-) means
‘whole.’ Descendents of √sol- include the Latin s¯alus, health or whole-
ness, and the English words save and salvation.4 Salv¯are can denote reli-
gious salvation, and can also mean ‘to make whole.’5 ‘To make whole’ is
the literal meaning of the Old English verbal root h¯al, origin of the word
heal. Heal carries the meaning of restoration from an undesirable condi-
tion, and at an elemental level pertains to saving, purifying, cleansing,
and repairing to bring about restoration from evil, suffering, or unwhole-
someness. These are also functions of religion. Reference to healing in the
domains of human physicality and psychology is the most common use
of the word, but the fundamental meaning of healing is recovery of
wholeness, which spiritual liberation entails.
The word therapeutic is from the Greek therapúein, and pertains to
curing and restoring. The term therapeía, healing (akin to theráp¯on,
‘attendant’), can connote religious or medical endeavor, for it refers to the
attending of a healer to a patient, and also designates ‘attending’ in the
form of religious ministering.6 The terms ‘cure’ and ‘restore’ reveal two
perspectives on healing. Curing refers to alleviating impaired functioning
and discomfort, while restoring connotes returning to an original state of
well-being. These two meanings support a conception of healing as hav-
ing religious as well as medical implications. The close relationship
between healing and religion is well substantiated in the Indian tradition,
where liberation is often construed as return to the unimpaired state of
one’s true nature. This is reﬂected in the Sanskrit terms for health, sv¯as-
thya and svasthat¯a: ‘self-abiding’ or ‘coinciding with oneself’ (sva
‘oneself’; √sth¯a ‘to stand’). Wilhelm Halbfass notes in his analysis of the
Indian tradition’s therapeutic paradigms that in Advaita Ved¯anta, these
two terms are used by Ía˙nkara and his disciple Sure´svara “to refer to their
soteriological goal, the unobstructed presence and identity of the ¯atman.”7
The comparable term in classical Yoga is svar¯upe ‘vast¯anam: establish-
ment in one’s own essential nature, which is Yoga’s prime goal [YS 1.3].
Contemporary interest in religious therapeutics is evident in the ex-
pansion of research activity under the rubric of religion and medicine.
For instance, in his article “Mantra in Åyurveda” Kenneth Zysk writes:
the idea of religious therapeutics
3

At all times and in almost every culture, a connection between medicine
and religion is demonstrable. The belief that by soliciting divine inter-
vention through prayer and ritual no disease is incurable cuts across cul-
tural boundaries.8
Zysk’s emphasis here is medical applications of religious speech in
Åyurveda, and although religious therapeutics may include religious
means of treating health problems, religious therapeutics embrace many
other relations between healing and religiousness. In classical Yoga, phys-
ical and psychological maladies may be remedied by religious effort, but
such healing is instrumental to a more fundamental healing: restoration
to one’s Self-nature as consciousness, unencumbered by psychophysical
limitations.
Religion and medicine serve the common purpose of helping per-
sons with transitions through the stages of living and dying, and they
share the aim of remedying human suffering. In India, the relation that
obtains between religion and medicine is importantly different from that
of the dominant tradition of the Anglo-European world, where science
and religion are treated more dichotomously. In the West, medicine is
oriented toward the body and life in the present world, while religion is
considered the province of non-material spirit, and particularly con-
cerned with an afterlife. In the Indian tradition, there is a much greater
afﬁnity between religion and medicine. One of the major commentaries
on the Yoga-s¯utras, V¯acaspati-mi´sra’s Tattva-Vai´s¯arad¯ı, states that the
science of Yoga is similar to the science of medicine for both “are taught
for the welfare of all” [TV 2.15]. The contrast of Anglo-European and
Indian perspectives on religion and medicine is rooted in their divergent
metaphysical conceptions of person, body, and human potential. The In-
dian tradition has a more holistic view of the human being as a unity,
with psychophysical and spiritual dimensions. The ﬁrst three of the tra-
ditional four aims of life (dharma, righteousness; artha, material well-
being; k¯ama, enjoyment; and mokÓsa, liberation) serve embodied well-
being, but, more than that, each can contribute to attainment of the
fourth and ultimate goal: self-realization and spiritual liberation.
Anglo-European and Indian approaches to health and spirituality
diverge also in the way the two traditions regard knowledge. While the
Indian tradition in general gives more credence to intuitive and mystical
knowledge, in the West, science and reason are strongly valued. Medicine
in the Anglo-European tradition relies heavily on empirical knowledge,
but in Hinduism, religious knowledge, and, to a large extent, medical
4
religious therapeutics

knowledge, are rooted in the Vedic knowledge intuited by ancient seers.
Vedic knowledge is considered to provide comprehension that is more
complete and truthful than knowledge gained through the senses.
Åyurveda exempliﬁes cooperation of empirical and intuitive knowledge,
and attention to both earthly and spiritual concerns.
From the standpoint of value theory, the Western presupposition
that rationality is among the highest goods supports the application of
reason and knowledge for utilization of the earth’s natural resources.
Technologically developed material resources are central to diagnosis and
treatment in contemporary scientiﬁc medicine, evident in the use of so-
phisticated diagnostic instruments, pharmacology, and surgery. On the
Indian view, however, healing involves transformations not only of mat-
ter but also of spirit, and healing incorporates self-knowledge and self-
transformation, guided by essential elements of Indian value, such as cul-
tivation of one’s inherent awareness, and the uncovering of one’s ultimate
Self-nature.
. . . yoga and other practices are helping to change our whole concept of
health and restoring the broken link between medicine and spirituality.
As the modern practitioner ﬁnds himself more and more helpless in the
face of purely functional disorders, we seem to be on the eve of a medi-
cal revolution, which should restore the lost balance and do way, among
other things, with excessive reliance on drugs.9
Classical Yoga is a source of many speciﬁc concepts and practices that
promote well-being, psychophysical and spiritual. Further, Yoga is a par-
adigmatic system of religious therapeutics—a path of healing that serves
the purpose of religious liberation. Among world traditions, classical
Yoga is a useful starting point for inquiry into the relationship of medical
and religious health because it connects the cultivation of physical and
psychological health with spiritual well-being and exempliﬁes the idea of
religious liberation as healing.
In the Indian religious and philosophical traditions in general, the
human body is considered different from the true Self that is eligible for
liberation. Body and mind are generally considered as a unity, and an on-
tological distinction is drawn between body/mind and Self, rather than
between body and mind, as Western traditions tend to do.10 Consonant
with the Indian view, I use the term psychophysical to refer to states and
processes of embodied human life. This term distinguishes the domain of
body/mind from that of the ultimate Self. Indian philosophy is often ster-
eotyped as strictly dualistic as regards body and Self. In particular,
the idea of religious therapeutics
5

S¯aÓmkhya and classical Yoga have dualistic ontologies, with conscious-
ness and materiality as the two primordial forms of being. However, in-
vestigation of the relation of spirituality and healing in Yoga and other
Indian traditions reveals a range of interpretations of the relation of body
and Self. As regards concepts of health, Western thinking tends to regard
health in physical and psychological terms, but Indian views of person
and body substantiate a broader interpretation of health, embracing reli-
gious and other dimensions of well-being, and demonstrating a closer re-
lation between medical and religious concerns.
Psychophysical health is integral to Yoga’s religious path, but even
more important is the healing that constitutes liberation: the prevailing of
a person’s true nature, and the overcoming of limitations and suffering.
Classical Yoga is a system of self-cultivation enjoined for the attainment
of liberation, and progress on Yoga’s religious path is a process of healing
(recovering the wholeness) of one’s true nature. Liberation as actualiza-
tion of unobstructed self-identity, and, consequently, the elimination of
suffering, constitute achievement of the health of the person in her or his
fundamental nature. While cultivation of body and health is not an end,
but a means in classical Yoga, Yoga makes a signiﬁcant contribution to
our understanding of health and the relationship of health and religious-
ness. This study offers a model of religious therapeutics, based on analy-
sis of body and health in Åyurveda, classical Yoga, and Tantra. Relations
between healing and spiritual life are treated within the two following
broad categories:
1. Health in its ordinary meaning, pertaining to physical and psycho-
logical well-being.
2. Liberation as healing in an ultimate sense.
A MODEL OF RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
Religious therapeutics in classical Yoga operate from a concept of the
person as having a psychophysical and a spiritual dimension. Each of
these dimensions is subject to healing; in short, to overcoming problems
that restrict well-being and vitality, produce suffering, and interfere with
the prevailing of the person’s true nature. Both psychophysical and spiri-
tual meanings of health are instrumental in classical Yoga. As regards
psychophysical health, this study focuses on the soteriological role of
body and health in Yoga and argues that the reﬁned awareness, disci-
6
religious therapeutics

pline, and cultivation of the body/mind are integral to Yogic religious
life, and prepare one for the higher stages of cultivation of consciousness
leading to liberation. Presentation of classical Yoga as a paradigm of reli-
gious therapeutics addresses both somatic and spiritual experience, fo-
cusing on these two main themes:
1. Although body and psychophysical health are of instrumental and
not ultimate value in classical Yoga, body and health have signiﬁcant
soteriological functions.
2. Liberation in Yoga is healing in an ultimate sense. It concerns attain-
ment of well-being with respect to the human being’s most funda-
mental nature and highest soteriological potential.
Because the word ‘health’ is ordinarily used to denote physical, psycho-
logical or psychophysical well-being, it might seem that the use of
‘health’ in reference to spiritual well-being is a metaphorical application
of the term. However, there are grounds for broadening the extension of
the term ‘health’ to apply to the well-being and freedom from suffering of
the whole person. If the human being is considered to be more than a psy-
chophysical entity (as is the case in Yoga, where puruÓsa or consciousness
is held to be the person’s true nature), then it is legitimate to speak of
health with respect to this spiritual Self, and of ultimate liberation from
suffering as healing. Self-identity is a signiﬁcant determinant of both psy-
chophysical and spiritual well-being. This idea is suggested by Wilhelm
Halbfass, who identiﬁes the recovery of self-identity and well-being as a
point of connection between psychophysical healing and religious liber-
ation.11 The concept of liberation as healing utilizes meanings of health
revealed by analysis of Åyurvedic determinants of health, and explores
metaphysical conceptions of personhood—such as freedom and iden-
tity—in their medical and soteriological implications. A model of reli-
gious therapeutics is presented below with eight branches. The ﬁrst ﬁve
areas, based on classical Yoga’s eight limbs, provide an initial matrix of
religious therapeutics. A more comprehensive model is established by in-
corporating the traditions of Åyurveda and Tantra. The Åyurvedic view
of the person differs signiﬁcantly from classical Yoga’s position that body
and Self are utterly distinct. Åyurveda adds the dimension of medical
therapeutics within a holistic context of embodied and spiritual life. In
Tantra, body can be understood as a vehicle to enlightenment, and as en-
lightenable itself. Tantra adds to an evolving model of religious therapeu-
tics the dimension of aesthetics, incorporating sacred and healing music,
the idea of religious therapeutics
7

dance, and art. Unlike classical Yoga, Tantra esteems nature, human
physicality, the feminine, and relationality. Classical Yoga, Tantra, and
Åyurveda are featured here in part because their somatic orientations
make their therapeutic dimensions more palpable. These three traditions
are in many ways iconoclastic within the larger context of Hindu views
of the body, and therefore they are especially interesting for extending
our insight into body and religiousness. Finally, Åyurveda, Tantra, and
other world traditions expand the model of religious therapeutics with
the notion of community: relationality and communication in the do-
mains of nature, culture, and the sacred.
Chapter 1, “Body and Philosophies of Healing,” examines Anglo-
European and Indian assumptions, setting the stage for analysis of the
meaning of health, and supporting the claim that ‘health’ is properly
predicated of the person, not the body or body/mind only. Chapter 2,
“Meanings of Health in Åyurveda,” presents determinants of health de-
rived from the text Caraka-saÓmhit¯a, and its commentary Åyurveda-
d¯ıpik¯a. Åyurveda has a comprehensive view of health as a positive state.
It is concerned with physical more than spiritual well-being, yet it is
grounded in Hindu religio-philosophical principles, and expands the
model of religious therapeutics by providing a system of health-
maintenance and medicine within a religious context. Fifteen determi-
nants of health are discussed under four headings: (1) biological and eco-
logical, (2) medical and psychological, (3) sociocultural and aesthetic,
and (4) metaphysical and religious. Criticism may be lodged against the
Indian emphasis on spirituality to the extent that mundane well-being is
neglected, but Åyurveda is an antidote to such a criticism, with its focus
on healthful life as holy life.
8
religious therapeutics 
Branches of Religious Therapeutics
1. Metaphysical and epistemic foundations
2. Soteriology (theory of salvation or liberation)
3. Value theory and ethics
4. Physical practice
5. Cultivation of consciousness
6. Medicine and health-care
7. Aesthetics
8. Community

Chapter 3, “Classical Yoga as a Religious Therapeutic,” analyzes
Patañjali’s Yoga-s¯utras and its commentaries Yoga-bh¯aÓsya and Tattva-
vi´s¯arad¯ı to present a matrix of classical Yoga as a system of religious ther-
apeutics. This analysis shows Yoga’s stance on meanings of health in the
psychophysical and the spiritual dimensions of human life, and explores
connections between Yoga’s therapeutic and soteriological elements. De-
terminants of health excavated from Åyurveda illuminate the ultimate
soteriological healing that Yoga offers: the concepts of wholeness, iden-
tity, and freedom integral to psychophysical health are operative in meta-
physical and soteriological domains as well. Classical Yoga’s most signif-
icant feature as a religious therapeutic is that liberation is healing: the
curing of limitations and suffering in an ultimate sense.
Chapter 4, “Tantra and Aesthetic Therapeutics,” draws on the tra-
dition of Tantra, particularly the texts Mah¯anirv¯aÓna Tantra and ÓSÓat-
cakra-nir¯up¯aÓna to add aesthetics as a dimension of religious therapeutics.
As an example of comparative inquiry into religious therapeutics, I dis-
cuss sacred music as a religious therapeutic in several Asian and Native
American traditions. In the conclusion, “Community: Relationality in
Religious Therapeutics,” the model of religious therapeutics is supple-
mented with the dimension of community, incorporating ecological, so-
cial, and religious relationality and communication.
Inquiry into religious therapeutics can address particular traditions,
or be done comparatively. One line of inquiry is investigation of particular
themes such as sacred music, or meditation practices, or ways of praying
for healing. Another approach is examination of entire traditions or
sects, in order to excavate their therapeutic concerns and contributions.
Inquiry into medicine and religion in world traditions beneﬁts from col-
laborative effort. Here I offer initial steps toward identifying relations
among body, health, and religiousness, ﬁnding the Indian tradition fertile
ground for accomplishing the main purpose of this study: establishing
foundations of an interpretive model of religious therapeutics.
the idea of religious therapeutics
9

This page intentionally left blank.

Chapter One
BODY AND PHILOSOPHIES OF HEALING
Investigation of health and religiousness requires inquiry into ways of
understanding the body. Human beings are embodied beings, and must
come to terms with their physicality in the process of realizing their spiri-
tual potential. This chapter examines concepts of body, showing how
they ground philosophies of healing, with Anglo-European approaches
providing a comparative context for Hindu views. Hindu concepts of the
body are represented here by classical Yoga, Tantra, and Åyurveda,
systems that are unusual in the Hindu tradition because of the priority
they give, in different ways, to the body. The spiritually oriented healing
paths offered by these three traditions together provide a model of reli-
gious therapeutics, useful for interpreting relations between healing and
spirituality in world traditions.
BODY IN WESTERN PHILOSOPHY OF MEDICINE
Presuppositions about the Body
Among the root philosophical presuppositions of the Anglo-European
tradition is Plato’s concept of the person, from which arises his exhorta-
tion to purify the soul (by means of a philosophical therapeutic) from
the prison-house of the body. The body, according to Plato, is the source
of obstacles to attainment of pure, rational consciousness—obstacles
such as maintenance demands, sensual distraction, sickness and pain,
and motivation toward conﬂict and war.1 Nietzsche speaks from the
modern period to recognize one of the great mistakes of the Western
philosophical tradition: “They despised the body: they left it out of the
11

account: more, they treated it as an enemy.”2 Nietzsche inverts Platonic
idealism, and against “the despisers of the body” voices a counter-
exhortation to recognize the body’s wisdom:
Behind your thoughts and feelings, my brother, stands a mighty com-
mander, an unknown sage—he is called Self. He lives in your body, he is
your body.3
Nietzsche calls for a redress of the Western philosophical orientation op-
erative since Plato, in which body is opposed to mind, mind is valorized,
and body is overlooked or maligned. Signiﬁcant among Western concepts
of the body are Plato’s prison-house, the New Testament characterization
of the body as a temple, and the seventeenth-century scientiﬁc view of
body as machine, epitomized in the thought of Descartes. In these no-
tions of the human body, the metaphor of body as container is dominant.
Plato initiated the tradition with the prison-house metaphor, and Christi-
anity contributed the inﬂuential image of the body as a temple:
What? Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost
which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye
are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are God’s.
1 Corinthians 6:19–20
This New Testament passage presents a dichotomous concept of person as
composed of spirit contained in body, which implies both the sacredness
of body, and its subsidiary position as a vessel for the spirit. Eliot Deutsch
points out that the temple metaphor is prescriptive, telling us how we
ought to regard our bodies: “It ﬁnds its intelligibility within a religious
framework of values that sees the possibility of a reverential attitude to-
ward all things in virtue of their divine origin and grounding.”4 Indeed,
this message from First Corinthians is a cornerstone of codes of health-
ethics in many Christian denominations, including, for instance, the pro-
hibiting of tobacco use. The metaphor of the body as the temple of the
Holy Spirit grounds an important element of Christian religious therapeu-
tics: The body is not only given by God, but it serves as the abode of the
Holy Spirit, instantiated as the individual’s spirit. Thus to neglect the body
or to engage in activities damaging to it would be sacrilege.
‘Container’ images of the body are consistent with the speculated
etymological association of the English term ‘body’ with the Old High
German botahha: ‘tub,’ ‘vat’ or ‘cask.’5 Classical Chinese thought offers
a concept of the body entirely different from the ‘container’ image. Roger
12
religious therapeutics

T. Ames writes that in classical Chinese thought, “mind and body are
polar rather than dualistic concepts, and as such, can only be understood
in relation to each other,” and that “‘person’ is properly regarded as a
‘psychosomatic process.’”6 ‘Polarism’ is a symbiotic relation, a unity of
two mutually dependent processes that require one another in order for
each to be what it is. Dualism, on the other hand, implies the coexistence
of two factors of fundamentally different natures, such as Plato’s psyche
and soma, Descartes’ thinking substance and extended substance, or
Yoga’s prakÓrti (consciousness) and puruÓsa (materiality). Underlying clas-
sical Chinese polarism is the presupposition of a single order of being,
wherein various objects and processes differ not in kind, but in degree.
Related to Chinese polarism is a commitment to process ontology rather
than substance ontology, producing an organismic interpretation of the
world as composed of interdependent and intrinsically related processes.
The combination of Chinese process metaphysics with a polar concep-
tion of the psychic and the somatic yields a holistic notion of ‘person’ as
a psychosomatic process. An important implication of this concept of
person is its circumvention of the main problem faced by dualistic ac-
counts of the person, the problem of how two fundamentally different
substances—such as consciousness and matter—can interact.
Deutsch observes that the dominant Western metaphors of body,
besides being ‘container’ images, are generally dualistic and conceptually
static. That is, it is assumed that the body is an objective given of nature
or experience, and that the meaning of ‘body’ can be spelled out in purely
descriptive terms. Deutsch argues that the meanings of ‘personhood’ and
‘body’ are found not in descriptive terms, but in terms of achievement.
Person and body can be understood not just as givens of nature, but in
terms of self-cultivation—how an individual appropriates and integrates
the conditions of his or her being:
My body is only as it is articulated within my being as a person. The iso-
lable physical conditions of my individual being, in other words, are not
my body. What I recognize as integral to me qua person is not this con-
ﬁguration but what, in a way, I have made of it as my own.7
An interpretation of person and body as achievement concepts is an anti-
dote to ‘container’ concepts of the body, and grounds an understanding of
the person in which body is integral. The metaphysics of René Descartes
(1596–1650) is paradigmatic of the Anglo-European view of rationality
as central to personhood, and mind as separate from and superior to body.
body and philosophies of healing
13

Descartes on Body and Medicine
Descartes’ dualistic metaphysics postulates two fundamental substances,
thinking substance and extended substance, and thus he relegates the
human being to a schizoid state, where the mind is valorized and the
body is considered a material object, analyzable in terms of mechanistic
science. The Cartesian legacy, in the words of Maxine Sheets-Johnstone,
“has been not only to divide the fundamental integrity of creaturely life,
but to depreciate the role of the living body in knowing and making sense
of the world, in learning, in the creative arts, and in self- and interper-
sonal understandings.”8 As we enter the twenty-ﬁrst century, the redress
of philosophical and functional implications of Descartes’ casting of the
‘mind-body problem’ incorporates phenomenological and non-Western
approaches to our understanding of person and body. This redress incor-
porates a range of disciplines including philosophy, anthropology, and
linguistics, and generates criticism in medical and social theory.
The damaging social effects of Cartesianism supply compelling rea-
sons to challenge it: “This hierarchical dualism has been used to subserve
projects of oppression directed toward women, animals, nature, and
other ‘Others.’”9 The Absent Body, by physician and philosopher Drew
Leder, offers a phenomenological account of how Cartesian-type dual-
ism, while misguided and misguiding, is experientially persuasive, owing
to our usual state of forgetfulness of our embodiment. Descartes, whose
thought was conditioned by, and contributed to, a mechanistic view of
person and world, was extremely interested in the philosophy of medi-
cine. Descartes names the philosophy of medicine as his foremost con-
cern in his ﬁrst published work, Discourse on Method (1637):
. . . I have resolved to devote the rest of my life to nothing other than try-
ing to acquire some knowledge of nature from which we may derive
rules in medicine which are more reliable than those we have had up till
now. Moreover, my inclination makes me so strongly opposed to all
other projects, and especially those which can be useful to some persons
only by harming others, that if circumstances forced me to engage in
any such pursuit, I do not think I would be capable of succeeding in it.10
Another of Descartes’ statements pertinent to his interest in medical phi-
losophy is found in his letter to William Cavendish (1645): “The preser-
vation of health has always been the principle end of my studies.”11 Des-
cartes considered his medical philosophy as an application of his physics,
which grounds both his medical philosophy and his ethical theory. Ac-
cording to Richard B. Carter, Descartes “envisioned a social revolution
14
religious therapeutics

based on his philosophy of medicine.”12 Descartes endeavored to apply
his science of nature to human beings as objects accessible by the same
principles as physical objects. With consideration of how humans use in-
stitutions for self-preservation, he claimed that his science of nature
could explain the constitution of a “body politic” as ethical to the extent
that it accords with the natural principles of cosmogenesis and embryo-
genesis.13 Descartes was concerned to demonstrate that the self is a think-
ing being, devoid of spatial characteristics, and is capable of existing in-
dependently of the body. The entire title of Descartes’ Meditations is
Meditations on First Philosophy, in which are demonstrated the existence
of God and the distinction between the human soul and body. None of
the Mediations, however, treats the living body in detail, though the
human body is a predominant theme in other works of Descartes, not-
ably his Discourse on Method (1637) (published posthumously in 1664),
and his ﬁnal work, Passions of the Soul (1649). The second meditation is
entitled “The nature of the human mind and that it is more easily known
than the body.” This meditation does not in fact discuss the nature of the
human body, but rather addresses the nature of physical bodies and our
knowledge of them. By way of example, Descartes presents the case of a
piece of beeswax, which, after melting, loses its particular shape, color,
scent, and resonance, and retains only its extension in space. Spatial ex-
tension is known by reason, not by the senses. Descartes regarded exten-
sion as the essential property of objects in the category of substance he
calls matter, res extensa (extended stuff), and distinct from the category
of substance he calls mind, res cogitans (thinking stuff).
Descartes’ physics is concerned with ‘body’ in general, that is, sub-
stance, of which particular physical ‘bodies’ are composed. His physical
theory of the generation of the cosmos provided paradigms for both his
medical theory of the embryogenesis of the human body and his ethical
theory of the generation of a healthy “body politic.” His medical philos-
ophy applies principles of his mathematical physics of general body to
the living human body, each of which is united with a soul. Descartes
conceived the anatomy of the human body from the standpoint of its ﬁt-
ness to carry out the intellectual operations of the mind. In the same way
that medicine is the science of maintaining the human body’s organiza-
tion so that it can carry out the operations of the mind, ethics, in
Descartes’ view, is the science of maintaining the organized cooperation
of groups of persons as a political body.14 In the opening paragraph of
his Description of the Human Body, Descartes expresses the view that
both ethics and medicine are informed by our knowledge of ourselves,
body and philosophies of healing
15

speciﬁcally of the respective functions of soul and body.15 Descartes’ let-
ters to his Jesuit disciple Père Mesland distinguish physical body from
human body on the basis of the human body’s “disposition” to receive
the human soul. The ﬁrst letter (1645) stipulates that body in general
means “a determined part of matter, and at the same time, the quantity of
matter of which the universe in composed.” Descartes next states that
what is meant by “human body” is not a determinate portion of matter,
but “all the matter that is united together with the soul of man . . . and we
believe that this body is whole while it has all the dispositions required
for conserving this union.”16 In the Meditations, Descartes supports his
view that the self is incorporeal by applying methodological doubt. In
doubting everything that can be doubted in order to seek an indubitable
starting point for knowledge, Descartes surmises that anything spatial
could be produced by a dream, or by the deceptive work of an evil genius.
He concludes that he himself must exist in order to be doubting in the
ﬁrst place, and, from there, he argues that “since he must exist despite the
supposition that everything corporeal or spatial is but a dream or a de-
monic hoax, he cannot himself be anything spatial or corporeal.”17
Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia challenged Descartes in a letter with a
question about how the soul, a thinking substance, can interact with the
body when they have nothing in common (20 June 1643). Descartes’
reply about an “inexplicable union between body and soul” is unsatisfac-
tory to her, and in a subsequent letter (13 September 1645), she requests
that Descartes give “a deﬁnition of the passions.”18 Albert A. Johnstone
notes that Elizabeth questions Descartes about the inﬂuence of emotional
turmoil on clear philosophical thinking, and suggests that her criticisms
“point toward the necessity of introducing feeling, and hence the body,
into the concept of the self.”19 Body for Descartes is the seen body, not the
felt body. In ruminating on his experimentally derived conclusion that he
must exist as a thing that thinks, Descartes asks, “What is this ‘I’ that
necessarily exists?”
Well, the ﬁrst thought to come to mind was that I had a face, hands,
arms, and the whole mechanical structure of limbs which can be seen in
a corpse, and which I called the body.20
Descartes conceives body in terms of its appearance, not from the stand-
point of what later philosophers have called ‘the subjective body,’ ‘the felt
body,’ or ‘the tactile-kinesthetic body.’ Merleau-Ponty contributed to the
phenomenology of the experienced body, distinguishing between the ob-
jective ‘seen’ body and the subjective ‘experienced body.’
16
religious therapeutics

. . . we must learn to distinguish it [the experienced body] from the ob-
jective body as set forth in works on physiology. This is not the body,
which is capable of being inhabited by a consciousness. . . . It is simply a
question of recognizing that the body, as a chemical structure of an ag-
glomeration of tissues, is formed by a process of reduction, from the pri-
mordial phenomenon of the body-for-us, the body of experience, or the
perceived body.21
Tracing the evolution of the concept of the body through the history of
Western medicine shows that Descartes’ ‘mechanical body’ dominates
early modern medical thinking, and that the ‘experienced body’ emerges
as signiﬁcant in contemporary medical philosophy.
Body in the History of Western Medicine
The history of medicine is a conceptual history of the body. Approaches to
understanding and treating the sick body become culturally engrained
habits of thought, which in turn engender a metaphysical Zeitgeist or
‘Spirit of the Age,’ claims Sheets-Johnstone. Western medical theory for
the 2000 years prior to the Enlightenment and scientiﬁc revolution was
based on the Greek humoral theory articulated by Hippocrates of Cos in
the ﬁfth century b.c.e. A medieval text, Regimen Sanitarius Salernum,
originating around 1140 c.e. from the School of Salernum, the leading
European center for medical study, discusses humoral theory and provides
evidence of its prevailing from the ancient period. Greek humoral theory
was grounded on Empedocles’ theory of the four elements: air, ﬁre, earth,
and water, and their basic qualities: cold, heat, dryness, and moistness.
Onto the schema of the four elements, Hippocrates mapped the four ele-
ments of living things: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile. Thus
he formulated a medical theory grounded in metaphysics wherein body
and cosmos are coterminous.22
Ancient Greek diagnostic and therapeutic methods, like those of
India’s Åyurvedic medicine, address the proportionality of elements con-
stituting both patient and medicinal and pathogenic substances. As in
Åyurveda, the goal of diagnosis in the Hippocratic tradition “was to ob-
tain a total uniﬁed picture of the patient’s condition . . . because the
whole body was felt to be involved in any ill that befell it.”23 In both an-
cient medical traditions, therapeutic restoration of the proper harmonic
relationships among elements and their qualities emphasized the patient’s
diet, regimen, and environmental, seasonal, and interpersonal circum-
stances. In Greece as in India, the doctrine of humors is a medical formu-
lation of a cosmic physiology dominated by the themes of circulation of
body and philosophies of healing
17

ﬂuids and a chain of successive ‘cookings’ of nutriment by the sun, the
cooking ﬁre, and the digestion. The divergence of the ancient Greco-
Latin and Indian medical traditions is Åyurveda’s conceptualization of a
vast combinative system of humors and qualities. This system consists in
enormous catalogues of medicinal substances. Greek and Latin science,
by contrast, produced a natural history wherein abstraction was not
combinative and ampliative, but rather classiﬁcatory, involving the re-
duction of speciﬁcations.24 However, there is remarkable similarity
between Greek and Indian views of the patient not merely as a body, but
as person with a consciousness and unique circumstances, who is physi-
cally and in other ways part of the world. On such an interpretation of
the person, the healing art is concerned with restoring equilibrium within
the patient and between patient and environment, and potentiating the
body’s innate power to heal.
Classical Western medicine (that of ancient Greece, and the Euro-
pean Middle Ages and Renaissance) regarded the body as “an abstract
nomenclatural construct . . . a subtle body of humours and dispositions;
but the perception of its ‘nature’ conformed more to a classiﬁcatory aes-
thetic than to the truth of its observable condition.”25 In the early modern
period beginning in the seventeenth century, the rise of empirical science
meant a revolutionary change in medicine’s approach to the body, sym-
bolized by the study of cadavers, and marked by an emphasis on the con-
crete structure of the body regarded as an intricately complex machine.
While ancient Western medicine held the body to be a sacred entity—and
like ancient Chinese and Indian thought—considered the human body a
microcosm corresponding to the whole cosmological order, the early
modern scientiﬁc approach relegated the body to the status of profane
ﬂesh to be empirically analyzed. While ancient etiological theory thought
in terms of the balance and imbalance of qualities within a pre-
established system of categories, early modern medicine replaced the
schemes of qualities with the principle of causal agency. A paradigmatic
example of medicine’s success in reﬁning the principle of causal agency is
the understanding and controlling of bacterial disease, based on Pasteur’s
nineteenth-century discovery of bacterial pathogenicity.
The body, illness, and health were radically reconceptualized in the
Western world in the sixteenth century. With Vesalius’ discoveries in anat-
omy and, in the seventeenth century, William Harvey’s explanation of the
circulation of blood within a closed loop, there was a progressive materi-
alization of the body, as structures and functions were “organ-ized into
discrete functional systems.”26 (‘Modern’ or Western scientiﬁc medicine
18
religious therapeutics

was introduced to India during this same period, when the Portuguese
conquered Goa in 1510 and established a hospital there.)27 The mechanis-
tic thinking of early modern medicine remains inﬂuential in contemporary
medicine. The materialist conception of the body prevalent in contempo-
rary Western medical theory is accompanied by a physicochemical orien-
tation to the person and to therapeutics, which Sheets-Johnstone says
“eventuates in both an eroded sense of self and an eroded sense of respon-
sibility.”28 She lodges the criticism that the paradigm of localization-in-
place of the various organs and systems underlies present-day Western
medicine’s organization according to various specializations. This organ-
ization contributes to the tendency to treat particular parts of the body
without much consideration of their relations to other parts, nor to the
health of the whole body and person.
Ancient Western science was holistic, and Åyurvedic and Chinese
medicine have remained so from ancient times. However, while Sheets-
Johnstone is correct to identify a trend of increasing “materialization” of
the body in the history of medicine, her account omits postmodern dis-
course on the body in the context of medicine, a discourse informed by
new cooperating technologies and epistemic approaches. The body as a
discursive formation in Western medical history has evolved through a
number of models. Levin and Solomon identify the ancient period’s ra-
tional body based on an aesthetic of matrices of dynamic qualities. Next
are analytic medicine’s anatomical, physiological, and biochemical bodies
originating in the scientiﬁc progress of the early modern period. In the
twentieth century, the dominant models of the body are the psychoso-
matic and the psychoneuroimmunological. If we consider the human
body not just as a biological entity, but as a discursive formation, as Levin
and Solomon recommend, we realize that contemporary Western medical
science “has begun to restore the body to the larger world-order.”29
The factors instrumental in the current evolution of medical theory
are both scientiﬁc and philosophical. The analytic medical research of the
early modern period investigated the tissues of the body with the eye and
then the microscope, revealing the structure of the body not just in terms
of major organs and systems, but as networks of tissues. Tissues were an-
alyzed in terms of differentiated cellular bodies, and these in turn were
probed at the atomic level, and understood in terms of molecular interac-
tions. In the early twentieth century, there emerged psychosomatic medi-
cine, which advocated the unity of mind and body, and made use of bio-
chemistry to account for particular disorders originating in a zone
between the material body and the ‘volitional body’ or psyche. Although
body and philosophies of healing
19

psychosomatic medicine advocated the unity of mind and body, “it has
failed to overcome the dualism which isolated this unity from its environ-
ment—nature, society, and culture.”30 A current discursive formation of
behavioral medicine defends an implication of psychosomatic medicine
that earlier psychosomatic medicine restricted itself from fully support-
ing: If ‘mind’ and ‘body’ are indeed dimensions of a unity, then all dis-
eases are in some respect psychosomatic, that is, they affect both body
and mind. Psychosomatic medicine, however, restricted itself to a limited
number of syndromes, for instance, allergy and hypertension, and to a
narrow range of mediating instances, notably the tracing of particular
diseases to speciﬁc personality characteristics.
Behavioral medicine, informed by knowledge of psychoneuro-
immunology and psychoneuroendocrinology, provides a new paradigm
of the body that works against dualistic views of mind/body, body/envi-
ronment, and individual/community. As we enter the twenty-ﬁrst cen-
tury, research in immunocompetence reveals a new body:
This dynamic, synergic body is seen as a system network functioning in
a larger system, a multifactoral network of cause and effect, in which ef-
fects also become causes. The body cannot be represented as a “sub-
stance.” It has become necessary to represent it, rather, as a system of
intercommunicatively organized processes, functioning at different lev-
els of differentiation and integration. It represents a growing body of ev-
idence supporting a new concept of disease and a much broadened
understanding of epidemiology, according to which diseases do not take
place in an environment conditioned only by the forces of nature, but
occur, rather, in a communicative ﬁeld [italics added], a world of social,
cultural, and historical inﬂuences: inﬂuences which the proprioceptive
body processes as meanings.31
The body as conceived by psychoneuroimmunology resonates with the
Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a’s body as a ﬁeld within a web of countless other interacting
ﬁelds, and the Åyurvedic articulation of the body as samyogavahin, ‘a ve-
hicle for congruous junctions.’ Contemporary medical philosophy that
dissolves dualisms pertaining to personhood invokes principles conso-
nant with those underlying India’s ancient religio-philosophical systems.
There is yet another concept of body emerging in the current evolu-
tion of Western medicine, a concept informed by both scientiﬁc and phil-
osophical discourse. This is the body of experienced meaning, a model of
the body that permits accounts of how the processes of disease and heal-
ing are related to proprioceptively experienced meanings. The success of
establishing correlations between the patient’s phenomenological or ex-
20
religious therapeutics

perienced body, and the states of that person’s medical body, depends on
more than medical knowledge. It also requires patients’ abilities to “ﬁne-
tune their embodied awareness, their sensitivity to processes of bodily ex-
periencing, and their skillfulness in carrying those processes forward into
more articulate, more discriminating meanings.”32
The emerging awareness of the experienced body in the philosophi-
cal thinking that bears on medicine may be informed by the Indian
tradition’s guiding principle of cultivation of self-knowledge. Yoga,
Åyurveda, and Tantra offer conceptual grounds and practical means of
cultivating self-knowledge in the domain of health. The extension of the
term health can be broadened from its usual application to physical and
psychological well-being, to encompass freedom from limitations and
from suffering of the whole person, inclusive of the human being’s spiri-
tual dimension. Concepts of person and body are fundamental to the phi-
losophy and practice of healing arts that serve the purpose of human
well-being conceived as broadly as possible. What is called for, accord-
ing to Sheets-Johnstone, is neither extreme materialization of the body
nor extreme animism. Similarly, medicine and the healing arts beneﬁt
from deeper consideration of both scientiﬁc and spiritual dimensions of
human life.
ICONOCLASTIC CONCEPTS OF BODY IN
YOGA, TANTRA, AND ÅYURVEDA
Traditional Indian Views of Person and Body
Hegel’s claim that “man . . . has not been posited in India” is the point of
departure for Wilhelm Halbfass’ discussion of person and self in Tradi-
tion and Reﬂection: Explorations in Indian Thought. Halbfass concludes
that the idea of the human being as a rational animal, and as a being ca-
pable of apprehending the future, has been articulated in Indian thought.
However, owing to the soteriological orientation of Indian philosophy,
this particular concept of man is not central in the way that it is in West-
ern thought.33
The Sanskrit word for human being, manuÓsya, is derived from the
verbal root man, ‘to think,’ which is also the root of the noun manas,
‘mind.’ In Hindu texts, the word manuÓsya is not as common nor as sig-
niﬁcant as the word ¯atman: the Self and immortal essence inherent in all
living entities.34 It is the ¯atman and not the human being as homo sapiens
that is to be liberated.35 Åtman is common to all living beings, yet there
body and philosophies of healing
21

is another way that the human being is not-different from other beings:
all are subject to saÓms¯ara, transmigratory existence through innumer-
able births and deaths. Transitions are possible among existences as
supra-human, human, animal, and plant. But the human being has a
special and perhaps exclusive soteriological qualiﬁcation or adhik¯ara,
the capacity for liberative knowledge. Liberative knowledge is knowl-
edge that permits discovery or realization of one’s true nature, and free-
dom from the cycle of saÓms¯ara. In view of this special qualiﬁcation the
Mah¯abh¯arata says that none is higher than the human being. The poten-
tial for religious liberation is a critical factor in Indian views of person,
body, and self.
Sanskrit terms for the human body include ´sar¯ıram and dehaÓh. Both
of these words reﬂect the predominant Indian view that the body is not
the person’s true and fundamental nature. Íar¯ıram is derived from the
verbal root √Ósr, ‘to break’: the body ultimately breaks apart. The word
dehaÓh suggests an envelope; it derives from the verbal root √dih, ‘to
cover,’ alluding to the cloak or container of the immaterial Self. John M.
Koller identiﬁes, among the details of India’s many subtraditions, two
common features of concepts of the body:
1. Body is really body/mind, and an ontological line is drawn between
body/mind and Self.
2. The body/mind is not a static entity, but a karmic process:
. . . constituted by interaction with the other processes in an ever-
widening sphere that extends ultimately to the whole world, linking
each person to other persons and beings in a web of interconnections
that extends to all times and places.36
While the Western philosophical tradition has tended to oppose mind
and body, the Indian view of the person begins with the presumption of
integrated psychophysiological functioning: “seeing the body as con-
scious and consciousness as bodily activity.”37 The body/mind complex is
rejected as the real Self, and similar to the Anglo-European struggle to
reconcile body and mind, the Indian traditions have the problem of relat-
ing body/mind to Self. While the Anglo-European traditions are inter-
ested in the problem primarily from a philosophical standpoint, the In-
dian concern for the problem is soteriological.
Two Indian traditions reject—on different grounds and with differ-
ent implications—the existence of a Self beyond the lived body/mind.
They are both n¯astika, that is, not among the Veda-accepting (¯astika)
22
religious therapeutics

systems. In Buddhism, a non-substantialist view of the human psycho-
physical entity replaces a notion of ‘Self.’ In C¯arvaka, the materialist
dar´sana, the body and self are considered identical. C¯arvaka (also known
as Lok¯ayata) differs from Western materialism in that C¯arv¯aka considers
the body to be imbued with consciousness.38
Ancient Indian interpretations of the person do not entirely exclude
simple mind-body dualism. The Maitri UpaniÓsad refers to the tranquil
eternal one by whom “this body is set up in intelligence . . . (and) who
propels it” (Mait. Up. 2.3–4). The BÓrhad¯araÓnyaka UpaniÓsad says the
“knowing self” or “breathing self” has entered the bodily self (´sar¯ıra
¯atman) as ﬁre is put into a ﬁre receptacle (BÓrhad. Up. 1.4.7).39 The n¯astika
tradition of Jainism holds a more radically dualistic account of the per-
son than these UpaniÓsadic conceptions: The soul, j¯ıva, pervades the body
and is spatially coextensive with it, because the soul’s indeﬁnitely many
space points (prade´sa) precisely assume the dimensions of the corporeal
form they occupy.40
Body in the Vedas
Vedic conceptions of the human nature were embedded in mythic and ri-
tualistic contexts. The climate of the Vedas is more earthly and temporal
than that of UpaniÓsadic and subsequent Indian thought, and in the
Vedas, humans are treated more as earthly, temporal beings. In Vedic
usage, the words ¯atman and puruÓsa tend to refer to the embodied person,
rather than to the absolute spiritual Self. A frequently used Vedic term for
person is j¯ıv¯a. Etymolgically, ¯atman means ‘breath’ and j¯ıva means ‘life.’
Troy Wilson Organ identiﬁes a variety of usages of ¯atman and j¯ıva. The
word j¯ıva is used in the ÓRgveda to designate living, breathing beings, for
example, “Rise, woman and go to the world of living beings (j¯ıvas)” [RV
10:2.2.8]. The term ¯atman is pivotal in a ÓRgvedic cremation prayer to
Agni that indicates belief in a Self different from the body: “Agni, con-
sume him not entirely. . . . Let the eye repair to the sun, the breath
(¯atman) to the wind” [RV 10:1.16.3]. Besides denoting breath, ¯atman can
denote the body, as in these healing hymns:
The virtues of the plants which are desirous of bestowing wealth issue
from them, man, towards thy body (¯atman) like cattle from a pen.
RV 10:8.7.8
I banish disease from each limb, from each hair, from each joint where it
is generated, from thy whole person (¯atman).
RV 10:12.12.5–6
body and philosophies of healing
23

Åtman also denotes life as existence in the ÓRgveda, for example, in
thanks given to Indra for bestowing existence on human beings [RV
1:1.11.8]. Åtman also implies the vitality of the life-force: “May he, the
bull, be the impregnator of the perpetual plants, for in him is the ¯atman
of the ﬁxed and the movable worlds” [RV 7:6.12.6]. Often the word
¯atman is used in the ÓRgveda to designate essential identity: “Thou ﬂow-
est, Indu (denoting Soma), the inviolable, the most exhilarating; thou art
thyself (¯atman) the best support of Indra” [RV 9:4.18.3]. An example of
the term ¯atman expressing the meaning of essential identity (identity of
something, not necessarily a person) is this passage concerning medicinal
plants: “As soon as I take these plants in my hand making the sick man
strong, the ¯atman of the malady perishes” [RV 10.8.7.11].
Vedic texts, particularly the Br¯ahmaÓnas, classify the human being as
a pa´su, an animal, as the preeminent animal, the ruler of all the other an-
imals, and the only animal able to perform ritual and sacriﬁce. The
human being is sukÓrta, ‘well-made,’ and, according to the Atharvaveda,
is distinguished by having ritual powers, access to sacred texts, and
power to inﬂuence the universe. These powers come from the human
being’s unique association with Brahman, the supreme principle [AV
10:2]. However, the Vedic classiﬁcation of the human being as a member
of the animal kingdom, based largely on physical similarity, demonstrates
a body-oriented view of the person. Further evidence of a body-oriented
view of the person is present in the Vedic perspective on the human being
as agent of ritual and sacriﬁcial acts. Yet a pervasive theme in Vedic views
of person is religious holism: body and consciousness are both instru-
ments of agency, particularly sacriﬁcial agency. In the vision of the Vedic
ÓrÓsis or seers, no dualism exists in their understanding of person: con-
sciousness has body as its locus, and the body’s volitional actions are en-
tirely dependent on the consciousness.41
The human being’s superior intelligence, discernment, and expres-
sion are noted in the Aitareya ÅraÓnyaka. A signiﬁcant application of the
human power to know, and our distinctness from other animals, is our
consciousness of the future. The ability to ‘know the tomorrow’ (veda
´svasthanam) is a necessary component of man’s soteriological preroga-
tive. MokÓsa, freedom from worldly limitations, is achieved by ritual ac-
tion informed by knowledge of dharma. Acting according to dharma
(righteousness) requires comprehension of the temporal horizons within
which dharma has meaning. In Vedic thought, man’s capacity to under-
stand dharma grounds human beings’ soteriological mandate and oppor-
tunity. The human being as rational animal has powers superior to those
24
religious therapeutics

of other animals, but in the Hindu context, man’s highest potential is not
the exercise of this power in dominion of the earth and its creatures. In
fact, such dominion is undesirable. Man’s privilege is to become liberated
from the world, not master of it. Our mandate is not to make use of other
beings, but to use our own human existence as a vehicle of transcen-
dence.42 The theme of self-transcendence evolves with various paths of
self-cultivation—yogic and otherwise—for the purpose of liberation.
Body in the UpaniÓsads
The UpaniÓsads contain a range of understandings of the body, most of
them within organic, holistic accounts of the person, showing the
person’s fundamental nature, ¯atman, to be non-different from the one
Absolute, Brahman. An illustration is the instruction of Ívetaketu by his
father, who imparts that the One, having longed to become many, diver-
siﬁed into the elements ﬁre, water, and earth, and entered these elements
as ¯atman. Åtman is the ground of all manifest things, just as clay is the
basis of various clay objects [Ch¯and. Up. Bk. 6]. A view of the self as hav-
ing both an individual and a universal aspect is expressed in the allegory
of the two birds in a tree, one eating fruit, the other abstaining and look-
ing on [MuÓnÓd. Up. 3:3.1.1; Ívet. Up. 4]. The bird who eats is the individ-
ual embodied self, given to enjoyment and suffering, the other is the true
Self, the universal and knowing Brahman.
In the Taittir¯ıya UpaniÓsad, the very body of Brahman is the source
of creation of human beings:
From this Self (Brahman) space arose; from space, wind; from wind,
ﬁre; from ﬁre, water; from water, the earth; from the earth, herbs; from
herbs, food; from food, semen and ova, and from semen and ova, the
person (puruÓsa).
Tait. Up. 2.1
Next, the upaniÓsad presents the widely employed pañca-ko´sa or ﬁve-
sheaths model of the person, whose core and source is ¯atman. The ﬁve
sheaths (pañca, ‘ﬁve’; ko´sa, ‘sheath’) are conceived as enveloping one an-
other, and at their center is the true Self. The outermost sheath is the body
of food, or the material body, which is ﬁlled successively with the sheath
or body of pr¯aÓn¯a, breath (life-force), then mind, consciousness, and, at the
center, bliss. The sheath of bliss is interpreted as either identical to, or con-
taining, the innermost true Self, the ¯atman. The upaniÓsadic ﬁve-sheath
doctrine is accepted by Ved¯anta and many post-classical schools of Yoga,
but not by classical Yoga itself. An image of the body more consonant
with that of classical Yoga is given in the Maitri UpaniÓsad.
body and philosophies of healing
25

Sir, in this ill-smelling, unsubstantial body, which is a conglomerate of
bone, skin, muscle, marrow, ﬂesh, semen, blood, mucus, tears, rheum,
feces, urine, wind, bile, and phlegm, what is the good of enjoyment of
desires? In this body, which is afﬂicted with desire, anger, covetousness,
delusion, fear, despondency, envy, separation from the desirable, union
with the undesirable, hunger, thirst, senility, death, disease, sorrow and
the like, what is the good of enjoyment of desires?
Mait. Up. 1:3
The Maitri is one of the UpaniÓsads that inclines more toward dualism,
thus grounding classical S¯aÓmkhya and Yoga, in contrast to the non-
dualistic UpaniÓsads eventuating in Ved¯anta. The Maitri UpaniÓsad also
incorporates elements of esoteric psychology, later incorporated in Tan-
tra and T¯antric Yogas:
Now, it has been said: There is a channel called the SuÓsumn¯a, leading
upward, conveying the breath, piercing through the palate. Through it,
by joining [√yuj, ‘to join] the breath, the syllable Om, and the mind, one
may go aloft . . . by binding together [saÓmyoga] the senses . . . one goes
to selﬂessness . . . becomes a non-experiencer of pleasure and pain, he
obtains the absolute unity.
Mait. Up. 6.21
The KaÓtha UpaniÓsad’s enumeration of the aspects of the person is similar
to that of classical S¯aÓmkhya and Yoga: There is nothing higher than
puruÓsa. At successively lower levels are the Unmanifest (avy¯akta), the
Great Self (Åtman), the discriminative intellect (buddhi), the mind
(manas), the senses, and the objects of sense [KaÓth. Up. 3.10]. In addition
to germs of classical S¯aÓmkhya and Yoga, the KaÓtha also contains ele-
ments of the esoteric physiology adopted and elaborated by Tantra. In a
concluding verse, reference is made to the 101 nad¯ıs or channels that
carry pr¯aÓna or life-energy, and the one that “passes up to the crown of the
head”—the SuÓsumÓn¯a [KaÓth. Up. 6.16].
Body in the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a
The battleﬁeld, the setting for the warrior Arjuna’s instruction by Lord
KÓrÓsÓna, grounds the G¯ıt¯a in a concrete world where Arjuna is at ﬁrst
overwhelmed by the implications of a situation in which body predomi-
nates: the physical action Arjuna chooses shall determine the physical
survival or annihilation of his kinsmen in the opposing army. This di-
lemma occasions KÓrÓsÓna’s teaching that the true Self is not the body. The
true Self is eternal, neither dies nor is born, but is reborn in new bodies
[BhG 2.20–22].
26
religious therapeutics

A rich conception of the person is the G¯ıt¯a’s depiction of the body as
a ‘ﬁeld,’ and the one who knows this, “the knower of the ﬁeld” [BhG 13.
1–3]. Koller describes this image as:
. . . a ﬁeld of interacting energies of different kinds and intensities, a ﬁeld
which is simultaneously interacting with innumerable other ﬁelds. The
body-mind is a juncture or constellation of these interactions, born and
reborn out of successively interacting energy-ﬁelds.43
Ved¯anta’s Model of ‘The Three Bodies’
Ved¯anta provides an important account of the person in Ía˙nkara’s pres-
entation of the three bodies in the Viveka-c¯uÓdamaÓni, “The Crest-Jewel of
Discrimination” (eighth century c.e.). This doctrine of the three bodies is
alluded to in the Maitri UpaniÓsad [Mait. Up. 6:10]. Wimal Dissanayake
gives the following explanation of the three bodies. The gross body
(sth¯ula ´sar¯ıra) is the physical body that we erroneously think is the Self.
This misidentiﬁcation results in part from our preoccupation with expe-
riences of pleasure and pain as a result of contact with gross objects. The
subtle body (s¯ukÓsma ´sar¯ıra), mentioned in Maitri UpaniÓsad 6:10, can be
understood in terms of dream consciousness. The contents of dream con-
sciousness are subtle elements (tanm¯atras), which lack material proper-
ties, yet are able to inﬂuence personality and waking consciousness. The
gross body is unable to understand the subtle forces of the tanm¯atras, but
the subtle body can, because it is of the same nature. Thus the subtle body
is responsible for the phenomenon of being at once a participant in, and a
witness to, one’s dream experience. The causal or karmic body (k¯araÓna
´sar¯ıra) is the most complex of the three bodies. It contain the saÓmsk¯aras
or impressions of experience, which result from one’s past actions. The
principle of karma holds that all actions arise according to past conduct,
and that all actions have effects in both the life of the person who acts,
and in the world. Therefore, the causal body contains the possibilities of
how a person’s particular life experiences will manifest.44
Yoga’s Use of the Body to Transcend Itself
In Patañjali’s classical Yoga, the body is the ground of action that can lead
to or obstruct liberation. Religious therapeutics in classical Yoga operate
from a concept of the person as having a psychophysical and a spiritual di-
mension. Each of these dimensions is subject to healing; in short, to over-
coming problems that restrict well-being and vitality, produce suffering,
and interfere with the prevailing of the person’s true nature. In classical
body and philosophies of healing
27

Yoga, the soteriological aim is realized in the freeing of puruÓsa, con-
sciousness, from prakÓrti, material nature. However, among the dar´sanas
or systems of Indian philosophy, Yoga is noteworthy for the integral role
it accords to the body in the striving for liberation. Given Yoga’s premises
that (1) body and Self are entirely distinct, and (2) the soteriological goal
entails the Self’s independence from physicality, what can be gained by in-
vestigating Yoga’s understanding of the body? The central problem of
Hindu soteriology may be expressed in these two corollaries:
1. Liberation from ignorance and the suffering it produces.
2. Attainment of one’s highest soteriological potential, generally con-
ceived as realization of one’s true spiritual identity.
Since human life has an inevitable physical dimension, a major challenge
in seeking a spiritual goal is reconciling the physical with the spiritual, or
transcending one’s embodied situation to one’s ultimate situation. Prac-
tice of classical or aÓsÓt¯a˙nga (eight-fold) Yoga incorporates cultivation of
the body to achieve the transcendence of embodiment. According to the
S¯aÓmkhya-k¯arik¯a, which provides much of Yoga’s metaphysical founda-
tion, all things (and thus human bodies) are instantiations of the whole of
creation, and may function as vehicles for attainment of the highest spiri-
tual goal:
From Brahman down to the blade of grass, the creation (sÓrÓsti) is for the
beneﬁt of the soul, until supreme knowledge is attained.
SK 3.47
The Yoga-s¯utras explain why the true Self, puruÓsa, is associated with the
human body:
The purpose of the conjunction (saÓmyoga) of the master [the Seer or ex-
periencer: puruÓsa] and the experienceable world [prakÓrti], is the experi-
encer’s recognition of the Self-natures of the two powers.
YS 2.23
Classical Yoga understands mind and body as aspects of the psychophys-
ical person. According to Yoga’s metaphysical foundations, body, mind,
and senses are all evolutes of matter, prakÓrti. Mind/body dualism is thus
avoided in Yoga, but there remains a dualism separating mind/body from
consciousness. The position that ‘mind’ and ‘body’ are dimensions of a
unity, rather than separate entities, grounds a pragmatically valuable or-
ientation to etiology (the theory of disease-causation) and to treatment,
28
religious therapeutics

by recognizing the mutual inﬂuence of physical and mental factors in
health and illness. Apart from the metaphysical problems inherent in
Yoga’s dualism, Yoga’s distinguishing mind/body from consciousness
also yields an important understanding of the relation of health and reli-
giousness: Similar to the way that mental factors have physiological con-
sequences, and physical factors have mental consequences for health,
Yoga shows that the wellness of the mind/body can assist the attainment
of spiritual well-being. Conversely, the recovery of spiritual Self-nature
and well-being helps to heal and vitalize the body/mind.
Because Yoga practices have health beneﬁts, there is a misconcep-
tion, particularly in the West, that health is Yoga’s goal. Indian views of
Yoga on the other hand, in recognizing Yoga as a religious system em-
phasizing the cultivation of Self-nature as consciousness, sometimes
minimize the importance of body and health in Yoga. In chapter 3, I lo-
cate the soteriological role of human physicality within the context of
Yoga’s ultimate aim: attainment of liberation from the nature and con-
straints of prakÓrti, and transcendence of the ignorance and suffering
that attend material existence. Both psychophysical and spiritual mean-
ings of health are instrumental in classical Yoga. As regards psycho-
physical health, the reﬁned awareness, discipline, and cultivation of the
body/mind are integral to yogic religious life, and prepare one for the
higher stages of cultivation of consciousness leading to liberation.
Chapter 3 presents classical Yoga as a paradigm of religious therapeu-
tics, addressing both somatic and spiritual experience, and revealing
two main principles:
1. Although body and psychophysical health are of instrumental and
not ultimate value in classical Yoga, body and health have signiﬁcant
soteriological functions.
2. Liberation in Yoga is healing in an ultimate sense. It concerns attain-
ment of well-being with respect to the human being’s most funda-
mental nature and highest soteriological potential.
Tantra’s Enlightenable Body
The Vedic tradition and the T¯antric tradition are distinct but inter-
related currents of Indian religious culture, and they share as well as di-
verge in their constitutions of religious meaning. A major feature of Tan-
tra is its ontological presupposition that the universe, and everything in
it, is a manifestation of the one Brahman. Emergent from this principle is
body and philosophies of healing
29

a positive attitude toward material nature and the body. The feminine
principle is esteemed as the manifestation of the masculine absolute’s im-
manent and dynamic aspect. Tantra emphasizes religious practice over
theoretical knowledge, and seeks liberation through mystical knowledge
gained in experience. A prominent feature of T¯antric practice is the util-
ization of material nature in order to transcend subjugation to materiality.
Tantra regards the body as an instrument to liberation, but, more than
this, considers the body as part of the sacred creation, and as capable of
enlightenment. The word ‘tantra’ literally means ‘loom’ or ‘that which is
woven.’ Its verbal root is √tan, ‘to stretch,’ ‘to expand.’ Thus it carries the
meaning of expansion—of being, of knowing, of bliss. Tantra’s connota-
tion of expansion recalls Wilfred Cantwell Smith’s thought about the sa-
cred as something ‘more.’ Diane B. Obenchain explains:
. . . religion might be deﬁned generally as giving care to, paying heed to,
paying attention to, more in human life than meets the eye. What is more
in human life is already within us and around us in the world; we are al-
ready, in some sense, participating in it. Hence transcendence (more) is
also immanence. What we pay attention to or give care to is what is more
. . . we give it priority in our lives, we are in awe of it: it is sacred to us. In-
sofar as we give priority in human life to what is more in human life than
meets the eye, we desire to live and move with it, not against it.45
The term Tantra can refer to the vast T¯antric tradition in general, to par-
ticular subsystems of thought and practice, and to T¯antric texts. There
are many classiﬁcations of the subtraditions of Tantra. Tantra may be
Hindu or non-Hindu, that is, Buddhist or Jain. Five major divisions of
Hindu Tantra, based on predomination of particular deities, are the
Íakta, Íaiva, Saura, G¯aÓnapatya, and VaiÓsÓnava, and there are other sub-
divisions within and besides these. Discussion here and in chapter 4 ex-
amines T¯antric approaches to body and religious therapeutics, at points
referring to views of particular sub-traditions, but without intending
them to be representative of the whole T¯antric tradition.
T¯antric texts are sometimes called Ågamas, but this term refers
more speciﬁcally to the Íaiva texts.46 The Ågama literature is extensive,
but is more concerned with religious practice than with philosophical
speculation.47 An anti-ascetic and anti-speculative orientation is charac-
teristic of Tantra. Although Tantra has comprehensive metaphysical
foundations, it is mainly concerned with s¯adhana, religious practice.
Hindu Tantra has philosophical contributions in addition to those of the
six Veda-accepting classical dar´sanas, yet much of T¯antric philosophy
involves modiﬁcations of S¯aÓmkhya and Ved¯anta.48
30
religious therapeutics

Tantra as a major religious and philosophical movement emerged
around the fourth century of the common era. According to Eliade, Tan-
tra “assumed the form of a pan-Indian vogue from the sixth century on-
ward,” popular among philosophers and theologians as well as ascetics
and yogins, and inﬂuential in philosophy, mysticism, ritual, ethics, ico-
nography, and literature.49 The origins of Tantra are not precisely known,
but in the pre-Vedic Indus Valley civilization, centuries before the com-
mon era, the germs of Tantra existed in the worship of the Mother God-
dess, and the Mother and Father of the universe.50 Tantra rejects the caste
system and the exclusion of females from participation in religious activ-
ities. Tantra has long provided a religious domain for persons excluded
from the Brahminical system because of caste or gender, as well as for
those whose religious ideas and practice diverge from Hindu orthodoxy.
Though T¯antrism is a major current of Indian culture, it has tended to re-
main on the fringes of society.51 Tantra has been misunderstood—and
maligned—for advocating activities that are traditionally or morally ob-
jectionable, and among the many subtraditions of Tantra, some do in-
volve extreme and even bizarre practices. Ritual sexual union (both ac-
tual and symbolic) is an aspect of some forms of Tantra. However, to
reduce the whole tradition of Tantra to particular sects or rites, or to re-
ject Tantra based on a sensationalized view, would be a misconstrual of
this vital aspect of Indian philosophy and religion.
Like the Vedic tradition, Tantra’s foremost concern is spiritual real-
ization, but its approach to the relation of human being, world, and the
sacred aims for transcendence of materiality by integration with it, rather
than separation from it. Liberation as conceived in Tantra includes spiri-
tual well-being in this life. S. C. Banerji writes that “T¯antric philosophy
vigorously advocates j¯ıvanmukti (liberation in life).”52 In comparing the
“emancipative core” of psychoanalysis and Tantra, Sudhir Kakar writes
that in Tantra, liberation is not only the “mystical” freedom from all
human conditions, but is “also relevant to the individual’s concrete his-
torical conditions.”53 Tantra’s soteriological goal is the realization of the
unity of the individual’s soul or j¯ıva with the one Supreme Reality, Param
Íiva, which has the static and transcendent aspect Íiva, and the dynamic
and immanent aspect Íakti. The masculine Íiva is pure Being, of the na-
ture of consciousness, and the feminine Íakti is the power that activates
and manifests Íiva: “The universe is a manifestation of the immanent as-
pect of the Parama Íiva in the form of Íakti.”54 While Síva is Being, Íakti
is the operative form of Being, called in the Yogin¯ıhÓrdaya: ‘the creative
matrix’ (ÓsÓrÓstir¯up¯a).55 Íakti and Íiva are one, as water and its current are
body and philosophies of healing
31

one. A person could object to this analogy and the T¯antric ontology it il-
lustrates, saying that the current is not essential to the water, but is a
property of the water, or that the water needn’t have a current, for it
could be motionless. Tantra would reply that Íakti is the form and force
of every manifestation of Íiva: roiling, trickling, or completely still, Íakti
is the force responsible for the water’s state. The word Íakti literally
means power or energy [√´sak, ‘to be able’]. Íiva derives from the verbal
root √´s¯ı, ‘to lie,’ and connotes ‘that in which all lies,’ as well as meaning
kind, gracious, and the like.
The Mah¯anirv¯aÓna Tantra begins with Parvat¯ı (Íakti) the spouse of
Íiva, asking him “What will lead to the beneﬁt of the universe?” Íiva re-
plies by conveying the nature of Brahman, the worship of whom leads to
liberation.
O Parame´svar¯ı! Should good be done to the universe, the Lord of the
universe is pleased, since he is its Self, and it depends on him. He is One.
He ever is. He is the truth. He is supreme unity without a second. He is
ever-full and self-manifest. He is eternal consciousness and bliss.
MNT 1:33.3–4
About her own nature, Parvat¯ı hears from Íiva:
Thou art the very Para PrakÓrti (supreme matter) of Brahman the
Param¯atman (supreme consciousness) and from thee has sprung the
whole universe—O Íiv¯a—its Mother. O gracious one, whatever is in
this world, of things that have and are without motion, from Mahat (the
Great) to an atom, owes its origin to and is dependent on thee. . . . Thou
art both subtle and gross, manifested and veiled, though in Thyself
formless, yet thou hast form.
MNT 4:10–11, 15
T¯antric metaphysics include prakÓrti and puruÓsa, but they are understood
differently from the way classical Yoga understands them. Yoga faces the
general quandary of dualistic ontologies, that of explaining how two en-
tities of wholly distinct natures can interact. According to Yoga, puruÓsa is
pure consciousness, and prakÓrti is unconscious matter. There are many
puruÓsas; each person is an individual puruÓsa. Tantra however, like
Ved¯anta, accepts Brahman as the one real. According to Tantra, both the
individual puruÓsa, and prakÓrti or material mature, are identical with
Brahman. While Yoga holds that creation proceeds from the co-presence
of prakÓrti and puruÓsa, in Tantra, both prakÓrti and puruÓsa exist within the
supreme Brahman. Like Ved¯anta, Tantra considers creation to proceed
from l¯ıl¯a: the sportive play of Brahman. Thus for Tantra, prakÓrti is not
32
religious therapeutics

distinct from Brahman, nor is prakÓrti unconscious (jaÓda) as it is for Yoga.
As part of Brahman, prakÓrti is conscious, and by means of prakÓrti, Brah-
man manifests itself in the form of all the constituents of the manifest
universe.56 Tantra’s metaphysical presupposition that matter possesses
consciousness is crucial: classical Yoga assumes that matter is uncon-
scious, and aims for realization of Self as not-matter, but T¯antric yoga
utilizes the body as an instrument of liberation, and reveres its material
nature as both conscious and sacred.
While T¯antric metaphysics is non-dualistic (advaitin), and regards
Brahman, known as Param Íiva, as the one Reality, it allows for the ap-
parent difference of the one Absolute and the multifarious manifest
world. Íiva and Íakti are separable in empirical and cognitive analysis,
but their identity is knowable through higher knowledge offered by T¯an-
tric mysticism.57 Tantra is non-dualistic like Ved¯anta, rather than dualis-
tic like Yoga, but while Ved¯anta ultimately relegates the manifest world
to the status of m¯ay¯a or illusion, Tantra considers the manifest world as
fully real. Ved¯anta regards m¯ay¯a as “that power (Íakti) of Brahman by
which the world of multiplicity comes into existence.”58 Tantra shares
this interpretation, but not Advaita Ved¯anta’s understanding of m¯ay¯a as
the illusory ground and nature of subject-object distinctions.
What is meant by calling the world an illusion and at the same time as-
cribing existence to it? The answer is that for Advaita Ved¯anta the term
“real” means that which is permanent, eternal, inﬁnite, that which is
trik¯al¯ab¯adhyam, never subrated at any time by another experience—and
Brahman alone ﬁts this meaning. The world is not real, but it is not
wholly unreal.59
For Tantra however, material nature (including the embodied human
being) is a manifestation of Íiva-Íakti, has full reality, and is sacred in its
origin and fundamental nature. The human being as an aspect of creation
is not-different from Param Íiva. This ontological position contributes to
a more body-positive religious practice and soteriological goal than is
found in orthodox Hinduism.
Tantra’s monistic view of the world and Brahman (as Íiva-Íakti) is
free of the metaphysical problems confronted by the dualism of classical
Yoga. Further, even though Tantra is monistic, it is able, unlike Advaita
Ved¯anta, to preserve the particularity of entities. Rather than ascribing to
particular entities a lower ontological status as mere appearances of
Brahman (a consequence of Advaita Ved¯anta’s understanding of m¯ay¯a)
T¯antric metaphysics does not consider particular entities in the manifest
body and philosophies of healing
33

world to be less real than Brahman. For persons who are concerned
about provision for particularity, as is the case when body is considered
integral to personhood, T¯antric metaphysics makes an important contri-
bution. According to Tantra, not just the person’s consciousness, but con-
sciousness and the psychophysical complex together are Brahman. The
body is the person’s locus in space, and has a particular position and na-
ture, with no less reality than the person’s non-material aspects.
Reverence toward the beings and things of the world does not imply
attachment and indulgence. Rather, Tantra considers recognition of the
unity and sanctity of material nature as an antidote to attachment, for at-
tachment requires a sense of duality. In the words of Kamalakar Mishra,
“I can be attached [only] to something which I consider different from or
other to me.” By realizing that I am one with all, “there is no question of
attachment with what is already myself or my own.”60 Eliade expresses
the core of T¯antric metaphysics and soteriology as follows:
. . . the absolute reality, the Urgrund, contains in itself all dualities and
polarities, but reunited, reintegrated, in a state of absolute Unity (ad-
vaya). The creation, and the becoming that arose from it, represent the
shattering of the primordial unity and the separation of the two princi-
ples (Íiva-Íakti, etc.); in consequence, man experiences a state of duality
(object-subject, etc.)—and this is suffering, illusion, “bondage.” The
purpose of T¯antric s¯adhana is the reunion of the two polar principles
within the disciple’s own body.61
Consonant with other Indian traditions, Tantra holds that liberation de-
pends on self-knowledge. The individual, or j¯ıva, is Íiva, and T¯antric s¯ad-
hana serves the purpose of gaining self-knowledge: ¯atma-pratyabhijña.
Mishra names pratyabhijña (‘recognition’) as the central problem of the
T¯antric tradition of Ka´sm¯ıra Íaivism. He notes that this school is in
agreement with Advaita Ved¯anta on the point that self is known not as an
object in a dualistic subject-object way, but is known as a self-illumined
or svayamprak¯a´sa subject.62 Self-realization in Tantra is considered to af-
ford both ultimate liberation and enjoyment in the present life.63
Classical Yoga envisions liberation as realization of Self-nature as
pure consciousness, without suffering, but without bliss. Tantra, how-
ever, like Ved¯anta, conceives the liberated state as one of Being, con-
sciousness, and bliss. However, in T¯antric practice, body is central in the
quest for liberative self-knowledge.
A main tenet of T¯antric practice or s¯adhana is that “the Absolute is
to be realized in and through the human body.”64 The universe is Íiva’s
34
religious therapeutics

manifestation, and the human body is Íiva’s abode. The body is the quin-
tessence of the physioconscious creation, and the T¯antric practitioner or
s¯adhaka awakens the divinity within him- or herself with the orientation
expressed in the Ratnas¯ara Tantra that “one who realizes the truth of the
body can then come to know the truth of the universe.”65 Eliade writes
that in T¯antrism, the body assumes an importance unparalleled in the In-
dian tradition:
To be sure, health and strength, interest in a physiology homologizable
with the cosmos and implicitly sanctiﬁed, are Vedic, if not pre-Vedic,
values. But T¯antrism carries to its furthest consequences the conception
that sanctity can be realized only in a “divine body.” The UpaniÓsadic
and post-UpaniÓsadic pessimism and asceticism are swept away. The
body is no longer the source of pain, but the most reliable and effective
instrument at man’s disposal for “conquering death.”66
Eliade distinguishes two convergent orientations in Tantra’s valuation of
the body:
1. Emphasis on the total experience of life as integral to T¯antric
s¯adhana.
2. The will to master and transmute the body into a divine body, a
strong theme in HaÓtha Yoga.67
Central to Tantra is the polarity of macrocosm and microcosm, wherein
the human body is realized—through the interiorization of ritual—as a
microcosm of the universe. The language of ‘macrocosm/microcosm’
conveys Tantra’s metaphysical orientation, but only in practice can one
grasp the meaning of realizing oneself, in body and consciousness, as
being part of the whole seamless conscious creation. Although writers on
Tantra use the terminology of macrocosm/microcosm, it would be more
consonant with T¯antric metaphysics to speak in terms of correspondence
throughout the domains of being. T¯antric unity of self and cosmos is a
variant of Vedic macranthropy. The Atharva-veda, for instance, identiﬁes
the breaths with the cosmic winds [AV 11: 4.15]. The UpaniÓsads contain
references to the identiﬁcation of the breath with the cardinal directions
[Ch¯and. Up. 3:13.1–6]. While air “weaves the universe” [BÓrhad Up.
3:7.2], breath “weaves” the human being [AV 10:2.13]. The spinal col-
umn is equated with the world-axis Mount Meru in the T¯antric text
DohakoÓsa. The iÓd¯a-nad¯ı and pi˙ngal¯a-nad¯ı (corresponding with the two
principal breaths pr¯aÓna and ap¯ana) are called sun and moon, symbolizing
body and philosophies of healing
35

their respective strong and gentle natures.68 T¯antric practice or s¯adhana
utilizes cosmophysiology to transubstantiate the human being, to sanc-
tify the human being by practices that ‘dilate’ or ‘cosmicize’ the physical
body so the practitioner realizes her- or himself as literally one with the
Absolute that forms the whole of nature—physical and conscious.
Purity—physical and religious—is a major concern in Hinduism.
Tantra reevaluates the meaning of impurity, and recasts traditional associ-
ations between physical impurity and unholiness. A signiﬁcant example is
that Tantra rejects the notion that the touch of a low-caste person would
make something impure. The equating of physical impurity with religious
impurity is rejected as well. For instance, body ﬂuids are considered by
Tantra as physically unclean, but not unholy.69 Tantra operates on the
principle that all aspects of the world, and particularly those of the human
psychophysical complex, are to be accepted and sublimated.70 The word
‘sublimate’ derives from the Latin subl¯ım¯are ‘to raise,’ [subl¯ımus,
‘uplifted,’ ‘sublime’].71 In the T¯antric context, sublimate pertains to raising
the cruder physical level of being to its real status as divine. Renunciation
in Tantra does not mean asceticism, but “proper utilization of an ob-
ject.”72 Contemporary Indian scholars and practitioners of Tantra ac-
knowledge that Tantra is subject to criticism because of the actions of
“hypocrites and pseudo-t¯antrists,” who “actually worship their own ego
and gratify their senses and do nothing else.”73 Sensationalized stereotypes
are put into perspective in chapter 4’s discussion of T¯antric utilization of
life energy, including the sexual force, for spiritual attainment.
Body as the Ground of Well-being in ¯Ayurveda
Åyurveda is called “a principal architect of the Indian view of person and
body” by psychoanalyst Sudhir Kakar.74 His ﬁeldwork investigating
India’s healing traditions demonstrates that in some signiﬁcant ways,
Åyurveda’s approach to the body diverges from traditional religio-
philosophical views. Although Yoga is well known for supporting the
health of body, Åyurveda is actually the Indian ´s¯astra or discipline di-
rectly concerned with health and healing. The word Åyurveda is com-
posed of ¯ayus, ‘life,’ and veda, ‘knowledge.’ Åyurveda means knowledge
of life and longevity, and designates a system of healthful living based on
knowledge. For personal health maintenance, Åyurveda makes recom-
mendations emphasizing diet, cleansing and rejuvenative measures, and
daily and seasonal regimen. As a system of medicine, Åyurveda has eight
branches and is thus called aÓsÓt¯a˙nga (eight-limbed) Åyurveda.
36
religious therapeutics

The Eight Branches of Åyurvedic Medicine
1. Internal medicine, including physiology and pathology: K¯aya-cikits¯a
2. General surgery: Íaly¯apahartÓrka
3. Eye, ear, nose and throat disease: Í¯al¯akya
4. Pediatrics, including obstetrics and embryology: Kaum¯ara bhÓrtya
5. Psychology/psychiatry: psychotherapy, dream analysis, demonology:
Bh¯uta-vidy¯a
6. Toxicology: vi´sagara-vairodhika-pra´samana
7. Geriatrics: and rejuvenation therapy: Ras¯ayana
8. Sexology: V¯ajikaraÓna 75
Body and physical health and illness are central in Åyurvedic medi-
cine. While body and health are important in classical Yoga, Yoga has
consciousness as its primary subject and agent of liberation. Yoga and
Åyurveda are sister sciences: practitioners of Yoga may study Åyurveda
prior to and along with their practice of Yoga, and Åyurveda’s science of
the body serves to make the body more ﬁt and pure for undertaking the
spiritual science of Yoga. Moreover, when yogic disciplines are per-
formed, the activation of stagnant energies in the body/mind may result
in physical and psychological disorders that can be diagnosed and treated
with Åyurvedic methods.76
Yoga and Åyurveda have in common strongly (but not exclusively)
S¯aÓmkhya metaphysical foundations, and in many respects their theory
and practice constitute applications of S¯aÓmkhya principles. A major dif-
ference between Åyurveda and Yoga is that Åyurveda is primarily di-
rected toward the earthly goals of health and longevity, while Yoga has
spiritual liberation as its aim. Åyurveda is not, however, without religious
roots and applications. Its ultimate source is Brahm¯a the creator, who
gave the knowledge of Åyurveda through the ÓrÓsis or seers who produced
the divinely intuited Vedas. Åyurveda’s claim to divine origin grounds its
assertion that it is not limited to any particular culture, religion, or period
of history. As a source of knowledge it considers itself to have no begin-
ning or end: Åyurveda deals with things inherent in nature, and based on
the assumption that such natural manifestations are eternal, the princi-
ples regarding medicine and health remain constant, though in applica-
tion their concrete particulars differ [CS 1:30.27]. Yoga is a liberative dis-
cipline, a mokÓsa-´s¯astra whose beneﬁts are also germane across time,
place, and circumstances. Though Åyurveda is not a mokÓsa-´s¯astra, the
body and philosophies of healing
37

Caraka-saÓmhit¯a states that Åyurveda is sacred because it beneﬁts human-
kind in “both worlds,” this one, and the life beyond [CS 1:1.43].
The Åyurvedic texts present medical theory in the context of medi-
cal practice, so the theoretical principles of Åyurveda have to be pieced
together and conceptually reconstructed. Jean Filliozat writes that
Åyurvedic medicine is a rational system based on experience, and Gerald
Larson corroborates this by describing the practical operational charac-
ter of the medical literature, wherein symptoms and diseases are classi-
ﬁed, contextualized with respect to diagnosis, prognosis, and so on, then
addressed therapeutically.77 The major texts that have preserved knowl-
edge of Åyurveda to the present day are together called BÓrhattrayi, “The
Great Trio.” The encyclopedic Caraka-saÓmhit¯a, compiled in the ﬁrst cen-
turies of the common era, and commented on and revised in subsequent
centuries, is used in present-day traditional Indian medical practice. The
saÓmhit¯a or collection of Su´sruta is similar in content to the saÓmhit¯a of Ca-
raka, except that the Su´sruta-saÓmhit¯a emphasizes surgery.78 The third
major Åyurvedic text is the AÓsÓt¯a˙nga-hÓrdaya-saÓmhit¯a of Vagbhata.79
The Caraka-saÓmhit¯a has eight volumes. Its chapters deal with con-
cerns of practical medicine such as pathogenesis, diagnosis, pharmaceuti-
cals, and therapeutic measures. The ﬁrst volume, S¯utra-sth¯ana (‘the sec-
tion on fundamentals’), presents essential principles of maintaining
health and preventing and curing disease; thus it is particularly valuable
for study of Åyurveda’s concepts of health and the philosophical and reli-
gious implications of Åyurvedic medical philosophy.
Caraka describes Åyurveda as “the science through the knowledge
of which one can obtain knowledge about the useful and harmful types
of life, happy and miserable types of life, things that are useful for such
types of life, the span of life and the very nature of life” [CS 1:1.41].
Åyurveda’s aim is preservation and restoration of health, and assistance
in attaining the four puruÓs¯arthas or principles of life: dharma (righteous-
ness), artha (prosperity), k¯ama (enjoyment), and mokÓsa (liberation) [CS
1:1.15]. Åyurveda’s commitment to the puruÓs¯arthas demonstrates that
Åyurveda serves the quest for religious liberation and is not merely for
material well-being.
The origins of Åyurveda are evident in the Atharva-veda (c. 1500–
1000 b.c.e.), in which both religious (e.g., m¯antric), and medical (e.g.,
pharmacological) approaches to healing are represented. Hundreds of
medicinal plants are listed in the Vedas, as, for instance, in this passage:
Most efﬁcacious for healing this disease [leprosy] is the medicine known
as Rajan¯ı, thou posessest the healing power of Suparna. Asuri-named
38
religious therapeutics

medicine lends its color and shape to different plants, and is made ser-
viceable through pulverization.
AV 1:5.24.1
Rajan¯ı (√rañj, ‘to color’) refers to the medicinal plant turmeric: Curcuma
Longa. It is generally called Haridr¯a in the Caraka-saÓmhita. Following is
an example of a m¯antric or prayer approach to healing:
O maladies, whether ye result from physical or ancestral ailments, or
the company of ignoble persons, or are sprung out of cherishing evil
thoughts, get ye away from here.
AV 1:3.14.5
Prayers or incantations—often incorporating images of nature, as is char-
acteristic of Vedic texts—may accompany medical procedures, such as a
surgeon’s opening a patient’s obstructed urinary passage:
Just as the pent-up water of a lake is let loose by cleaving its dam, so do
I, O patient open thy urinary passage. May that urine of thine come out
completely, free from check.
AV 1:1.3.7
Environmental factors are not merely metaphoric, but are important in
Vedic etiology and therapeutics, as evident in this prayer for the
physician’s success:
O physician, so thou release this man from headache, free him from
cough which has entered into all his limbs and joints. One should resort
to forests and hills for relief from diseases resulting from excessive rains,
severe wind and intense heat.
AV 1:3.12.3
Åyurvedic medicine abandons the ancient Vedic religio-magical thera-
peutics. However, the role of the environment in the cause and cure of ill-
ness remains central. Francis Zimmermann’s study of Åyurveda, The Jun-
gle and the Aroma of Meats: An Ecological Theme in Hindu Medicine,
presents Åyurveda as grounded in ecological theory that conceives of the
land and the human body as the two kinds of place. Prognosis was in-
formed by knowledge of the inﬂuences of climate, season, diet, and cus-
tom. Therapeutic intervention had the double purpose of:
1. Rendering the environment appropriate to the needs of the patient
(by relocating the patient to a climate suitable to his constitution and
malady).
body and philosophies of healing
39

2. Rendering the patient’s diet and regimen appropriate to the ecologi-
cal conditions.
While ancient Greco-Latin science produced the model of knowledge
called natural history, based on classiﬁcation of species according to em-
pirically grounded distinctions, the concern of Indian taxonomy was the
dietetic and therapeutic qualities of the land and its inhabitants.
Åyurveda’s concept of the person places the human being within a context
of ‘biogeography,’ an aspect of the broader register of knowledge called
pharmacy. Pharmacy presupposes a whole cosmic physiology: the great
chain of foods where living beings—eaters and eaten—transmit to one an-
other the nourishing essences of the soil. Pharmacy then leads to a super-
ior register of knowledge: physiology, which in the ancient sense embraces
. . . the circulation of ﬂuids in the surrounding world, the rise of sap in
plants, the aroma that is given off by the cooking of different kinds of
meats, and ﬁnally the interplay of different humors within the body.80
While Åyurveda utilizes concepts of the person based to a great extent on
S¯aÓmkhya and VaiÓse´sika metaphysics, the person as the subject of medical
science is regarded within a context of the web of life. Åyurveda as
‘knowledge of life’ refers not just to individual human life, but to the
whole of living nature, and the countless pathogenic and therapeutic fac-
tors inﬂuencing human health.
‘Life’ in the context of individual health-maintenance embraces
more than biological life sustained by medical science. Åyurveda pro-
vides a system of hygiene incorporating such factors as diet and seasonal
regimen, cleanliness and physical puriﬁcation, and cultivation of knowl-
edge and attitudes that sustain well-being. Knowledge of life in Åyurveda
strongly concerns hygiene (Gk. hygienos: ‘healthful’), the study and prac-
tice of preserving health and preventing illness. Compared with the dra-
matic achievements of medical science, the idea of hygiene as a signiﬁcant
part of health-care is often considered to be on the level of archaic folk
remedies. Åyurveda’s systematic and sophisticated theory of hygiene
counters such a view. Granted, contemporary scientiﬁc medicine makes
remarkable contributions to human well-being, but hygiene remains
foundational to health, and the power of medical science to prevent and
treat medical problems doesn’t replace the simple procedures of protect-
ing and cultivating one’s vitality. Furthermore, scientiﬁc medicine is con-
cerned primarily with disease, and its theoretical basis gives insufﬁcient
attention to promoting health as a positive state.
40
religious therapeutics

Hygiene in the Åyurvedic sense of ‘knowledge of life’ is the axis of
the ancient medical traditions of Greece and China as well as India. Al-
though these medical systems developed advanced medical knowledge
and procedures, the foundation of each was proper hygienic measures.
Plato’s Timaeus says of diseases:
. . . if anyone regardless of the appointed time tries to subdue them by
medicine, he only aggravates and multiplies them. Wherefore we ought
always to manage them by regimen, as far as a man can spare the time,
and not provoke a disagreeable enemy by medicines.81
The Huang Ti Nei Ching Su Wên, “The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of
Internal Medicine,” opens with discussion of why people become so de-
crepit and no longer live to be a hundred years old. The answer: formerly,
they practiced temperance based on understanding the tao and con-
ducted themselves in accord with yin and yang.
There was temperance in eating and drinking. Their hours of rising and
retiring were regular and not disorderly and wild. By these means the
ancients kept their bodies united with their souls, so as to fulﬁl their al-
lotted span completely, measuring unto a hundred years before they
passed away.82
The Caraka-saÓmhit¯a—along with its extensive presentation of theory and
procedures for prevention, diagnosis, and treatment by pharmacological,
surgical, and other means—conveys many points of hygiene, such as rec-
ommendations for diet, exercise, seasonal regimen, grooming, massage,
and maintaining the physique. Cakrap¯aÓnidatta’s commentary, Åyurveda
D¯ıpik¯a, states that “of all the factors for the maintenance of positive
health, food taken in proper quantity occupies the most important posi-
tion” [AD 1:5.1]. Several verses are devoted to instruction on the taking
and healthful utilization of nourishment. For instance, it is recommended
that one note the relative heaviness of food, and leave about one-third of
one’s stomach capacity unﬁlled, to assist the power of digestion [CS
1:5.7]. In the humble matter of consuming food, Åyurveda reveals a seri-
ous implication of the ancient medical systems’ emphasis on ‘knowledge
of life’: the individual’s self-responsibility and power to maintain his or
her own health. Åyurveda emphasizes:
1. The individual’s particular type of constitution—physical and psy-
chological.
2. A holistic theory of the environment, focusing on the individual’s
body and philosophies of healing
41

relationship with the environment in the diagnosis and treatment of
health problems.
3. Concepts of health and disease that incorporate interrelated dimen-
sions of human physiology, psychology, and spirituality.
4. Sustaining health as a positive state.
5. Prevention of health problems.
The Åyurvedic texts have a strongly S¯aÓmkhyan account of the nature
of person and body (evident in passages such as Caraka-saÓmhit¯a iv:1, Su-
´sruta-saÓmhit¯a III). Life arises from the co-presence of consciousness and
primordial materiality. Materiality operates through the interaction of the
three energy-forces called guÓnas (‘strands’ or ‘ropes’). Larson charac-
terizes the guÓnas as follows: sattva, the subtle matter of pure thought,
rajas, the kinetic matter of pure energy, and tamas, the reiﬁed matter of in-
ertia.83 All forms of matter, including the human body and senses, are
composed at a fundamental level of the ﬁve mah¯abh¯utas or subtle ele-
ments (space, air, ﬁre, water, and earth), each produced by a particular
combination of the guÓnas. The ﬁve mah¯abh¯utas in turn combine to form
the three dh¯atus or doÓsas that constitute the psychophysical person (see
Figure 1.1). Along with drawing on S¯aÓmkhya as a dominant philosophical
basis, Åyurveda also uses terms and concepts from other Veda-accepting
systems—Ny¯aya, VaiÓse´sika, Ved¯anta, and Yoga—as well as from the non-
Vedic systems Buddhism and Jainism. Mainly Ny¯aya, VaiÓse´sika, and Bud-
dhist theories explain physical and chemical processes in Åyurveda, while
S¯aÓmkhya is considered to provide a very adequate metaphysics and ac-
count of the process of creation.84 Larson suggests that the afﬁnity
between Åyurveda and the naturalistic philosophical systems generated a
mutually inﬂuential pattern of interaction. The meaning of dar´sana,
‘viewpoint,’ as the designation of the major Indian philosophical systems—
considered as complementary and non-contradictory despite the differ-
ences of their principles and methods—is wonderfully exempliﬁed by
Åyurveda’s employment of these several systems.
S¯aÓmkhya metaphysics grounds the central doctrine of Åyurvedic
metaphysiology, that of the dh¯atus (doÓsas) or constitutive principles of
human psychophysiology and pathology. The three guÓnas produce the
ﬁve subtle proto-elements or mah¯abh¯utas, and the proto-elements com-
bine in three pairs to form the body’s three dh¯atus, fundamental elements
or ‘supports’ (√dh¯a,‘to give,’ e.g., ‘to give support’).
Åyurveda uses the term dh¯atu in two ways. First, the body is held to
have seven dh¯atus or basic tissue elements, each derived from the one pre-
ceding it in the following sequence: rasa (chyle or extract of nutriment),
42
religious therapeutics

blood, ﬂesh, fat, bone, marrow, and ova/semen. The term dh¯atu also re-
fers to the three functional constituents of the body/mind: v¯ata, pitta, and
kapha. In a normal and healthy state these three function in dynamic
equilibrium and are called dh¯atus. When one or more of the three dh¯atus
is aggravated or diminished, equilibrium is compromised and they are
called doÓsas (√duÓs: ‘to spoil,’ ‘to impair’. The term tri-doÓsa signiﬁes the
three ‘faults’ or ‘impairments’ that condition disease.
A major manifestation of the three doÓsas is the body’s systems of
respiration (v¯ata), digestion (pitta), and structural integration (kapha).
Each doÓsa has characteristic functions within the body. V¯ata is the dy-
namic element in digestion, excretion, respiration, circulation, reproduc-
tive functions, speech, and motor activity in general. Pitta is the energy of
the vision, the nervous system, and the digestive ‘cooking’ of food in the
stomach. Kapha is responsible for the integration of tissues and systems,
and maintenance of the body’s homeostasis. V¯ata, pitta, and kapha are
generally translated as ‘wind,’ ‘bile,’ and ‘phlegm,’ but instead of taking
these terms literally, they should be understood as the principles consti-
tuting and governing the body’s systems and functions.
Åyurveda’s practice of health-care assumes a concept of the person as
a ‘tripod’ of body, mind, and self, which together constitute the sentient
‘person’ called puruÓsa [CS 1:1.46–47]. The tripod metaphor suggests that
these three constituents serve as a substratum to support the person’s
higher nature, but it is the tripod that is Åyurveda’s practical subject mat-
ter. Human life, according to this rather VaiÓse´sikan interpretation in the
Caraka-saÓmhit¯a, arises from the association of the body, ´sar¯ıra (including
its sensory capacities), with the mind (sattva or manas), and self (¯atman).
This association constitutes the person who is of concern to Åyurveda.
While Yoga regards the person’s ultimate nature as puruÓsa or pure
consciousness, and its aim is the freeing of this spiritual Self from the body,
Åyurveda inclines toward the cooperation of the physical and the spiritual.
Cromwell Crawford comments that “for Åyurveda, spirit and matter, soul
and body, although different, are not alien, insofar as they can be brought
GuÓnas
Sattva (Awareness)
Rajas (Energy)
Tamas (Inertia)
Mah¯abh¯utas
Space
Air
Fire
Water
Earth
Dh¯at¯us (in equilibrium) or
DoÓsas (in disequilibrium)
V¯ata
Pitta
Kapha
body and philosophies of healing
43
Figure 1.1 Åyurveda’s three dh¯atus or doÓsas

in a healing relationship with consequences that are mutually beneﬁ-
cial.”85 Åyurveda thus diverges from the position of classical S¯aÓmkhya and
Yoga that consciousness should transcend materiality. This is a central ex-
ample of how Åyurveda, because it is concerned with concrete physical
problems, embodies and reveals meanings about human nature that devi-
ate from traditional Indian religious and textual interpretations.
Although Åyurveda does not draw the same soteriological conclu-
sions from S¯aÓmkhya cosmology that Yoga does, the S¯aÓmkhya philosophy
of cosmic evolution is part of the foundation of Åyurveda’s conception of
the human being as a microcosm within the macrocosm of the natural
world. Crawford articulates the point that the “parallelism between
human nature and nature at large suggests that humans are in a systemic
relationship with the creative forces of the universe.”86 This point is illu-
minated by Zimmermann’s analysis of Åyurveda’s doctrine of humors
and the medical formulation of a cosmic physiology dominated by the
themes of the circulation of ﬂuids and the chain of successive ‘cookings’
of nutriment by the sun, the cooking ﬁre, and the digestion. The
Åyurvedic version of the great chain of Being is a chain of foods, where
essences transmitted from the soils, through plants, herbivores, carni-
vores, and man are ﬁnally rendered to the gods in the aroma of sacriﬁcial
ﬁres. The burning transformative power of the sun, the cooking ﬁre, the
digestive ﬁre, metabolism, and the ﬂames of sacriﬁce are links in a uni-
verse of biospiritual metamorphosis, where the meal is a metaphoric ritu-
alization of sacriﬁcing foods in the internal ﬁre.87
Caraka’s text Analysis of the Human Body reveals Åyurveda’s con-
ception of the body in a more fundamental way than the accounts given
in the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a. The text does not address anatomy and physiol-
ogy conceived in terms of the structure and function of the body’s organs
and systems. According to Zimmermann, Caraka’s Analysis of the
Human Body is “a speculative pathogenesis, a reﬂection of balance and
imbalance between the humors from which results either growth or wast-
ing of the tissues.”88 Caraka’s text begins with a deﬁnition of the body as
samyogavahin, translated by Zimmermann as “a vehicle for congruous
junctions.” The physician’s work is to orchestrate proper conjunctions of
foods and medicinal substances with the patient’s particular constitution
and circumstances—environmental and temporal as well as pathological.
The next chapter, “Meanings of Health in Åyurveda,” presents a set of
determinants of health based on Hindu medicine’s holistic conception of
person and world.
44
religious therapeutics

Chapter Two
MEANINGS OF HEALTH IN ¯AYURVEDA
In Western philosophy of medicine, inquiries into health tend to focus
more on the meanings of disease, in part because disease demands con-
crete problem-solving for a variety of ills, while health is assumed to be a
unitary state equivalent to the absence of disease or dysfunction. This
chapter examines the notion of health as a positive state, rejecting the
narrow deﬁnition that health is simply the absence of disease. Contempo-
rary scientiﬁc medicine is oriented to treating speciﬁc syndromes to the
neglect of addressing the well-being of the whole person. This approach
to health and healing is being questioned by many patients and practi-
tioners.1 Ancient and traditional health-care systems—such as India’s
Åyurveda—have roots in religious cosmologies that regard the person as
more than body or body/mind, but as inclusive of a spiritual dimension,
and as part of the natural world and the social world. An Åyurvedic
understanding of ‘medicine’ incorporates not just pharmacology, surgery,
and the other empirical disciplines we associate with the word. The close
relation of medicine and religion is reﬂected in the etymological fact that
the Indo-European root med, ‘to take appropriate measures,’ is the
source of the words ‘medicine’ and ‘meditation.’ Among med’s descen-
dents are the Latin meder¯ı, ‘to look after,’ and medit¯ar¯ı ‘to think about.’
Traditional healing systems can broaden our views of the nature of
the person, and of religious, social, and environmental implications of
health and illness. They can also open perspectives for a more compre-
hensive understanding of health. The commonality of medicine and reli-
gion—at root, the perpetuation of human well-being—underlies concern
for both psychophysical and spiritual health in traditions across lands
and times. While Åyurveda has much to offer as a system of medicine and
45

as a program of health maintenance, my task here is not to evaluate the
soundness of Åyurvedic medical theory. Rather, I follow Gerald Larson’s
suggestion that South Asian medical theory and practice can reveal new
agendas for health and healing.
What is of importance in traditional medicine, however, is a way of val-
uing and a way of conceptualizing “disease” and “illness” that is inter-
estingly different from our own and that is not at all incompatible with
the rigorous precision of modern scientiﬁc methodology.2
A foundational concept of Åyurvedic medical philosophy is equilib-
rium, starting with the idea of health as balance among the three doÓsas or
bioenergetic principles. The idea of balance has a range of applications,
such as a suitable ratio of work, rest, and recreation, and the eating of
types and amounts of food in proportion to individual requirements and
digestive capacity. Åyurveda’s fourfold therapeutic paradigm is given in
Caraka-saÓmhit¯a 1:9.19, shown below.
The Four Branches of Åyurvedic Medical Knowledge
1. Causes of diseases
2. Diagnosis
3. Cure
4. Prevention
This chapter presents a set of determinants of health, derived from
the classical Åyurvedic text, Agnive´sa’s Caraka-saÓmhit¯a (c. ﬁrst century
c.e.), and its commentary Åyurveda-d¯ıpik¯a of CakrapaÓnidatta. In about
the third century c.e., the text was reconstructed and annotated by Ca-
raka (an individual or perhaps a school), and the name Caraka still desig-
nates it. In the eigth century, the redactor DÓrÓdhabala again reconstituted
and reﬁned the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a. CakrapaÓnidatta’s commentary Åyurveda-
d¯ıpik¯a was written in the eleventh century.3 Interpretive sources for this
chapter include contemporary sources on Åyurveda, and modern West-
ern medical philosophy. The purposes of this chapter are:
1. To offer a positive account of health applicable to human life in all its
dimensions.
2. To specify major conditions of health in order to ground the idea of
religious therapeutics.
Determinants of health are presented here under four categories:
46
religious therapeutics

1. Biological and ecological
2. Medical and psychological
3. Sociocultural and aesthetic
4. Metaphysical and religious
The four categories, and the determinants of health presented within them,
are not intended to be entirely independent of one another, nor exhaustive.
INQUIRY INTO HEALTH
‘Health’ pertains to a state of being, but it also names a conceptual ru-
bric, encompassing themes such as freedom from incapacitation, vitality
sufﬁcient for successful action, and feelings of well-being. ‘Health-care’ is
a related rubric covering traditional and contemporary systems of medi-
cine, preventive routines and treatment methods, and social issues such
as the economics of health insurance. What we call ‘health-care’ in con-
temporary scientiﬁc medicine more often amounts to ‘sickness care,’ in
that medical intervention is more often applied after illness has devel-
oped, rather than beforehand to cultivate the person’s inherent vitality
and to diagnose and prevent potential problems. Åyurveda emphasizes
preventive methods and cultivation of health as a positive state, and pro-
vides a complement to the more crisis-oriented biomedical model. While
the biomedical model gives most of its attention to the theory and treat-
ment of disease, Åyurveda shows more concern for the active cultivation
of health. Health is deﬁned as follows in the preamble to the Constitution
of the World Health Organization:
Health is a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and
not merely the absence of disease or inﬁrmity.4
This deﬁnition has the strengths of recognizing the several domains of
human life in which health is important, and of regarding health as a pos-
itive state, not merely a concept whose meaning is established in relation
to illness or disability. Complete well-being or perfect health is generally
thought to be an unrealizable ideal. We tend to think of healthiness as a
matter of degree, for the complex web of relations among material and
biological factors seems to obviate the possibility of the body’s perfect
form and function. Each of us, writes Susan Sontag in Illness as Meta-
phor, “holds dual citizenship, in the kingdom of the well and in the king-
dom of the sick.”5 Yet perfect health is an ideal that physician Deepak
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
47

Chopra extends as possible through Åyurveda. Working from the Vedic
premise that intelligence is the basic force underlying all of nature,
Chopra’s efforts to help restore Åyurveda in contemporary health-care
invoke the Indian concept of the supreme Self (Param¯atman), which
Åyurveda says is free of dysfunction: “The soul is essentially devoid of
abnormalities. . . . is eternal and the observer who sees all actions” [CS
1:1.56]. Chopra writes:
There exists in every person a place that is free from disease, that never
feels pain, that cannot age or die. When you go to this place, limitations
that all of us accept cease to exist.6
Chopra explains Åyurveda’s recommendations for a range of traditional
practices of Åyurvedic physical culture, infused with the mental cultiva-
tion of meditation and the waking of body/mind intelligence. The “quan-
tum mechanical body” is Chopra’s model of a body of intelligence, which
unites the ‘river’ of quanta comprising the physical body, with the ‘river’ of
thought that is the mind.7 Healing in quantum terms is grounded in
knowledge (notably knowledge of oneself as a body of intelligence), and
utilizes meditation and mental techniques “to control the invisible pat-
terns that order the body.”8 Perfect health may not be possible, but the no-
tion of it calls us to question what health could be like ideally. Åyurveda
offers practical means of caring for one’s body/mind that can help us live
with more vitality, calmness, and well-being than we might have imagined.
In clarifying meanings concerning the relation of health and illness,
it is worthwhile to acknowledge the ambiguities that make health and ill-
ness poles in a dialectical tension where one or the other may predomi-
nate. Our participation in the kingdom of the sick and the kingdom of
the well is not as simple as occupying one realm and then the other. Con-
ditions of sickness impinge to greater or lesser extents on states of health,
and they even serve to mobilize the forces of health. The presence of dis-
ease or disability does not exclude health. As Caroline Whitbeck says, “a
high degree of health is compatible with some degree of disease, injury, or
impairment.”9 The “ambiguity of life” is Paul Tillich’s term for the source
of inevitable intrusions by destructive factors that cause illness and in-
jury. In Tillich’s view of the dialectic processes that constitute life, every
creative process implies a destructive trend, and every integrating process
implies a disintegrating trend. Threats exist even in the assimilation of
food, breath, and communication. Intrusion of destructive forces, and
thus malfunctions—physical and psychological—are inevitable. Disease,
Tillich says, “is a symptom of the universal ambiguity of life.”10 In present-
ing determinants of health, I note ambiguities inherent in various aspects
48
religious therapeutics

of health, and point out some of the tensions inherent in embodied
human life as revealed through the window of health. An instance of such
ambiguity is Nietzsche’s startling suggestion that our seeking health with-
out any sickness is cowardice, if not barbarism, for “the sick soul” as
much as the healthy one, is needed to inspire self-knowledge and even
virtue.11 Nietzsche’s recognition of the ambiguities inherent in human life
and health suggests a useful direction for inquiry into the meaning of
health: an adequate account of human health should allow for the funda-
mental tensions, ambiguities, and imperfections in human life.
Health and disease are not symmetrical concepts; that is, the mean-
ing of one cannot be adequately established in terms of the other. H. Tri-
stam Engelhardt holds that the concept of disease is a pragmatic concept,
a concept by which phenomena are analyzed for the purposes of diagno-
sis, prognosis, and therapy. Health, on the other hand, is a regulative con-
cept, a concept that establishes an ideal and guides inquiry and action to-
ward the achievement of that ideal.12 The Constitution of the World
Health Organization provides an articulation of health as a regulative
ideal, and it afﬁrms health as a fundamental value for both the individual
and for world culture:
• The enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health is one of
the fundamental rights of every human being without distinction of
race, religion, political belief, economic or social condition.
• The health of all peoples is fundamental to the attainment of peace
and security and is dependent upon the fullest co-operation of indi-
viduals and States.
• The achievement of any State in the promotion and protection of
health is of value to all.13
Two inﬂuential doctrines of health illustrate descriptive and normative
concepts of health. A biologically based doctrine articulated by Christo-
pher Boorse deﬁnes health as “functional normality.” This doctrine uses
the terms ‘health’ and ‘disease’ as descriptive, value-neutral terms. To say
that a person or an organ or system is healthy means that its functions are
normal; to say it is diseased means that its functions are abnormal, with
biostatistical data providing the criteria of normality.
. . . diseases are internal states that depress a functional ability below
species-typical levels. Health as freedom from disease is then statistical
normality of function, i.e., the ability to perform all typical physiologi-
cal functions with at least typical efﬁciency.14
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
49

Health and disease on this interpretation are employed as scientiﬁc con-
cepts, not normative ones, despite the fact that, in general, human beings
value health and abhor disease.
A normative doctrine is exempliﬁed in Georg Canguilhem’s The
Normal and the Pathological, which uses the terms ‘health’ and ‘disease’
as normative terms: Health means that a person functions well, disease
means he or she functions badly.
Man feels in good health—what is health itself—only when he feels more
than normal—that is, adapted to the environment and its demands—but
normative, capable of following new norms of life. . . . for man health is
a feeling of assurance in life to which no limit is ﬁxed. Valere, from which
value derives, means to be in good health in Latin. Health is a way of
tackling existence as one feels that one is not only possessor or bearer but
also, if necessary, creator of value, establisher of vital norms.15
Discussions of human health often address a particular dimension of
health and neglect others, for instance, emphasizing the capacity to
achieve one’s goals but overlooking the factor of resistance to disease.
Rather than proposing a ‘deﬁnition’ of health, I present a range of deter-
minants that can be used as criteria for evaluating states of health, and
that identify conditions for thinking about health. In using these determi-
nants as criteria to assess the health of a particular person, emphasis may
be placed on some determinants over others, depending on circumstances.
For example, in evaluating the health of a child who has no serious medi-
cal problems, growth and development are important criteria of health. In
the case of an elderly person with a chronic condition, the degree of pain
experienced by the person would be a signiﬁcant criterion. The determi-
nants of health presented here are applicable across a range of instances,
with modiﬁcations for speciﬁc circumstances. For example, strength is a
criterion of health for both a child and an elderly person, though there are
differences in the particular set of abilities required by each.
DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH
Biological and Ecological Determinants
Life, Development, and Longevity
Living, rather than dying, is a fundamental determinant of health. Health
can be ascribed only of living entities, and an essential criterion of health
is the organism’s prevailing in its life-functions rather than tending toward
50
religious therapeutics

death. Longevity means long life, and connotes living to great age with
vitality. In Hindu medicine, life and longevity are central in the concept of
health: Åyurveda means ‘knowledge of life and longevity’ (¯ayus, ‘life’;
veda, ‘knowledge’). Åyus in the term Åyurveda means the combination
of body, senses, mind, and soul [CS 1:1.42 ], but in the compound term
Åyurveda, ¯ayus connotes the support and prolonging of healthful human
life [CS 1:1.41]. In Åyurveda, life means not merely biological thriving:
the desire to live long and well is recommended as the ﬁrst priority [CS
1:11.3–4].
The term ‘development’ applies to biological growth, but also to in-
tellectual, social, and other kinds of progress in one’s awareness and ca-
pabilities. Because human beings have high potential for intellectual, so-
cial, athletic, creative, and spiritual achievement, part of being healthy
means cultivating one’s knowledge and abilities. Without such lifelong
development, a person tends more toward stagnation than toward opti-
mum health. Change is an explanatory principle of the processes of life
and development, and of disease and death as well. In biological terms,
children’s growth and development constitute change in the direction of
healthiness, while impaired development marks problems with health,
owing to factors such as inadequate nutrition, congenital abnormality,
injury, or illness. Nineteenth-century pathologist Rudolph Virchow re-
garded diseases not as ontological entities, but as representing “the
course of corporeal appearances under changed conditions.”16 Illness is
marked by changes in sensations, capacities, and sometimes of appear-
ance.17 Change is integral to healing as well: to undergo healing is to
undergo transformations wherein the normal conditions of life are re-
stored, and to cure is to generate and assist transformations that restore
the normal conditions of life.
Along with conception, death is an ultimate change of state of the
physical body. Disease and injury may lead to death, yet there is such a
thing as a ‘healthy death,’ a death experienced as part of the natural cycle
of coming to be and passing away. Healthy death is exempliﬁed by death
from old age, when a person is not suffering greatly from the debilitation
or pain of a particular condition. Instead, he or she retains a degree of
strength and self-sufﬁciency until the time that the body has aged to the
point that one or more systems cease to function. Åyurveda’s notion of
longevity means more than long life; it means cultivating long life in
health and vitality, thus establishing conditions for a healthy death. At
any age, the idea of ‘healthy death’ applies to cases where a person’s pow-
ers to thrive are diminished, yet death is accepted with equanimity. The
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
51

Taoist idea of enlightenment as living and dying in accord with nature’s
simplicity grounds the notion of healthy death. Chuang Tzu rejected his
disciples’ plans for his funeral, named heaven and earth as his cofﬁn, and
accepted his imminent death without dread.18 Poems by Zen Buddhist
monks, written close to the moment of death, epitomize the idea of dying
in a state of health sufﬁcient to permit awareness and expression of one’s
ﬁnal experience.19
Equilibrium
In Åyurveda the meaning of health centers on the concept of equilibrium.
Healing involves restoration of balanced states of being within the organ-
ism—that is, at the level of the doÓsas or constituent principles of the
mind/body complex, and between organism and environment. Broadly
conceived, equilibrium in Åyurveda means the stable and harmonious
functioning of “our organs and systems, psyche and spirit, but also a bal-
anced and creative relationship with our fellow creatures and nature as a
whole.”20
The body and mind constitute the substrata of diseases and happiness
(i.e., positive health). Balanced utilization (of time, mental faculties, and
objects of sense organs) is the cause of happiness.
CS 1:1.55
The technical meaning of equilibrium or balance in Åyurveda refers
to the equilibrium of the three dh¯atus or doÓsas. Health on the Åyurvedic
interpretation is the equilibrium of v¯ata, pitta, and kapha, the tri-dh¯atu,
the three ‘tissue-elements,’ more precisely termed ‘systematic constituents’
or ‘sustaining factors.’ Their imbalance constitutes impaired health, and is
referred to as tridoÓsa, the three systematic problems.
The very object of this science is the maintenance of the equilibrium of
the tissue elements [dh¯atus¯amya: equilibrium of sustaining and nourish-
ing factors].
CS 1:1.53
As the author himself will say, the disturbance of the equilibrium of tis-
sue elements [dh¯atus] is the disease, while the maintenance of equilib-
rium is health.
AD 1:1.53
Applications of tridoÓsa theory include:
1. Classiﬁcation of the patient’s psychophysical constitution-type, de-
termined by the predominance of one or more doÓsas.
52
religious therapeutics

2. Etiological theory employing the explanatory principle of deviation
from the proper proportions of the doÓsas.
3. Therapeutic measures including pharmaceuticals that act to restore
the balance of the doÓsas according to the patient’s constitutional type
and environmental circumstances.
For the maintenance of health, it is necessary that a perfect equilib-
rium be established with regard to the various forces acting and
counteracting on the body. If there is an excessive deﬁciency any-
where, it has got to be neutralized. . . . Marshy lands are by nature
dominated by the qualities of unctuousness [‘oiliness,’ ‘slipperiness’]
and heaviness. Individuals residing in such places should naturally be
required to become used to taking meat of animals of arid climate,
honey, etc., which are dominated by qualities like roughness and
lightness in contradistinction with those of the unctuousness and
heaviness which dominate the climate of other lands. Similarly, one
should be required to follow a regular regimen on the above lines in
order to counteract the imbalancing forces of these places. The same
principle also holds good with regard to the various diseases. For ex-
ample, if a disease has occurred due to the vitiation [impairment] of
v¯ata, then the diet, drugs and regimen are to be habituated in such a
manner that they counteract the effect of the former.
AD 1:6.50
Åyurvedic physician Vasant Lad explains that disease-process is caused
by doÓsas imbalanced by factors such as unsuitable diet, or smoking,
which weaken tissues in speciﬁc locations of the body where disease may
then take hold. Treatment does not focus on eradication of external path-
ogenic factors, but rather on restoring the balance of conditions and
forces within the affected tissues and system, the system surrounding it,
and the whole organism.21 Åyurveda’s theory of pathogenesis implies that
a determinant of health is equilibrium of the functions that support un-
damaged tissues and systems, in order to avoid tendencies to malfunction
when pathogens are inevitably encountered.
Contemporary scientiﬁc medicine makes particular use of chemical
analysis, and here the concept of equilibrium concerns the balance of
chemical substances and processes within an organism. Physiological
functions depend on chemical factors and interactions whose equilibrium
can be evaluated quantitatively. Chemical levels in the body can be ana-
lyzed by laboratory procedures and judged in terms of a standard range,
with readings falling outside the normal range indicative of particular
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
53

disorders (e.g., abnormal blood glucose levels may indicate hypoglycemia
or diabetes). The pharmaceutical treatment of illness entails introduction
of chemical agents into the body to improve functioning and relieve dis-
comfort. Equilibrium in a pharmacological context does not generally
entail direct replacement of a particular chemical compound that the
body lacks (though in some cases this is so). Rather, the restoration of
equilibrium by pharmacology consists in chemically establishing condi-
tions that support normal functions of the body, so that they prevail over
factors causing malfunction. Åyurvedic pharmacology emphasizes the
patient’s particular circumstances in administration of medicines:
It is necessary to take into account the place where the drugs are pro-
duced, the physical conditions of the patient, the appropriate dose of the
drug, and the seasonal variation as well as the age of the patient.
AD 1:1.62–63
Åyurvedic diagnosis and treatment invoke the idea of balance not merely
for pharmaceutical applications, but as it pertains to the relationship
between persons and their environment and life-circumstances. Dash and
Junius note that the idea of balance can apply to relationships with fam-
ily, friends, work, culture, and God.22 An important application of the
idea of equilibrium in the context of health is avoidance of extremes in
diet, sleep, work, recreation and other activities.
Adaptation
Medical theorist Claude Bernard, working in the nineteenth-century cli-
mate of Lamarck’s and Darwin’s evolutionary theories, regarded disease
as a result of an organism’s failure to adapt to environmental insults.23
Brody and Sobel’s systems-theory of health assumes Dubos’ position that
“states of health or disease are the expression of the success or failure ex-
perienced by an organism in its effort to respond adaptively to environ-
mental challenges.”24 The systems-theory view of health incorporates
various ‘levels’ or domains, through which information ﬂows in a pattern
of feedback loops: “component A inﬂuences component B and the new
state of B then ‘feeds back’ to inﬂuence A.”25 Brody and Sobel summarize
the concept of health as “the ability of a system (e.g., cell, organism, fam-
ily, society) to respond adaptively to a wide variety of environmental
challenges (e.g., physical, chemical, infectious, psychological, social).”26
Adaptation in the Darwinian sense of reproductive success is one
meaning of adaptation, but adaptation further refers to an organism’s
having a relation to its environment that is both self-preserving and ac-
54
religious therapeutics

comodating of impinging forces. Jozsef Kovács characterizes a healthy
relationship between organism and environment as “a dynamic steady
state which can be maintained by the living being in spite of changes in
the environment.”27 In biological terms, health coincides with the highest
stability and self-preservation of the individual and of the species, which
in turn contributes to the self-preservation of the ecosystem in which in-
dividuals and species participate. In human life, adaptation is not only a
biological process; it is also cultural process, involving the production
and use of knowledge, instruments, methods, and institutions aimed at
successful participation in the environment, and transformation of it.28
Adaptation for the purpose of self-preservation is central to
Descartes’ physics, medicine, and ethics. Descartes’ physics is concerned
with “simple bodies,” what contemporary science calls “masses in mo-
tion,” and the natural forces that resolve compound bodies back into their
original state as simple bodies. In the physical universe, each entity, living
or non-living, acts and reacts to its environment so as to maximize its
chances of survival. The living organism, in Descartes’ terms, is a com-
pound body formed of organ systems, a mechanism of self-preservation
that supports the functioning and interaction of those organs. Life, then, is
the compound motion of the simple bodies constituting the organism, and
medicine is responsible for helping human beings preserve the functions of
the body’s systems. For Descartes, just as medicine is concerned with rela-
tions among the parts of the body, ethics addresses the relations among
persons (i.e., living, sentient, compound bodies) so that each might act as
an organic part of the largest body, society, or the ‘body politic.’29
In psychological terms, adaptation pertains to how a person re-
sponds to life’s problems, classiﬁed by Maslow and Mittelmann as (1) bi-
ological and physical, (2) cultural, and (3) those set by internal psycho-
logical demands.30 An ambiguity in human health exists in the fact that
even though adaptation is generally a criterion of health, there are cases
where failure to adapt is indicative of health. Sanford gives this example:
People who adapted to Hitler’s Germany of the 1930’s appeared “well”;
in terms of their particular social framework they were well-adjusted
people. Those who could not adapt found themselves in a painful condi-
tion, and suffered a terrible malaise. They appeared sick and disturbed
people, but their very lack of adaptation may well have been their sign
of health. It is as though there was too much health in them to adapt to
a sick situation.31
Medically, disease itself may be adaptive, as in the case of cowpox infec-
tion preventing smallpox.32
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
55

Åyurveda demonstrates that the medical use of the concept of adap-
tation has been operative from ancient times. Zimmermann translates
from Caraka-saÓmhit¯a 1:6.50:
Experts in appropriateness try to oppose a regimen of diet and exercise
(literally a s¯atmya) with contrary qualities to those of the places and dis-
eases in question.33
S¯atmya (sa , ‘with’; ¯atma, ‘self’) is translated by Zimmermann as “habit-
uation,” and by Sharma and Dash as “homologation” [CS 3:8.118].
‘Homologation’ connotes ‘making similar’ [Gk. homo-logos, ‘agreeing’].
P. V. Sharma translates oka-s¯atmya as “suitability by practice” [CS
3:8.118], and translates its deﬁnition as “adjustment to a particular diet
or behavior due to practice” [CS 1:6:50]. Zimmermann clariﬁes: s¯atmya
concerns “what has become beneﬁcial to a person through constant use.”
While biogeographical habituation or s¯amtya is recommended in a short-
term view of the inﬂuence of climate, Zimmermann says that “in the long
term, however, the practitioner seeks to obtain an immunity through ha-
bituation.”34 This second sense of s¯atmya “denotes an intervention made
on the patient’s body; it has the different meaning of a regimen or remedy
which ‘compensates’ for some excess or lack: a person wasting away is
fed on sweet food for example.” Based on the Åyurvedic notion of body
and land as the two kinds of place (de´sa), Zimmermann uncovers two di-
mensions of health-promoting adaptation: compensation using contrar-
ies in therapeutic de´sas¯atmya (applying particular remedies), and habitu-
ation to external conditions in biogeographical de´sas¯atmya (concerning
the dietary practices of peoples in different environments).35 Zimmer-
mann communicates the ethos of Åyurveda in this remark about the
adaptation procedure called s¯atmya: “The ideal is to accustom oneself to
hit on the right choice of regimen, learned doses, and mixture, so that the
nature of what is eaten is rendered appropriate to the nature of the one
who eats it.”36
Non-susceptibility
Biologically, non-susceptibility means resistance or immunity to poten-
tially infectious agents or damaging forces. The Åyurveda D¯ıpik¯a gives a
succinct deﬁnition of resistance:
Resistance to diseases or immunity from diseases includes both attenu-
ation of the manifested diseases as well as prevention of the unmani-
fested ones.
AD 1:28.7
56
religious therapeutics

Non-susceptibility is a determinant of health in that an organism’s resis-
tance to infectious or other threatening agents signals its power of per-
sisting in its own functions, while resisting or overcoming the effects of,
for example, microorganisms to which it is exposed. Non-susceptibility is
also the principle behind participation without injury in activities requir-
ing exertion. Vitality is at the root of resistance to both biological illness
and physical injury. Vitality connotes the strength and energy to prevail
in one’s own being and activities, and withstanding interference from
forces in one’s environment.
Psychologically, non-susceptibility means a state of mental clarity
and equilibrium from which one can respond to pressures from other
persons’ behaviors and communications, and from within one’s own
psyche, without extreme reactions of suffering or behavior damaging to
self or others. While v¯ata, pitta, and kapha are pathogenic factors of the
body, Åyurveda names two of the three guÓnas (principles of matter) as
the pathogenic factors affecting the mind: rajas (activity) and tamas (iner-
tia). The Caraka-saÓmhit¯a claims as its province physical medicine (not
psychological medicine), but nevertheless it recommends “spiritual and
scriptural knowledge, patience, memory, and meditation” for reducing
susceptibility to maladaptive mental inﬂuences [CS 1:1.58].
Vitality, Endurance, and Relaxation
In Åyurveda, the life force is considered to consist in a physiological ﬂuid
material called ojas:
It is the ojas which keeps all living beings refreshed. There can be no life
without ojas. It marks the beginning of the formation of the embryo. . . .
Loss of ojas amounts to loss of life itself. It sustains the life and is lo-
cated in the heart. It constitutes the essence of all tissue elements. The
elan vital [‘life force’] owes its existence to it.
CS 1:30.9–11
Although Åyurveda understands ojas as a physical substance, the word
ojas also expresses the abstractions we call ‘energy’ or ‘vitality’ in human
life. Sharma and Dash translate ojas as energy in this passage of the
Caraka-saÓmhit¯a: “A body possessed of organs having proper measure-
ment is endowed with longevity, strength, energy (ojas), happiness,
power, wealth and virtues” [CS 3:8.117]. P. V. Sharma translates ojas in
this passage as ‘immunity.’ As a physical substance, ojas is the essence of
the seven tissue elements: chyle, blood, ﬂesh, fat, bone, marrow, and
semen or ova.
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
57

The excellent essence of the dh¯atus beginning with rasa (chyle) and end-
ing with semen (´sukra) or ova and blood (´soÓnita) is called ojas. This ojas
is also called bala (strength) in the context of the medical science. Be-
cause of strength, there is stability and nourishment of the muscle tis-
sues and the person remains undeterred in all efforts.37
Vitality, from the Latin noun vita, life, refers to the force of life. Vitality
connotes vigor and strength, and as a determinant of health it represents
an entity’s strength to assert itself for survival, for meeting challenges and
accomplishing chosen purposes. Strength refers to the power of resisting
or generating an effect or force. It is an important factor in diagnosis, for
loss of strength is often indicative of compromised functioning, though
individuals possess and utilize strength in different ways. Endurance is
the power to act in a sustained way when a continued expenditure of ef-
fort and concentration is required.
Relaxation and stress are signiﬁcant factors for health, and the con-
cept of vitality provides an interpretive context for them. Tension and re-
laxation are complementary poles in maintaining homeostasis. In in-
stances ranging over cellular integrity, arterial pressure, and the person’s
affective sense of sufﬁcient challenge and rest, vitality requires some de-
gree of tension to stimulate action, and to maintain or strengthen an
organism’s capacities. At the same time, relaxation is imperative for pre-
venting more extreme forms of tension that can damage tissues, systems,
and psychological resiliency. Relaxation is not only a means of maintain-
ing vitality, but a sign that an organism is maintaining its functional equi-
librium and well-being.
Medical and Psychological Determinants
Normality
In contemporary scientiﬁc medicine, a widely applied criterion of health
is the ‘normal’ functioning of an organ, system, or person, with normal-
ity established by comparison with bio-statistical data, as articulated in
Boorse’s theory of health.38 Normality can be understood in terms of:
1. PATHOLOGY: Normality is deﬁned in terms of presence and extent of
disease.
2. STATISTICS: Normality is deﬁned in terms of deviation from the dis-
tribution of a given characteristic in a population.
3. SOCIAL VALUES: Normality is determined in relation to values (e.g.,
the question of whether homosexuality is normal).39
58
religious therapeutics

The Caraka-saÓmhit¯a lists the following determinants of normality as cri-
teria for determining whether a cure has been effected:
• Alleviation of pain
• Normal voice
• Normal complexion
• Increased strength
• Appetite
• Proper digestion, and nourishment of the body
• Proper elimination of waste
• Proper sexual functioning
• Sufﬁcient sleep at the proper time
• Absence of dreams indicating morbidity, happy awakening
• Unimpaired mind, intellect, and sense faculties [CS 3:8.89]
Central to Åyurvedic diagnosis and therapy is restoration of conditions
regarded as normal for all persons, but achieved on the basis of what is
normal for an individual’s particular type of constitution. Because an
individual’s normal structure and function depend on the equilibrium of
the three doÓsas, what is normal for a given person depends on his or her
type of constitution, whether dominated by v¯ata (‘wind’: the force of mo-
tion), pitta (‘bile’: the force of heat), or kapha (‘phlegm’: the force of
stability) or a combination of two of these, or all three.
The entire body is in fact the abode of all the doÓsas and as such these
doÓsas bring about good and bad results according as they are in normal
and abnormal states respectively. When in a normal state, they bring
about good results like growth, strength, complexion, happiness, etc.
When in an abnormal state they cause various types of diseases.
CS 1:20.9
Health and disease in Åyurveda are relative to the normal and abnormal
states of the doÓsas, and hence the absence or alleviation of disease is co-
extensive with equilibrium of the doÓsas suitable to a given person’s con-
stitution. The names of the three doÓsas should not be taken in literal
terms as the substances phlegm, bile, and wind, but understood to repre-
sent qualities of physiological structures and functions. The three forces
governing biological processes in the normal state of equilibrium that
constitutes health are traditionally called dh¯atus, ‘supports’ (√dh¯a, ‘to
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
59

give,’ e.g., to give support). Disturbance of the dh¯atus’ equilibrium is co-
extensive with states of compromised health. In disequilibrium the three
are called doÓsas or ‘faults’ (√duÓs, ‘to soil,’ ‘to spoil,’ ‘to impair’).
There are two aspects of the doÓsas, viz., natural and morbid. In the nat-
ural state, pitta helps in living beings’ digestion and metabolism. In its
morbid state, it causes various diseases. Kapha in its natural state pro-
motes strength in the form of ojas. When in morbid condition, it takes
the form of excreta and causes misery. Similarly, v¯ata in its natural state
is responsible for all activities of the body. When in morbid state, it
causes diseases and death.
CS 1:17.115–18
Pharmacist and Åyurvedic researcher Birgit Heyn makes the non-
traditional, but clinically useful distinction that the term dh¯atu is prop-
erly employed to mean ‘tissue-element,’ while doÓsa refers to the dynamic
bioenergetic principles: “three different forms of energy which govern the
whole energy economy in living organisms.”40 As regards v¯ata, pitta, and
kapha as psychophysical ‘types,’ these are stylized pictures used as a gen-
eral guide in recognizing the characteristics of each person’s nature,
wherein a particular doÓsa generally predominates.41
Zimmermann maintains that in ancient Hindu medicine, the hu-
mors were conceived within two superimposed standpoints: First, ac-
cording to an agricultural metaphor, as ﬂuids irrigating the tissues. Sec-
ond, in terms of health and disease, they represent various facets in a
combinative system of humors, savors, and qualities possessed by hu-
mans, animals, plants, and by the soils that infuse plants and animals
with their rasa (‘juice’ or essence) throughout the food chain.42 Thus the
ancient Åyurvedic practitioner did not consider the three humors wind,
bile, and phlegm in a literal sense, but made a leap of abstraction from
the level of image to the construction of a conceptual system. This is “the
moment when phlegm is no longer simply an image of excessive serosity
or unctuosity, but becomes the abstract principle of elephantiasis.”43
The several meanings of doÓsa indicate that understanding and ap-
plying Åyurvedic principles requires multileveled analysis. An important
clinical interpretation of doÓsa is excess material resulting from the in-
complete digestion of food. The verbal root duÓs gives the word doÓsa the
connotation of ‘spoiling’ or ‘impairment.’ The stomach, and particularly
the gastric ‘ﬁre,’ may be ‘spoiled’ owing to faulty digestion. This results
in the spreading throughout the body of a sticky substance called ¯ama,
‘unripe’ or incompletely digested food-juice. The s¯ama (‘with ¯ama’) state
of the body is marked by the symptoms of “a feeling of heaviness in the
60
religious therapeutics

body, sleeplessness, sticky stools and saliva, swelling in the body, aches
and pains, etc.”44 Daniel C. Tabor reports the explanation of a vaidya or
Åyurvedic physician who asserts that chronic disorders (e.g., backache)
result from ¯ama in the body. Acute illnesses (e.g., cholera) have other im-
mediate causes, but proximally, “the predisposition of the body to these
infections was held to be caused by ¯ama also.”45
Nir¯ama (without ¯ama) is the state of normality and hence of health. It
is indicated by signs including lightness of limb, and proper appetite and
elimination. Åyurvedic treatment employs measures to return the body to
the normal nir¯ama state before the administration of medicines appropri-
ate for particular disorders. A major therapeutic strategy in Åyurveda is
´samana or alleviation therapy: elimination of ¯ama by rekindling the diges-
tive ﬁre or agni (in modern terms: digestive enzymes and processes, along
with metabolism). Alleviation therapy includes fasting or light diet, exer-
cise, the drinking of warm water, and adminstration of digestive herbs,
singly or in compounds—for instance, dried ginger (Zingiber ofﬁcia-
nale).46 These procedures reactivate the reciprocally related functions of
the gastric ﬁre and elimination, and the ‘drying up’ of excess doÓsas.
While normality has many applications as a diagnostic criterion in
Åyurvedic and Western medicine, Nietzsche provides another perspective
on medical normality. Nietzsche rejects the idea of ‘normal health’ in gen-
eral terms. He valued sickness and other morbid states for showing us
“under a magnifying glass states that are normal but not easily visible
when normal.”47 But as for a standard of ‘normal health’ Nietzsche says
the concept should be abandoned, for what constitutes health for the
body (let alone the soul) “depends on your goal, your horizon, your ener-
gies, your impulses, your errors, and above all on the ideals and phan-
tasms of your soul.”48 With the forsaking of the idea of a normal health,
he says, we may reﬂect on the health and illness of the soul. The sick soul
is really necessary, Nietzsche holds, to provoke the growth of our knowl-
edge, self-knowledge, and virtue. Difﬁculties and suffering can demand
our self-reﬂection and the exercise of our power. An ambiguity thus
emerges in the suggestion that while medical science—contemporary or
Åyurvedic—relies on a concept of normality as a criterion of health, our
‘abnormality’ can be a generative factor for healing.
Freedom from Pain
Freedom from pain is a foremost determinant of health, and relieving
pain is among the primary goals of medicine. Pain is generally the most
prominent and immediate indicator of the presence of illness and injury.
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
61

Åyurveda classiﬁes diseases as exogenous (caused by external factors,
such as ﬁre), and endogenous (caused by impairment of the doÓsas). There
are four major subgroups of disease, because exogenous and endogenous
diseases may manifest in mind or body [CS 1:20.3]. As regards pain:
The exogenous diseases begin with pain, and then they bring about dis-
turbance in the equilibrium of the doÓsas. The endogenous diseases on
the other hand, begin with disturbance in the equilibrium of doÓsas and
then bring about pain.
CS 1:20.7
Pain more often than not accompanies illness and injury; we associate
pain with disease, and freedom from pain with health. However, pain
and disease are not coextensive: Pain may occur to persons in good
health, and illness may be present without accompanying pain or imme-
diate suffering, for example, in the case of hypertension. Drew Leder’s
phenomenological analysis of the body and its “dys-appearance” in its
ordinary states of well-being reveals the experienced dimensions of pain
and disease:
The body stands out in times of dysfunction only because its usual state
is to be lost in the world—caught up in a web of organic and intentional
involvements through which we form one body with other things. To
say that the body is “absent,” a “being-away,” thus has a positive signif-
icance; it asserts that the body is in ceaseless relation to the world.49
Our associating pain with disease, Leder says, is not due merely to their
occurring together in time. A phenomenological association occurs as
well. “Disease tends to effect many of the same experiential shifts as does
pain”; disease and pain bring about disruption of our intentional links
with the world, and can constrict our spatiotemporal horizons.50
An ambiguity regarding pain exists in the fact that pain, while gen-
erally undesirable, is critical to health, for it signals the presence of
threats to health.51 Another ambiguity pertinent to pain is the fact that
pain often goes unrecognized. This claim might seem surprising, for the
meaning of ‘pain’ connotes the characteristic of being felt. However, it
commonly occurs that persons experience pain without accompanying
awareness of its existence, location, and severity. Diminished or delayed
awareness of pain can be a sign of a low degree of body awareness, some-
times caused by a high degree of involvement in one’s mental processes.
(However, the ability to mentally control pain can be an aspect of healthi-
ness.) In either case, awareness, discussed subsequently, presents itself as
62
religious therapeutics

a determinant of health: awareness is both a determinant of health and a
resource for protecting and improving one’s health.
In psychological terms, physical pain and mental suffering can be re-
sults of a person’s subjection to injurious forces outside his or her con-
trol—another’s abusive behavior, for example—or they can arise from
tensions in a person’s own psyche. As Nietzsche says, however, psycho-
logical suffering can have the productive quality of provoking a person’s
development.
The motive to avoid pain (physical and/or psychological) can lead to
reliance on alcohol or drugs, prescribed or non-prescribed. Physical de-
bilitation is a possible consequence of substance abuse, and other kinds
of damage can result from abusing drugs. Spiritually, substance abuse can
cloud a person’s motivation and clarity of understanding. Morally, it can
interfere with the making and fulﬁlling of commitments. Alleviation of
suffering without reﬂection on its meaning neglects its positive value to
provide information about physical health problems. Additionally, it can
involve overlooking the potential of psychological suffering to incite the
development of personhood and maturity.
Wholeness and Integration
Åyurveda’s medical holism is founded on a cosmology wherein the per-
son is a microcosm of the macrocosmic world, a position that has reli-
gious as well as medical implications:
An individual is an epitome of the universe, as all the material and spiri-
tual phenomena of the universe are present in the individual, and all those
present in the individual are also contained in the universe. . . . As soon as
he realizes his identity with the entire universe, he is in possession of true
knowledge which stands him in good stead in getting salvation.
CS 4:5.3, 7
Åyurveda considers the universe (and all matter in it, including human
beings) to be compounded of the basic substances earth, water, ﬁre, air,
and ¯ak¯a´sa (‘ether’ or space), and Brahman or supreme consciousness [CS
4:5.3–5]. On this metaphysical basis, Åyurvedic therapeutics aim to re-
store the doÓsas’ equilibrium in consideration of inﬂuences such as season,
climate, and local foodstuffs and medicinal substances. Classical
Åyurvedic pharmacology recommends medicinal substances conditioned
by the environment, and holds that the rasa or essence of foods and med-
icines (gained from the rasa of the soil in which they grew) pervades the
rasa or essence that is the basis of the human’s seven dh¯atus or tissues.52
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
63

The word ‘health’ actually means wholeness, and ‘to heal’ is to re-
store wholeness. Health, heal, and whole are derived from the Old English
h¯al, ‘whole,’ and ultimately descend from the Indo-European root mean-
ing whole: √kailo-.53 Holism is a conceptual orientation that recognizes the
organic unity and interdependence of forces within an organism, among
organisms, and among forces at various levels within an environment.
. . . a holistic approach offers a conceptual alternative to the physio-
chemical reductionism, materialism, and mind/body dualism that dom-
inates much of contemporary medical thought.54
Besides its ontological dimension, holism also pertains to function. Leon
R. Kass connects wholeness with well-working: wholeness as regards liv-
ing organisms is not static, but pertains to wholeness-in-action, the work-
ing well of the entity; thus the whole organism must be evaluated in order
to determine its well-working.55 Kass’ interpretation of wholeness is more
satisfactory than interpretations that deﬁne wholeness statically. By re-
garding wholeness from the standpoint of well-working, the concept of
wholeness becomes more useful as a criterion of health. For instance, a
person who lacks the ability to hear can still attain to wholeness by virtue
of using means of communication that enable her to carry out projects of
importance to her.
In the psychological theory of Carl G. Jung, the journey toward
wholeness, which he called individuation, is a process involving the
bringing to consciousness of meanings previously repressed in the uncon-
scious. Psychological health in Jungian terms entails that one’s inner and
outer selves are integrated rather than fragmented.
As long as all goes well and psychic energy ﬁnds its application in ade-
quate and well-regulated ways, we are disturbed by nothing from within.
. . . But no sooner are one or two of the channels of psychic activity
blocked, than we are reminded of a stream that is dammed up. The cur-
rent ﬂows backward to its source; the inner man wants something which
the visible man does not want, and we are at war with ourselves.56
Wholeness describes an ideal state, for life circumstances change con-
stantly and require new adjustments and responses. Further, our human
potential can never be fully achieved in our lifetimes and, in this respect,
achieving wholeness is impossible, because the possibilities for our devel-
opment are so rich.57 Wholeness, then, like the concept of health itself, is a
conceptual rubric and regulative idea, that is—an action-guiding ideal.
Wholeness is a signiﬁcant determinant of health, for it sets a standard for
judging the extent to which a person is fully acting and experiencing.
64
religious therapeutics

One way of understanding integration is in terms of the concept of
wholeness: To integrate is to make something whole by bringing its parts
into proper relation. The Latin adjective integer (from the Indo-European
root √tag, ‘to touch’) means ‘untouched,’ hence, whole, complete, and
perfect.58 Integer is the basis of the English nouns integer (whole num-
ber), and integrity (moral consistency and soundness). Åyurveda suggests
that integration is fundamental to health by its use of the term roga for
illness. Roga is derived from the verbal root √ruj, ‘to break,’ while its ne-
gated form, ¯arogya, means health. Integration, like wholeness, is more
fruitfully considered in dynamic rather than static terms. As a determi-
nant of health, integration pertains to the degree of cooperation within
and among the systems, subsystems, and constituent parts of an entity.
Loss of integration characterizes illness and injury in that the af-
fected part stands out in its dysfunction. Leder refers to this phenomenon
as a thematization: pain brings the body out of its well-working ‘absent’
state to an experience of intense awareness of the affected part. Leder in-
vokes Heidegger’s reference to the “ready-to-hand” tool (Being and
Time, 95–107). The tool remains withdrawn from our attention as long
as it serves the purpose of our work, the “towards-which” the tool is
used. In the same way that a tool stands forth due to a break in its useful-
ness, “it is characteristic of the body itself to presence in times of break-
down or problematic performance.”59 Leder gives the example of a per-
son who has a heart attack while playing tennis:
Prior to the onset of pain . . . attention is ecstatically distributed to the
distant points. Parts of the body are backgrounded and forgotten as all
power centers in the swing. A metabolic machinery supplies the player
with energy, without demanding his attention or guidance. The game is
made possible only by this bodily self-concealment. Yet this structure is
lacerated by a single moment of pain. The player is called back from ec-
static engagement to a focus upon the state of his own body. A back-
ground region, the chest, is now thematized.60
Leder uses the terms disappearance and dys-appearance to characterize
the body in its states of well-working and dysfunction, respectively. He
capitalizes on the etymological difference between the Latin preﬁx dis,
meaning ‘away,’ ‘apart,’ or ‘asunder,’ and the Greek preﬁx dys, meaning
‘bad,’ ‘difﬁcult,’ or ‘ill,’ as in ‘dysentery.’ Disappearance evokes absence,
and refers to the state of ordinary functioning where the lived-body is
‘absent’ from awareness due to its ecstatic involvement in its projects in
the world. In contrast, ‘dys-appearance’ refers to states where “the body
appears as thematic focus, but precisely in a dys state.”61
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
65

Integration characterizes the state of health and well-working, while
dys-appearance, the thematized appearance of an impaired part or
system of the body, is equivalent to dis-integration in the function of the
body as whole. Hegel’s deﬁnition of the disease-state turns on such an
idea of integration:
. . . the system or organ establishes itself in isolation, and by persisting in
its particular activity in opposition to the activity of the whole, ob-
structs the activity, as well as the process by which it pervades all the
moments of the whole.62
In considering integration as a determinant of health, it seems at ﬁrst a
simple matter that integration is a mark of health, and disintegration a
mark of illness. But Leder’s analysis reveals that both illness and health
involve a certain kind of disintegration that takes the form of alienation
from one’s own body:
Both exhibit an element of alienation from the body. In the case of
health, the body is alien by virtue of its disappearance, as attention is
primarily directed toward the world. With the onset of illness this gives
way to dys-appearance. The body is no longer alien-as-forgotten, but
precisely as-remembered, a sharp and searing presence threatening the
self. One is a mode of silence, the other a manner of speech, yet they are
complementary and correlative phenomena.63
Leder’s insight is useful to understanding yet another of the ambiguities
inherent in the experience of human health and illness: health can permit
a degree of integration with our projects (whether in the world or in the
spiritual domain) that diminishes the integration of body with conscious-
ness. For instance, classical Yoga cultivates health as a condition for med-
itative practice aimed at dis-integration of bonds keeping the conscious-
ness connected with body and senses.
Awareness and Mental Clarity
Awareness in the context of health has a number of applications. A
healthy organism has capacities for sensory awareness, while illness or
injury can interfere with the organism’s ability to register information in
its environment. An extreme example is loss of consciousness due to in-
jury or illness, and gradual loss of awareness is one of the signs of im-
pending death. The BÓrhad¯araÓnyaka UpaniÓsad describes the soul at death
as becoming “non-knowing of forms.” “He is becoming one,” they say,
“he does not see . . . (smell, etc.)” [BÓrhad. Up. 4:4.1–2]. The Ch¯andogya
66
religious therapeutics

UpaniÓsad [6:15.1] describes how the relatives of a dying person gather
and ask “Do you know me?” For in the ﬁnal phases of dying, it com-
monly occurs that dying persons lose awareness sufﬁcient even to recog-
nize their loved ones.
Among the criteria for evaluating whether a cure has been effected,
the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a lists “unimpairment of mind, intellect, and senses”
[CS 3:8.89]. The Hindu traditions, in various terms, uphold the position
that intelligence or consciousness is the person’s true nature, and that dis-
criminative wisdom is the remedy for the ignorance, suffering, and bond-
age that is human life. Thus it is not surprising that Åyurveda considers
the pain of illness to result from ignorance, and holds that clarity of mind
is a determinant of health. Clarity of mind in the context of health is an
ordinary kind of knowledge, not a form of higher knowledge leading to
religious liberation; mental clarity contributes to liberation from the suf-
fering of illness:
. . . the ignorant indulge in unwholesome gratiﬁcation of the ﬁve senses
. . . and adoption of such regimens as are pleasing only temporarily; but
the wise do not indulge in them because of their clarity of vision.
CS 1:28.39–40
Awareness is a determinant of health, and a capacity that contrib-
utes to the maintenance of health: Åyurvedic medical theory implies that
knowledge of one’s own nature, and the dietary, climatic, temporal, and
other patterns suited to oneself helps a person follow the proper regimen
to preserve health. The Caraka-saÓmhit¯a gives this analogy to illustrate the
principles of self-awareness and responsibility for one’s state of health:
“As an incompetent king neglects his enemy, so also an ignorant person
does not realize the need to take care of the disease in its primary stage
due to his negligence” [CS 1:11.57]. Awareness of one’s normal function-
ing and deviations from it can help one sustain a higher level of health,
and to recognize circumstances that signal a need for adjustment in one’s
actions or a need for medical assistance.
In the domain of psychological health, awareness and clarity of
mind are contrary to neurosis and psychosis. Psychological disorders in-
volve internal conﬂicts far from transparent to their sufferer, and psy-
chosis is marked by interference in a person’s contact with reality. An
important dimension of mental health is a person’s awareness of his or
her own thoughts and feelings, and a certain degree of awareness (free of
projection and other neurotic interpretations) of others’ emotions and
communications. Psychological health entails mental clarity sufﬁcient
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
67

for responding appropriately to experiences and communications. In
contrast, neurotic behavior is often impelled by interpretations fueled by
unconscious inner tensions, and thus can be inappropriate to a given sit-
uation. Inner psychological tensions spring from, and produce, suffering.
Neurotic or psychotic behaviors tend to produce further suffering in both
the subject and those with whom he or she interacts. The Hindu postu-
late that suffering is rooted in ignorance is supported by the efﬁcacy of
psychotherapy to relieve psychological suffering through replacing nesci-
ence of one’s own psyche with self-understanding.
In addition to the direct applications of awareness for attainment and
preservation of health, awareness in contradistinction to self-deception is
an aspect of having a healthy connection with truth in the achievement of
personhood. Deutsch articulates self-deception as follows:
Self-deception is a refusal to acknowledge who I am and what I am
doing, not out of simple ignorance but from what appears to be a kind
of unselfconscious willful perversity.64
Deutsch develops Fingarette’s view of self-deception, “that the deceiver is
one who refuses to spell out, to avow, some feature of his engagement
with the world.”65
Deutsch distinguishes a number of forms of self-deception, which in
its primary forms involves
. . . breakdown of an individual’s capacity to be responsible, to be able
(and not just unwilling) to acknowledge the actualities of his or her per-
sonal identity making and to exercise one’s inherent powers to strive to-
ward integration and freedom.66
If we conceive health broadly as well-being encompassing the achieve-
ment of personhood, Deutsch’s thought on self-deception shows how
well-being is countered by self-fragmentation. Self-deception as a form of
metaphysical illness ﬁnds intelligibility within an understanding of health
whose determinants include integration.
Finally, the ability to learn has its genesis in awareness. An
organism’s health is reﬂected in, and protected by, its ability (appropriate
to its species and situation) to interpret and remember experiences, for
purposes ranging from survival, to application of high levels of insight,
creativity, and problem-solving. Because of the human being’s potential
for higher order thinking, aesthetic experience, and so on, the ideal of a
high degree of health entails development of the mind’s capacities and the
exercise of creative potential. The ideal of cultural health thus requires
68
religious therapeutics

that societies have effective schools for the cultivation of human intelli-
gence and its applications, especially for the young, but ideally for lifelong
learning.
Sociocultural and Aesthetic Determinants
Relationality
Relationality signiﬁes relationships of various kinds: interpersonal,
between person and society, among social groups and nations, and
between persons and other kinds of beings (living and non-living) who
constitute the world. Psychology and sociology investigate relations
among persons and groups, social and political theorists discuss relational-
ity in the sociopolitical domain, and ethicists in terms of morality. But rela-
tionality can be understood in some other and interestingly subtle ways.
Self-sufﬁciency is a determinant of health, and in evaluating a
person’s health, an important question is: How much does a given condi-
tion interfere with the person’s ability to act independently to accomplish
his or her purposes? A limited capacity to act can indicate a compromised
state of health. On the other hand, health as a positive state is relative to
the power to act in one’s own behalf to meet one’s needs and desires.
Moreover, because our humanity entails the duties and beneﬁts of com-
munity life, vitality can be employed in one’s work and social service to
contribute to the well-being of others. Self-sufﬁciency is important to
health, but its necessary condition is relationality, a concept that illumi-
nates meanings of health as regards person, species, environment, and
community.
The notion of ‘social determinants of health’ suggests two main
themes; the ﬁrst is social factors as they bear on medical health. It was in
this connection that Descartes envisaged a social revolution based on
medicine, consonant with Rudolph Virchow’s concept of the role of
health in democratic government:
The democratic state desires that all its citizens enjoy a state of well-
being, for it recognizes that they all have equal rights. . . . However, the
conditions of well-being are health and education, so it is the task of the
state to provide on the broadest possible basis the means for maintain-
ing and promoting health and education through public action.67
The second theme emergent in the idea of social determinants of health is
the one emphasized here: perspectives on what it means to be healthy in
context of human social and cultural life—that is, creation of meanings
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
69

based on values concerning relationality and aesthetics. For varied in-
sights into relationality, we may turn to sources including Åyurveda,
Neo-Confucianism, and indigenous religious cosmologies. Leder’s study
of medical and philosophical dimensions of the body utilizes Neo-
Confucianism as a tradition grounded in relationality, and draws on
Wang Yang-ming’s description of the universal empathy whereby we may
“form one body” with all things:
Everything from ruler, minister, husband, wife, and friends to moun-
tains, rivers, spiritual beings, birds, animals, and plants should be truly
loved in order to realize my humanity that forms one body with them,
and then my clear character will be completely manifested, and I will
really form one body with Heaven, Earth, and the myriad things.68
Leder invokes against the Cartesian mechanistic model of the body, the
Neo-Confucian principle of relationality. He recommends three ways
whereby we may “form one body”: morally, by compassion, aestheti-
cally, by absorption or aesthetic openness to the world, and spiritually, by
communion, experiencing “interconnection with the ground of all
being.”69
Descartes’ medical philosophy is mechanistic, yet at the same time
organic—in other words, relational. The human body as the subject of
medical science he conceived in terms of a machine, governed by the
principles of physics, and subject to physical manipulations to restore it
to proper functioning. However, Descartes has an organic view of the
inter-relation of the organs and systems of the individual body, and the
inter-relation of persons who together constitute the body of society.
Health in Descartes’ view depends on the concern of the mind to con-
serve the union of body and soul. According to Cartesian physics, God
created the world, and it continues to exist because God continually
“conserves” it.70 The human body is ﬁt to receive a soul by virtue of the
interconnection of its organ systems; the conservation of the union of
soul and body is afforded by the mind’s concern for the preservation of
life, and by supportive factors in the environment.71 Along similar lines,
Descartes holds that political association is an instrument for the conser-
vation of its human constituents. Its institutions can be regarded as or-
gans of the body politic, and the body politic serves in turn to preserve
the soul-body unions of the persons who constitute it.72 In addition to
relationality’s inclusion of ethical relations among persons, a vast topic
not undertaken here, relationality characterizes cosmologies envisaging
an interconnected web of life.
70
religious therapeutics

Åyurveda illuminates the idea of relationality as a determinant of
health. Gerald Larson identiﬁes several possibilities for expanding our
concepts of the self and the human species, and our valuation of the ecol-
ogy of the living world. In suggesting new agendas for healing based on
Åyurvedic and South Asian cultural axioms, Larson employs the logical
concept of abh¯ava, ‘analytic absence’ to suggest the following perspec-
tives on person, species, and life:
Axiom 1 Absence of separation between birth and rebirth
The person is a product not just of parents, and of action in
the present life, but of karmic heritage stemming from former
lives, perhaps expressible in modern terms of evolutionary
trajectory.
In terms of relationality, an ‘individual’ exists in relation to
past and future instantiations of her/himself.
Axiom 2 Absence of separation between self and self, or self and other
Hindu concepts including ¯adhibhautika (sociality) could in-
form a socio-biological notion of ‘species-health.’
Relationality functions in the capacity of pointing out transac-
tional and ‘dividual’ inﬂuences on human health.
Axiom 3 Absence of separation between divine and human, or between
one species and another
The idea of rebirth in another life-form could ground “an eco-
logical reverence for life that encompasses more than the
human.”73
Applications of relationality within ecologically grounded
conceptions of life and health are precisely what is needed in
our present world to address the compromised and threatened
well-being of ecosystems and their inhabitants.
Relationality is a motif in both contemporary ecological theory and phi-
losophy of health. In ancient times, Åyurveda used ideas of relationality in
an ecologically informed approach to medicine. Ancient Hindu ecology
conceived the land and the human body as the two kinds of place. Ecology
was integral to the practice of a pathology based not on scientiﬁc physiol-
ogy (which 2000 years ago had not yet evolved in India nor Greece),
but on prognosis, the interpretation of symptoms and stages of an ill-
ness. Zimmermann writes that the physician proceeded by “taking into
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
71

consideration the most general conditions of life: climate, seasons, cus-
toms, postures. Ecology was an integral part of this practical context.”74
The volume of the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a dealing with the body is the
fourth volume, Íar¯ıra-sth¯ana (´sar¯ıra: body). It has chapters on mind and
soul, embryology, anatomy, obstetrics, and pediatrics. In its ﬁfth chapter,
PuruÓsavicaya Íar¯ıra, “Individual and Universe,” is this verse that ex-
presses the cosmological and pragmatic signiﬁcance of relationality:
If one realizes himself as spread in the entire universe and the entire uni-
verse spread in himself, he is indeed in possession of transcendental and
worldly vision. His serenity of mind based on wisdom never fades away.
CS 4:5.20
Creativity
In Chopra’s articulation of Åyurveda, life itself is creativity, and healing is
a creative act. The body, its systems, and its very cells have creative intel-
ligence. At a quantum level, we are continually creating ourselves, physi-
cally and with our intelligence.75 To illustrate the operation of creativity
in human physiology, Chopra cites Claude Bernard, who described how
the laws of physics and biochemistry “subordinate themselves and suc-
ceed one another in a pattern, and according to a law which pre-exists;
they repeat themselves with order, regularity, constancy, and they har-
monize in such a manner as to bring about the organization and growth
of the individual.”76 Chopra conceives disease as diversion from the ﬂow
of intelligence,77 and he sees creative intelligence as a key to health, that
is, to creating conditions for new and more successful patterns in the
functioning of the body/mind. In his work on aging and longevity, Cho-
pra connects creativity with the universal force of creation. Invoking the
traditional Hindu view of the three forces by which the universe exists—
creation, maintenance, and destruction—Chopra writes:
The genes of every species include the code for creating new cells, main-
taining each cell for a certain time, and destroying it to make way for
another generation of tissue. This three-in-one intelligence is what you
are trying to affect when you consciously shape your life; it is up to you
which aspect—creation, maintenance, or destruction—is most domi-
nant. . . . As long as creation dominates your existence, you will keep
growing and evolving.78
As regards creativity conceived in the usual sense of realizing and ex-
pressing new meanings, Chopra recommends creative activity for elders
72
religious therapeutics

who wish to maximize their vitality, to create themselves as persons man-
ifesting as much as possible their true human nature in intelligence and
bliss. If health is conceived as inclusive of the exercise of one’s capacities,
then health encompasses creativity. Human beings in general have a high
degree of intelligence and a vast range of potential, so a healthy person
uses these powers in some creative way suited to her nature. The manifes-
tation of creativity can mark a psychophysical state in which require-
ments for basic functioning are met, and a surplus of energy permits the
bringing forth of new connections of meaning, whether in thought, lan-
guage, music, the plastic arts, political participation, or other ways.
Among the ambiguities of human life revealed by consideration of
health and illness is the fact, pointed out by Nietzsche, that pain and suf-
fering can be stimulants to creativity. Walter Kaufmann says of Nietz-
sche’s dialectical conception of health:
It would be absurd to say that the work of healthy artists is eo ipso
beautiful, while that of the ill must be ugly. . . . Homer was blind and
Beethoven deaf. Even Shakespeare and Goethe—Nietzsche thinks—
must have experienced a profound defect: artistic creation is prompted
by something which the artist lacks, by suffering rather than undis-
turbed good health, by “sicknesses as great stimulants to life” (The Will
to Power, 1003).79
In contrast to Nietzsche’s view, Deutsch describes creativity in terms of
the imparting of vitality:
The creative act is a kind of “letting be,” but at the same time it is a
shaping, a formative act, that involves expressive power. Together with
immanent purposiveness and cooperative control, the creative act is an
infusion of power, an imparting of a felt life or vitality; it is a making of
that which is alive with the very nature of natural-spiritual life.80
Deutsch’s idea of creative being pertains to creative transformation of the
constraints and conditions of one’s being in the articulation and achieve-
ment of personhood.81 Personal identity and freedom, he claims, are con-
tingent on creative being. Identity and freedom are determinants of crea-
tive being, and they are determinants of health, in both medical and
religious terms, as will be argued in the following chapter.
Generativity
In biological terms, a determinant of health is the ability to produce off-
spring. The Caraka-saÓmhit¯a addresses reproductive generativity in its
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
73

sixth volume, Cikits¯a-sth¯ana: A person without children is compared to
“a lamp in sketches” (not the actual lamp that emanates light). But a per-
son with many children is said to have “many faces, many dimensions,
and multi-dimensional knowledge” [CS 6:2, quarter-chapter 1:16–24].
Generativity is presented here under the heading of social and cultural
determinants of health rather than biological determinants, because
human beings have capacities of spirituality, intellect, and creativity ex-
tending beyond our mere biological natures.
To generate is to bring into being, but there are ways other than bio-
logical reproduction whereby persons may express generativity. This idea
is as ancient as Plato’s Symposium, wherein Diotima instructs Socrates
that some persons’ procreancy is of the body, while others’ is of the soul.
These persons “conceive and bear things of the spirit.”
And what are they? you ask. Wisdom and her sister virtues; it is the of-
ﬁce of every poet to beget them, and of every artist whom we may call
creative. Now, by far the most important kind of wisdom, she went on,
is that which governs the ordering of society, and which goes by the
names of justice and moderation.82
The developmental theory of Erik Erikson provides a modern psy-
chological articulation of generativity, which Erikson says “encompasses
the evolutionary development which has man the teaching and instituting
as well as the learning animal.”
Mature man needs to be needed, and maturity needs guidance as well as
encouragement from what has been produced and must be taken care
of. Generativity, then, is primarily the concern in establishing and guid-
ing the next generation, although there are individuals who through
misfortune or because of special and genuine gifts in other directions, do
not apply this drive to their own offspring. And indeed, the concept of
generativity is meant to include such more popular synonyms as pro-
ductivity and creativity, which, however, cannot replace it.83
Generativity manifests an individual’s vitality by exercising his or her
inner resources and initiative to take responsibility for the perpetuation of
human culture. Whether or not a person has biological offspring, genera-
tivity represents one’s participation in the bringing up of new generations.
In the present state of the planet, overpopulation is at the root of many of
our ills, environmental and human. Thus generativity has an ampliﬁed sig-
niﬁcance as an option for augmenting or transforming the impulse toward
biological parenthood in ways that contribute to the well-being of the
next generation, without necessarily adding to its numbers.
74
religious therapeutics

Enjoyment
The Caraka-saÓmhit¯a’s recapitulation of the nature of the happy life pro-
moted by Åyurveda lists a number of forms of enjoyment, including
strength, knowledge, use of sensory capacities and objects of enjoyment,
freedom to achieve, and freedom to move as one likes. The ﬁrst-listed ele-
ment of a happy life is freedom from physical and mental ailments [CS
1:30.24]. An account of health would lack an essential ingredient of well-
being without the factor of enjoyment. Maslow and Mittelmann note that
an aspect of a healthy personality is “interest in several activities” and
they list among their criteria for psychological health “the ability to derive
pleasure from the physical things in life, such as eating and sleeping.”84
The idea of enjoyment is applicable in contexts beyond basic physi-
cal and psychological ones. Domains of healthful enjoyment include, for
example, sport and other forms of recreation, appreciation of the beauty
of the natural world, the arts, crafting, friendship and social life, love and
sensuality. Enjoyment can characterize the experiencing of meaning and
well-being derived from one’s work, one’s contributions to family and so-
ciety, and one’s spiritual practice. To take the perspective of the Bhaga-
vadg¯ıt¯a’s Karma Yoga, ‘enjoyment’ in these aspects of life is not a mat-
ter of pleasure, but more a sense of satisfaction from carrying out one’s
responsibilities.
The aesthetic enjoyment advocated for health in the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a
includes the wearing of clean, attractive clothing: “It brings about pleas-
ure, grace, competence to participate in conferences, and good appear-
ance.” Also recommended are the wearing of scents and jewelry for the
experience and expression of pleasantness [CS 1:5.95–97].
Metaphysical and Religious Determinants
Self-identity
Self-identity as a determinant of health signiﬁes the existential problem of
knowing one’s true nature, and manifesting it in one’s being. In the con-
text of health, self-identity encompasses questions about the extent to
which a person’s health-circumstances permit the seeking and actualizing
of Self-nature. In Tillich’s analysis of the meaning of health, self-identity
is integral to the dialectic process of life in physical, psychological, and
other dimensions:
A centered and balanced living whole goes beyond itself, separates itself
partly from its unity, but in so doing it tries to preserve its identity and
to return in its separated parts to itself.85
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
75

The dangers of this dialectical process are, on the one hand, extending
oneself in such a way that self-identity is reduced or destroyed, and on
the other hand, experiencing various degrees of inability to extend and
alter oneself. Thus tension exists in facing possible threats to self-identity
(and to one’s health, physical and/or psychological) in the course of seek-
ing to realize one’s identity.
Nietzsche’s point that what is healthy depends on a particular
person’s nature86 is echoed in Ingmar Pörn’s “Equilibrium Model of
Health,” which presupposes self-identity as a determinant of health. By
‘equilibrium’ Pörn means the balance of an individual’s capacities and
goals. To determine the criteria for a person’s health, Pörn says, requires
choosing among interpretations of “functioning well,” for instance, func-
tioning as one’s cohorts do, to meet one’s basic needs, or to satisfy one’s
aspirations. Pörn selects the third interpretation, and deﬁnes health as
follows:
Health is the state of a person which obtains when his repertoire [of
abilities] is adequate relative to his proﬁle of goals. A person who is
healthy in this sense carries with him the intrapersonal resources that
are sufﬁcient for what his goals require of him.87
Health, in Pörns’s view, depends on the mutual ﬁtness of a person’s pro-
ﬁle of goals and his repertoire of abilities. Illness, then, is the state where
the repertoire is inadequate to the person’s goal proﬁle. Impairments, in-
juries, and diseases are characterized in Pörn’s model as states, changes,
and processes, respectively, which are abnormal due to their tendencies to
restrict repertoires of desired action. On this basis, one is ill only if one’s
repertoire is restricted relative to one’s own goals. Pörn sees health in re-
lation to a person’s ability to do the things that the person holds as goals.
If goals are taken to represent steps in the evolution of a person’s nature,
then working toward goals is a means of articulating one’s self-identity.
To be healthy is to conduct and cultivate oneself in accord with the truth
of one’s Self-nature.
Identity is the link between medical and religious therapeutics as an-
alyzed by Halbfass. Regarding a verse in the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a concerning
the fourfold medical paradigm—cause, diagnosis, cure, and prevention
of disease—[CS 1:9.19], Halbfass observes that the verse:
. . . does not mention “health” as such; instead it refers to the “nonre-
currence of diseases” (rog¯aÓn¯am apunarbhavaÓh). While this is a negative
manner of expression and presentation, it also contains a remarkable
absolutist claim. It is obviously reminiscent of the claims and ideas of
76
religious therapeutics

the philosophers, who try to achieve ﬁnal liberation from all cyclical oc-
currences from rebirth and repeated existence (punarjanma, punarb-
hava), from saÓms¯ara in general.88
Exploring the relation of liberation and identity in Advaita Ved¯anta,
Halbfass quotes Ía˙nkara’s commentator Sure´svara:
From medical treatment, the natural state (sv¯asthya) results for one who
is afﬂicted by disease; likewise isolation (kaivalya, i.e., ﬁnal liberation)
results once the misconception of the self has been destroyed through
knowledge.89
Deutsch writes that the possibility of freedom is limited to the extent
that self-deception interferes with one’s achievement of identity as an
integrated person. Self-deception “touches almost everyone in funda-
mental ways and makes for the spiritual atrophy that so often resides in
our being.”90 Realization of identity is a corollary of freedom in the
contexts of medical and religious well-being, and to a great extent, iden-
tity and freedom embody the meaning of health—both psychophysical
and spiritual.
Freedom
Freedom in the domain of physical health refers to freedom from impair-
ments resulting from illness or injury, freedom from accompanying pain
and suffering, and freedom from susceptibility. Engelhardt identiﬁes free-
dom as the essence of health, and concludes that treating medical prob-
lems is a matter of granting freedom:
If health is a state of freedom from the compulsion of psychological
and physiological forces, there is a common leitmotif in the treatment
of either schizophrenia or congestive heart failure—namely the focus
on securing the autonomy of the individual from a particular class of
restrictions.91
Freedom is a determinant of health because it is a condition for a person
to act for survival and the achievement of goals. Psychological freedom
concerns a person’s inner powers, and the constraints emergent from
one’s personality and circumstances. Aspects of the personality unac-
cepted by the self, and submerged in the unconscious, can restrict free-
dom by interfering with creativity, intimacy, and other articulations of
personhood. Non-integrated forces may demand a channeling of effort
toward repressing and/or maladaptively engaging those aspects of per-
sonality in outer experience. Freedom in the context of psychological
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
77

health is exempliﬁed by Jung’s conception of seeking greater wholeness
through bringing to the light of consciousness and integrating into one’s
awareness restricted and restricting forces of the unconscious.
Freedom is an integral concern in embodied human life and for med-
icine and the healing arts. Åyurveda is concerned with perpetuating free-
dom—medical, but also spiritual. Cromwell Crawford identiﬁes the fol-
lowing three themes in his analysis of medical and religious elements of
Hindu medicine:
1. Spirituality represents a dimension of health (as do the body and the
mind).
2. Spirituality . . . is not isolated from the mind-body complex, but em-
braces and empowers every cell and ﬁber of the organism.
3. The relationship of spirituality to health is reciprocal—health pro-
motes spirituality and spirituality promotes health.92
Concern for freedom is at the heart of Hinduism—freedom from suffer-
ing, and from all that interferes with realizing one’s true nature.
Åyurveda’s province is the art and science of medicine; its ﬁrst priority is
not religious liberation, but the immediate issues of health and sickness
of the body. Although Åyurveda is not primarily a mokÓsa-´s¯astra or sci-
ence of liberation, liberation is among the Hindu aims of life that
Åyurveda seeks to serve, along with material well-being, enjoyment, and
righteousness. The Carara-saÓmhit¯a refers to the goal of liberation [e.g.,
CS 4:5.6–7], and advises against skepticism regarding the existence of the
other world [1:11.6–33]. However, Åyurveda’s immediate focus is free-
dom in embodied life: freedom from physical and psychological afﬂic-
tions, and freedom to achieve one’s aims. “The happy person . . . has
achieved desired results of all actions and moves about where s/he likes”
[CS 4:30.24]. One’s ultimate aim might be earthly health, wealth, and en-
joyment, or it might be spiritual liberation, but either goal is assisted by
the wholesome life and strength attainable by application of Åyurvedic
principles.
ÅYURVEDIC RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
Fascinating controversies surround the religious and scientiﬁc origins and
development of Åyurveda. In the words of Kenneth Zysk, Debiprasad
Chattopadhyaya rightly argues that
78
religious therapeutics

. . . Indian medical epistemology is fundamentally opposed to brah-
manic ideology, and that the classical medical treatises of Caraka and
Su´sruta result from a grafting process whereby orthodox brahmanic
ideals were superimposed onto a medical framework.93
Zysk argues that Hindu medicine developed largely by the efforts of het-
erodox ascetics rather than brahmanic intellectuals, and that Buddhist
monastic establishments were highly instrumental in the reﬁnement and
systematization of ancient Indian medicine. Reasons for this include the
facts that Buddhism is free of injunctions against contact with ‘impurity,’
and Buddhism’s emphasis on compassion and the ethical duty to relieve
suffering. While the history of Åyurveda is beyond the scope of this study,
our next step here is to consider elements of religious therapeutics in
Åyurveda.
Åyurveda is not a mokÓsa-´s¯astra or discipline of liberation, but it is a
religious therapeutic on three grounds:
1. A tradition of religious philosophy informs its metaphysical and
medical concepts.
2. The healing it offers can assist in the quest to achieve ultimate reli-
gious liberation.
3. It conceives of wholesome life as itself a kind of holy life.
Åyurveda qualiﬁes as a system of religious therapeutics on the basis that
a religious tradition, Hinduism, informs its concepts of person and body
as well as its medical theory and practice. Regardless of the exact rela-
tionship between Åyurveda’s religious and scientiﬁc elements, the health-
ful life promoted by Åyurveda can contribute to spiritual life. Åyurveda
presents itself as serving especially the ﬁrst three of Hinduism’s four aims
of life. Although its focus on the physical body is an aspect of artha, ma-
terial well-being, the four aims are integral members of a life-plan in
which the ultimate goal is mokÓsa (liberation). The three prior members,
artha (material well-being), k¯ama (pleasure), and dharma (morality),
while intrinsically valuable, function also to support the achievement of
mokÓsa. Finally, living according to Åyurvedic principles means living a
spiritual life in the sense of achieving a proper relation with what is sa-
cred, and in making more of oneself in connection with that sacred force.
For Åyurveda, life itself is sacred.
Åyurveda recommends a life that is wholesome, and thus holy, in
respect of living according to a pattern of daily and seasonal routines,
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
79

hygiene, diet, and activities appropriate to one’s individual constitution,
and nourishing to one’s vital energies. At the foundation of such a life is
the Hindu principle of self-knowledge. Åyurveda prescribes self-
knowledge at an empirical level. The Åyurvedic foundation of self health-
care is knowledge: knowledge of the principles of nature that govern
health, and knowledge of one’s own psychophysical nature and require-
ments for optimum well-being. Moreover, self-knowledge in Åyurveda
functions within a context of religious meaning: the Self that one cares
for is a spirit supported by a physical body.
Åyurveda recommends that we adopt ways of living that support
our vitality, rather than compromising it. One means of doing this is to
regulate one’s life in accordance with the qualities of the seasons and
times of day. Time is a signiﬁcant factor in Åyurveda’s conception of the
causes of disease and health:
The causes of disease relating to both mind and body are three-fold:
wrong utilization, non-utilization and excessive utilization of time,
mental faculties, and objects of the sense organs.
The body and mind constitute the substrata of diseases and happiness
(i.e., positive health). Balanced utilization (of time, mental faculties and
objects of sense organs) is the cause of happiness.
CS 1:54–55
In Åyurvedic self health-care, the factor of time especially concerns at-
tunement with qualities of energy that prevail in particular cycles of the
day and year. Information about daily and seasonal regimens is available
in the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a 94 and other primary sources, but there are good
contemporary works on Åyurvedic health maintenance that make
Åyurvedic principles more accessible. For an example of the Åyurvedic
approach to living in accord with daily time-cycles, and in order to ap-
preciate Åyurvedic principles more concretely, consider some of Chopra’s
recommendations for daily routine.
Appreciation of Åyurveda’s prescription for daily routine requires
reference to the three doÓsas or vital principles, v¯ata, pitta, and kapha,
whose basic natures are motion, metabolism, and stability, respectively.
These doÓsas govern a three-phase cycle between sunrise and sunset,
which is repeated during the hours of darkness between sunset and sun-
rise. By waking before sunrise, “you take advantage of V¯ata’s qualities of
lightness, exhilaration, and freshness. These are infused into your body
just before sunrise and last throughout the day.”95 For evidence of this,
80
religious therapeutics

compare the sense of slowness and heaviness—kapha qualities—that can
result from waking later in the morning. The main meal of the day is best
taken at midday, when the digestive ﬁre, along with the sun, burns bright-
est, under the domination of the ﬁrey doÓsa, pitta, which governs metab-
olism and distribution of energy. The afternoon v¯ata period can be a time
of mental ﬂuidity and efﬁciency. In the evening one should not ﬁght
kapha’s tendency toward a slow and relaxed pace, and one should go to
sleep early, before the resurgence of pitta brings about the inclination to
wakefulness and activity.
There is another way that time is important to health, not in terms
of scheduling daily and seasonal activities, but as regards living within
measured time and being either relaxed or suffering from ‘time-pressure.’
Stress disorders are increasingly recognized in Western medical philoso-
phy. Along with psychological tensions, and physical irritants such as
chemical toxins and noise pollution, a sense of time pressure can aggra-
vate and even produce medical problems. In the contemporary world,
many persons struggle painfully to accomplish all their tasks within
amounts of time that are barely sufﬁcient. Very little unscheduled time is
available in modern schedules for rest, recreation, socializing, creative
work, and worship. An Åyurvedic approach to life calls us to question
the extent to which we sacriﬁce our health for the sake of our goals and
desires, some of which are necessary and worthwhile, and others that can
perhaps be relinquished or recast. Åyurvedic living nurtures sensitivity to
one’s individual requirements for maximal well-being, and can cultivate
degrees of energy and vitality beyond what we might have thought pos-
sible. This vitality can be used to accomplish goals, but one must put
one’s health ﬁrst in order to cultivate vitality.
A suggestion for health-care reform, made by anthropologist and
M.D. Melvin Konner, is greater realism (on the part of both patients and
providers) about the efﬁcacy of technological solutions for medical
problems. He suggests that the public’s expectation that high-tech solu-
tions will rescue them from health problems contributes to individuals’
meanings of health in ¯ayurveda
81
Six Phases of the Day According to Maharishi Åyurveda96
Day
Night
6a.m.–10 a.m.—Kapha
6 p.m.–10 p.m.—Kapha
10 a.m.–2 p.m.—Pitta
10 p.m.–2 a.m.—Pitta
2 p.m.–6 p.m.—V¯ata
2 a.m.–6 a.m.—V¯ata
The times listed vary with season and location.

irresponsibility for maintaining their own health.97 In this connection
Åyurveda emphasizes prevention, and the individual’s responsibility and
also power to cultivate her or his own health. A person living according
to Åyurvedic principles of diet, daily and seasonal routine, and mental at-
titude is probably less likely to develop conditions such heart disease.
Moreover, Åyurveda fosters acute sensitivity to one’s health states so that
symptoms of incipient illness can be addressed in their early stages.
Åyurveda’s notion of equilibrium is dynamic rather than static, and
health therefore is not so much a state, but a force: the power to resist
and overcome threats to one’s well-being. Embodied life involves a dy-
namic tension between health and illness; health is not constant well-
being, but consists in the power to overcome sickness, to overcome one-
self. In his life and thought, Nietzsche valued sickness as well as health,
and counted illnesses among “the great stimulants to life.”98 In the tides
of illness and health, sickness incites inclination toward life and health,
and saying Yes to being. The great health, Nietzsche says, “one does not
merely have but also acquires continually.”99 The great health is great
enough to encompass illness, so that one can go beyond accepting sick-
ness to afﬁrming it as a necessary part of life. The T¯antric notion of ´sakti,
the dynamic aspect of being, conveys the notion of health as a power: the
dynamic force of thriving in one’s Self-nature. Thriving entails resistance
and overcoming of physical and psychological intrusions to the integrity
of one’s being. The practice of Yoga serves precisely to cultivate health
for overcoming physical and mental intrusions that interfere with the full
manifestation of the true Self, which is whole and well. The following
chapter, “Classical Yoga as a Religious Therapeutic,” applies Åyurvedic
concepts of health to reconstruct Yoga’s therapeutic paradigm. 
82
religious therapeutics

Chapter Three
CLASSICAL YOGA AS A
RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTIC
Among world religious traditions, classical or P¯atañjala Yoga is outstand-
ing as a comprehensive system of psychophysical healing and religious lib-
eration. Yoga accounts for the human body/mind and spirit so as to guide
practitioners in ethics, health, and progress toward enlightened embodi-
ment. As a religious path, Yoga offers a means for attaining the ultimate
soteriological aim: mokÓsa or freedom from saÓms¯ara, the cycle of rebirth
and suffering. Yoga calls liberation kaivalya—‘independence’—realization
of one’s true nature—Self-nature as consciousness, independent of materi-
ality (realization connoting both ‘understanding’ and ’achievement’). In
this chapter, I cast Yoga’s philosophical and religious foundations, along
with its eight a˙ngas (‘limbs’ or components) of practice, as a system of re-
ligious therapeutics with ﬁve areas, as shown on the top of the next page.
This model of Yogic religious therapeutics is based on analysis of the
Yoga-s¯utras of Patañjali (c. second/third century c.e.), along with its
commentaries the Yoga-bh¯aÓsya of Vy¯asa (c. ﬁfth/sixth century c.e.) and
the Tattva-vai´s¯arad¯ı of V¯acaspati Mi´sra (ninth century c.e.). Since the
Yoga teachings are available in broad-ranging texts and detailed com-
mentaries in the original Sanskrit and in translation, access to Yoga’s
principles, procedures, and potential has been available from ancient
times, and will continue to be available in the future. Consonant with the
Indian tradition’s emphasis on spiritual instruction by a g¯uru, a teacher
who is a master of a given tradition, direct guidance in the practice of
Yoga is available through the efforts of many teachers in India and
throughout the world. Understanding and practice go hand in hand in
83

Yoga. Following the path of Yoga requires effort to understand the prin-
ciples of Yoga, combined with practice of the eight components of Yoga.
The Yoga-bh¯aÓsya says that practice of the limbs of Yoga destroys unreal
cognition and leads to discriminative knowledge [YBh 1.28]. Discrimina-
tive knowledge, which distinguishes between materiality and Self-nature
as consciousness, is essential for liberation. Discriminative knowledge is
a higher form of knowledge than ordinary discursive knowledge. Culti-
vation of knowledge—by means of self-education such as study of reli-
gious and philosophical texts, and the higher knowledge available
through meditation—is among Yoga’s accessories to attainment of liber-
ation. Like the Indian traditions in general, Yoga considers higher knowl-
edge as the key to liberation, but unique in Yoga is the role it accords the
body in the process of attaining it.
84
religious therapeutics 
Branches of Religious Therapeutics 
Based on Classical Yoga’s Eight Limbs
Metaphysical and Epistemic Foundations
Yoga’s therapeutic paradigm
Soteriology (theory of salvation/ liberation)
Self-realization by healing the afﬂictions (kle´sas)
Value Theory and Ethics
Health and the Good
First limb—Moral self-restraints: Yama
Second limb—Moral commitments: Niyama
Physical Practice
The soteriological role of body and health
Third limb—Postures: Åsana
Fourth limb—Regulation of vital energy through breath: Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama
Fifth limb—Withdrawal of the senses: Praty¯ah¯ara
Cultivation of Consciousness
The polarity of sam¯adhi and vy¯adhi (illness)
Sixth limb—Concentration: Dhy¯ana
Seventh limb—Meditation: Dh¯araÓn¯a
Eighth limb—Meditative trance: Sam¯adhi

MEANINGS AND FORMS OF YOGA
Meanings of ‘Yoga’
The word yoga is derived from the Sanskrit verbal root √yuj, ‘to yoke.’
The Indo-European root of yuj is √yeug-, which is also the source of the
Latin noun jugum, yoke, and the English yoke.1 A range of words derives
from the Sanskrit yuj. Primary meanings of yuj are to harness, bind, inte-
grate, unite, or unify. Sanskrit words derived from yuj have meanings
such as: to meditate, to recollect, to be adapted, joined to, bound by
(duty), to be appropriate, and to be logically linked. The derivative noun
yoga also has a variety of meanings, for instance: the yoking of a team or
equipment, union, contact, combination, mixture, connection, relation,
performance, employment, use, application, remedy, cure, means, expe-
dient, device, opportunity, undertaking, ﬁtness, propriety, order, succes-
sion, effort, exertion, endeavor, zeal, assiduousness, occupation, mental
concentration, and meditative abstraction.2 The great Sanskrit grammar-
ian P¯aÓnini distinguished the root √yuj, meaning meditative concentration
(yuj sam¯adhau) from the root √yujir, meaning connecting or yoking
(yujir yoge).3 This distinction is made in V¯acaspati’s Tattva-vai´s¯arad¯ı:
“The word ‘yoga’ is derived from the root yuj, to contemplate, and not
from the root yujir, in which latter case it would mean conjunction” [TV
1.1]. The words ‘yoga’ and ‘religion’ share the meaning of yoking: reli-
gion is derived from the Latin ligare, ‘to bind,’ ‘to bond,’ from the Indo-
European root √leig, ‘to bind.’4 While a large number of words derived
from yuj connote yoking or connecting, in classical Yoga, yuj’s primary
meaning is yogic meditative absorption, yuj sam¯adhau. However, yuj in
the sense of ‘uniting’ is certainly operative in classical Yoga, and refers to
unifying one’s efforts, integrating one’s physiological functions (for in-
stance, by controlling the breath), making one’s concentration one-
pointed, and overcoming the fragmentation that characterizes ordinary
human attention and activity.
Eliade notes that an important meaning of yoga is the effort of yok-
ing one’s powers. The purpose of this effort is “to unify the spirit, to do
away with the dispersion and automatism that characterize profane con-
sciousness.”5 The effort of self-integration by practice of yoga breaks the
bonds keeping puruÓsa—pure consciousness and the person’s true na-
ture—enmeshed in prakÓrti, the world and the person’s mentality and
physicality. In devotional forms of yoga, yoking connotes the yoking of
the individual with God. Eliade contends that the basic meaning of the
verb yuj, ‘to bind,’ presupposes “breaking the ‘bonds’ that unite the spirit
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
85

with the world.”6 Despite a variety of applications of yuj in the sense of
yoking, the ultimate aim of yoga according to the Yoga-s¯utras is neither
the yoking together of the practitioner’s aspects nor the joining of the as-
pirant with the Absolute, but something quite the opposite: kaivalya, ‘in-
dependence.’ Kaivalya is the liberation of the person’s true nature as pure
consciousness, independent of material nature, as described in the ﬁnal
verse of the Yoga-s¯utras:
PuruÓs¯artha ´suny¯an¯am guÓn¯an¯am pratiprasavaÓh kaivalyaÓm
svar¯upa-pratiÓsÓth¯a v¯a citi-´sakter iti
Independence (kaivalya) is the re-merging of the guÓnas [constitu-
ents of materiality] back into their latent state [as undifferentiated
prakÓrti, materiality], because of their becoming empty of value for the
puruÓsa. Then puruÓsa is established in its own true nature, in other
words, as pure consciousness.
YS 4.34
Liberation in classical Yoga is thus not so much a yoking as a dissolution
of the bonds of matter, so that consciousness may prevail free of inﬂu-
ences of the body, mind, and the material world. Yoking remains integral
to the meaning of Yoga in that the practices of Yoga—physical and medi-
tational—entail an effort of one-pointed focusing. One-pointed concen-
tration helps to yoke together the activities of body, breath, senses, and
mind, which supports the achievement of non-fragmented mental still-
ness in the state of sam¯adhi.
The most explicit designation of ‘yoga’ is yoga-dar´sana, the philo-
sophical and religious system of Yoga systematized by Patañjali. The clas-
sical Yoga of Patañjali is known as P¯atañjala Yoga, AÓsÓt¯a˙nga (eight-
limbed) Yoga, and R¯aja Yoga (the royal yoga, or yoga whereby one
becomes master or king, r¯aja, of oneself). Classical Yoga is a synthesis
and distillation of a range of traditional Indian techniques of restraint
and meditation. In general religio-philosophical terms, ‘yoga’ designates
liberative ascetic techniques and methods of meditation. Eliade discusses
two senses of liberation in the Indian tradition:
1. Transcendental: transcending the human condition and appropriat-
ing another mode of being.
2. Mystical: a ‘breaking’ of the human condition, “a rebirth to a non-
conditioned mode of being,” which is absolute freedom.7
Yogic restraint of ordinary human activities—of vice, near-constant
movement of the body, erratic breathing, and chaotic and distractive
86
religious therapeutics

mental activity—is the means of separating oneself from profane life and
aspiring to sacred life.
Yoga in the Vedas, UPANIÓSADS, and BHAGAVADG¯ıT¯A
Yoga in the Vedas
The ÓRgveda does not contain references to yoga as a system of spiritual
practice. The word ‘yoga’ in the ÓRgveda has meanings such as yoking,
connecting, and achieving the unachieved. But the theme of yoking live-
stock, and the symbolic yoking of powers is a recurring theme. The fol-
lowing hymn uses the metaphor of yoking to liken the work of sacriﬁcial
priests to the work of farmers in their ﬁelds:
The inspired poets who know how, harness the plough and stretch the
yokes on either side to win favor among the gods.
RV 10:101:4
Agricultural and yoking metaphors abound also in the Atharvaveda, which
provides a wealth of material concerning Vedic conceptions of healing.
Homage to the ploughs (l¯a˙ngala), homage to thy [wagon-]poles and
yokes; let the kÓsetriya [hereditary-disease-] effacing plant fade the
kÓsetriya away.
AV 2:8.4 (trans. Whitney)
Pr¯aÓna, the vital energy carried by breath, is a fundamental bridge to liber-
ation in yoga, and it is extolled in the Atharvaveda:
Reverence be, O Pr¯aÓna
to thee coming
reverence to thee going;
reverence to thee standing,
and reverence to thee sitting.
Reverence be to thee, O Pr¯aÓna,
When thou breathest in (pr¯anate)
Reverence when thou breathest out!
Reverence be to thee when thou art turned away,
Reverence to thee when thou art turned hither:
To thee, entire, reverence be here!
Of thy dear form, O Pr¯aÓna,
Of thy very dear form,
Of the healing power that is thine,
Give unto us, that we may live!
AV 11:4:7–9 (trans. Bloomﬁeld)
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
87

Yoga in the UpaniÓsads
The KaÓtha UpaniÓsad provides one of the earliest articulations of yoga,
and expresses a central way of conceiving yoga—restraint of the senses—
likened to the yoking of “the vicious horses of a chariot driver” [KaÓth.
Up. 3:5]. In this metaphor, the self, ¯atman, rides in a chariot representing
the body. The driver is the intelligence or faculty of discriminating wis-
dom (buddhi), and mind (manas) is the reins. In this UpaniÓsad the young
man Naciketas receives instruction from Yama, Lord of Death, on the
means of attaining Brahman and immortality. Yama teaches that the wise
one may transcend joy and sorrow by the yoga-study of what pertains to
the self, “set in the secret place [of the heart], dwelling in the depth pri-
meval—by considering him as God” [KaÓth. Up. 2:12]. Yama instructs
that this self is not slain when the body is slain [repeated in Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a
2:19–20¯a]. Yama describes yoga thus:
When cease the ﬁve [sense-] knowledges
Together with the mind [manas],
And the intelligence [buddhi ] stirs not—
That, they say, is the highest course.
This they consider as yoga—
The ﬁrm holding back of the senses.
Then one becomes undistracted.
Yoga, truly, is the origin and the end.
KaÓth. Up. 6:10–11
A six-fold (ÓsaÓda˙nga) yoga is recommended in the Maitri UpaniÓsad. A
beautiful description is given of Brahm¯a, the One in the sun, in the cook-
ing ﬁre, and in the heart. Realization of the unity of self with the limitless
One is attainable by six yogic practices: restraint of the breath
(pr¯aÓn¯ay¯am¯a), withdrawal of the senses (praty¯ah¯ara), meditation (dhy¯ana),
concentration (dh¯araÓn¯a), rational contemplation (tarka), and meditative
absorption (sam¯adhi) [Mait. Up. 6:18]. This sixfold yoga is similar to
P¯atañjali’s eight-fold classical Yoga, which differs only in that classical
Yoga begins with moral restraints (yama) and observances (niyama), and
includes posture (¯asana) but not tarka [YS 2.29]. Meditation on the mys-
tical syllable Om is recommended by these upaniÓsads [KaÓth. Up. 2:15–
17; Mait. Up. 6:21–29¯a] as it is in the Yoga-s¯utras.
In the Ívetasvatara UpaniÓsad, yoga is prescribed for the realization
of Brahman, which pervades all things “as oil in sesame seeds, as butter
in cream.” [Ívet. Up. 1:15–16]. The Ívetasvatara describes the methods
and results of yoga practice, indicating how meditative posture, control
of the breath, and withdrawal of the senses lead to liberation:
88
religious therapeutics

Holding his body steady with the three [upper parts: head, neck
and chest] erect,
And causing the senses with the mind to enter the heart,
A wise man with the Brahma-boat should cross over
All the fear-bringing streams.
Having repressed his breathings here in the body,
And having his movements checked,
One should breathe through his nostrils with diminished breath.
Like the chariot yoked with vicious horses,
His mind the wise man should restrain undistractedly.
Ívet. Up. 2:8–9
Although liberation is the highest aim of UpaniÓsadic yoga, the UpaniÓsads
note the health beneﬁts of yoga: sickness, old age, and death are avoided
by one “who has obtained a body made out of the ﬁre of yoga” [Ívet. Up.
2:12¯a]. Health is named as one of the signs of progress in yoga [Ívet. Up.
2.13]. The Ívetasvatara refers to yoga in connection with S¯aÓmkhya. In
the later systematizations of the classical dar´sanas, S¯aÓmkhya and Yoga
are separate but closely related. In the Ívetasvatara, S¯aÓmkhya and Yoga
designate two means of attaining knowledge of the absolute: by discrimi-
native knowing and meditative abstraction, respectively [Ívet. Up. 6:13].
In the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a, the major yoga-text preceding Patañjali’s systemati-
zation of yoga in the Yoga-s¯utras, Lord KÓrÓsÓna teaches Arjuna of a two-
fold path: “the knowledge-yoga of the S¯aÓmkhyas” (jñ¯anayogena
s¯aÓmkhyanaÓm), and the “action-yoga” of the Yogins (karmayogena yogi-
nam) [BhG 3:3].
Yoga in the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a
K. N. Upadhyaya writes that the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a subordinates S¯a Ómkya’s
dualism and atheism, along with the methods of yoga, under the theistic
and non-dualistic philosophy of Vedanta.8 In the G¯ıt¯a’s Karma Yoga, the
yoga of non-detached action, the body is the very instrument of the
aspirant’s carrying out responsibilities in the world, but with an attitude
of non-attachment. While action is necessary in human life, salvation re-
quires ni´sk¯ama karma, performance of action without attachment to its
result, whether pleasant or unpleasant. KÓrÓsÓna exhorts the warrior Ar-
juna: “Fixed in yoga . . . do thy work . . . Yoga is skill in action” [BhG
2:48,50]. KÓrÓsÓna’s instructing Arjuna to act, to carry his duty as a warrior
regardless of the consequences—the killing of his kinsmen—exempliﬁes
Karma Yoga’s yoking of physical action with emotionally detached
understanding. Action is to be performed in a fully aware and disci-
plined manner, with the matter of signiﬁcance not being the external
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
89

action and its consequences, but the understanding with which the ac-
tion is performed. Knowledge permits performance of the action with
mental equipoise—without desire or aversion—and this state of equa-
nimity permits and, in part, constitutes the aspirant’s liberation and
union with God.
‘Yoga’ in the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a does not have the Yoga-s¯utras’ technical
meaning of cessation of the ‘turnings’ or activities of the mind. The pre-
dominant meaning of yoga in the G¯ıt¯a is “disinterested and selﬂess dis-
charge of one’s duty.”9 Upadhyaya identiﬁes a number of other meanings
of ‘yoga.’ In devotional terms, yoga means total surrender to God. In
some verses, God’s wondrous powers are called yoga-m¯ay¯a. ‘Yoga’ is also
used in the G¯ıt¯a to designate control of the mind and practice of medita-
tion—the meaning of yoga later articulated by Patañjali.10 Dasgupta sug-
gests that use of the word ‘yoga’ in the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a has meanings con-
forming with both yuj sam¯adhau, pertaining to meditative concentration,
and yujir yoge, yoking or connecting. He maintains that both these con-
notations of yoga serve the G¯ıt¯a’s purpose of prescribing a middle path
between a meditative life disengaged from worldly activity and the sacri-
ﬁcial action of a vedic worshipper. The G¯ıt¯a’s type of yogin both medi-
tates and acts, but he acts more from responsibility than desire, releasing
attachment to the pleasant or unpleasant consequences of his actions.11
Although Karma Yoga is the predominant form of yoga in the G¯ıt¯a,
other paths of yoga are recommended as well. The G¯ıt¯a refers to ¯asana
and pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama [BhG 6:10ff], and gives concise instructions for Dhy¯ana
Yoga, the yoga of concentration and meditation. The G¯ıt¯a offers a choice
of yogas for persons of different natures:
In this world there is a two-fold basis
Taught anciently by me O blameless One (Arjuna).
The knowledge yoga of the S¯aÓmkhyas (jñ¯anayogena s¯aÓmkhyanaÓm),
The action-yoga of the yogins (karmayogena yoginam).
BhG 3:3
S¯aÓmkhya theory and yoga practice in the G¯ıt¯a represent Jñ¯ana (knowl-
edge) Yoga and Karma (action) Yoga, respectively. The G¯ıt¯a treats the
two paths as having equal value and with the same destination. Bhakti
Yoga, the yoga of devotion, can be practiced through either Jñ¯ana or
Karma Yoga. KÓrÓsÓna instructs:
By devotion to me he comes to know
How great and who I am in truth
90
religious therapeutics

Then having known me in truth
He enters into me immediately.
BhG 18:55
In all these uses of yoga in the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a is the idea that knowledge is
the foremost requirement for liberation. The various yogas both require
and cultivate understanding that supports discriminative, and hence lib-
erative insight.
Traditions of Yoga Practice
Many forms of yoga are practiced within India’s several religio-
philosophical currents. These include non-Hindu yogas (Buddhist and
Jain), T¯antric yogas, non-systematic and popular forms of yoga, and the
classical Yoga of Patañjali. The following discussion identiﬁes major
schools of yoga, beginning with yoga in non-Hindu traditions.
In Buddhism, the main problem of Indian soteriology—suffering
and emancipation—is treated in part by yogic techniques. Í¯akyamuni
Buddha studied S¯aÓmkhya doctrines and yoga practice during his six years
of seeking enlightenment, and his teachers of these two traditions are
named in the early Buddhist texts.12 A major instance of yogic technique
in the Buddha’s teaching is sattipaÓtÓth¯ana, ‘mindfulness’ of the body’s
structure, function, posture, and breathing:
And how O bhikkus, does a bhikku [monk] dwell observing the body in
the body?
Here a bhikku, having gone to a forest, or to the foot of a tree, sits
down crosslegged, keeps the body upright and ﬁxes his awareness in the
area around the mouth. And with this awareness he breathes in, with
this awareness he breathes out. Breathing in a deep breath he under-
stands properly “I am breathing in a deep breath.” Breathing out a deep
breath he understands properly, “I am breathing out a deep breath.”13
The Buddhist practice of mindfulness of breathing does not emphasize
physical action and control of breath as does yogic pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, but in-
stead emphasizes mental effort, and the gaining of awareness and truth
by observing the arising and cessation of physical and mental states.
Mindfulness of the body and breath exempliﬁes Buddhism’s emphasis on
cultivation of mind and higher knowledge.
Jainism also incorporates yogic practices. For instance, the Jñ¯an-
¯arÓnava of Íubhadra (c. 800 c.e.) discusses postures, regulation of breath,
and yogic meditation methods.14 The Jain scholar Haribhadra (c. 750
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
91

c.e.), among his hundreds of other works, wrote treatises on yoga, not-
ably the Yoga-bindu and DÓrÓsÓti-samucc¯aya. Jainism inﬂuenced classical
Yoga’s ethics, especially its inclusion of the fundamental Jain principle of
ahi ˙ms¯a: non-injury.15
KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga, part of the T¯antric tradition, uses the esoteric phys-
iology of cakras, ‘wheels’ or energy-centers along the axis of the spine,
and nad¯ıs or ‘channels’ (literally ‘rivers’) through which pr¯aÓna, the life-
force, circulates. KuÓnÓdalin¯ı is conceived as cosmic energy, depicted as a
snake coiled at the lowest of the cakras. The yogin who practices
KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga aims to redirect his psychospiritual energy, in the form of
the feminine principle KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Íakti, upward through the cakras to the
crown of the head, where it unites with the masculine principle Íiva, re-
sulting in sam¯adhi. Yogic practices such as pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama or control of the
breath and vital energy are thought to activate kuÓnÓdalin¯ı’s ascent, culmi-
nating in attainment of the enlightened consciousness called sam¯adhi.16
The well-known HaÓtha Yoga incorporates doctrines of KuÓnÓdalin¯ı
Yoga. HaÓtha Yoga emphasizes physical puriﬁcation, ¯asana or postures,
and pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama. Consonant with T¯antrism, HaÓtha Yoga regards the per-
fection of the body as instrumental to attainment of liberation. HaÓtha
means ‘force’ or ‘forceful.’ Figuratively, ha signiﬁes the heating energy of
the sun, and represents inhalation, while tha denotes the moon’s cooling
energy and represents exhalation. HaÓtha Yoga’s main text, the HaÓtha-
yoga-prad¯ıpik¯a, presents techniques of activating kuÓnÓdalin¯ı energy for
the sake of spiritual progress.17 HaÓtha Yoga is not merely a system of
physical cultivation: the HaÓtha-yoga-prad¯ıpik¯a integrates physical disci-
plines with the higher spiritual disciplines of classical or R¯aja Yoga, and
HaÓtha texts present HaÓtha Yoga as a means to R¯aja Yoga.18 However,
Tantra and HaÓtha Yoga are diametrically opposed to classical Yoga in
that they consider enlightenment to involve illumination of body as well
as consciousness.
The different types of yoga may be considered in terms of six peri-
ods in the history of yoga: (1) Proto-Yoga, (2) Pre-classical, (3) Epic, (4)
Classical, (5) Post-classic, and (6) Modern yoga. Evidence about the
Proto-yoga of the period of the Indus Valley civilization (c. 2600–1500
b.c.e.) exists in archaeological ﬁndings such as statues and seals with im-
ages of persons in yoga postures, and also references in the ﬁrst Indian
texts, the Vedas. Pre-classical yoga consists of the ﬁrst detailed articula-
tions of yogic practices and meditation in the early UpaniÓsads, dating
from c. 800 b.c.e. Epic yoga (c. 500 b.c.e.–200 c.e.) designates the yoga
of the middle UpaniÓsads, and the great epic the Mah¯abh¯arata, which
92
religious therapeutics

includes the revered scripture the Bhagavadag¯ıt¯a. For persons of different
natures, the G¯ıt¯a offers three yogic paths: Jñ¯ana Yoga, the yoga of knowl-
edge, Karma Yoga, the yoga of action [BhG 3.3], and Bhakti Yoga, the
yoga of devotion to the Lord [BhG 18.57]. Jñ¯ana Yoga is cultivation of
discriminative knowledge and the use of the mind to free itself from mat-
ter and bondage. Karma Yoga is the carrying out of one’s earthly and
spiritual duties, and serving others, without desire or aversion. Bhakti
Yoga, related to both Jñ¯ana Yoga and Karma Yoga, is grounded in adora-
tion of the Lord and offering all one’s actions to him.
Classical Yoga (c. second/third century c.e.) denotes the Yoga
systematized in Patañjali’s Yoga-s¯utras and expounded by extensive com-
mentaries in subsequent centuries. The Yoga-s¯utras distill elements of ear-
lier forms of yoga, and systematize an eight-fold program of disciplines
culminating in enlightened realization of Self as consciousness—in this
life, free of subjugation to embodiment—and after this life, free of a body
and its potential rebirth and suffering.
Post-classical yoga (c. 200–1900 c.e.) includes HaÓtha Yoga, T¯antric
yogas, and the Yoga UpaniÓsads. In general, the approximately twenty
Yoga UpaniÓsads incorporate the subtle physiology of Tantra’s KuÓnÓdalin¯ı
Yoga. The Yoga UpaniÓsads do not accept the dualistic metaphysics of
classical Yoga, but instead advocate Ved¯anta, the non-dualistic meta-
physics dominating Indian philosophy and religion from the time of the
earliest UpaniÓsads to the present day. Several of the Yoga UpaniÓsads list
four varieties of yoga:
Yoga, although one, is according to practice and usage, O Brahman!
Differentiated as of various kinds [chief among them are]: Mantra-yoga,
Laya-, what is known as HaÓtha- and R¯aja-yoga.
Yoga-tattvopaniÓsad, 19
Mantra Yoga aims for dissolution of mind by mantras, sacred Sanskrit
sounds that are chanted or silently meditated on. Mantras are imbued
with qualities thought to contribute to meditative awareness and attain-
ment of liberation. Mantra Yoga also employs pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama and cultivation
of the ascent of kuÓnÓdalin¯ı. Laya Yoga, the yoga of dissolution [√li, ‘to dis-
solve’], embraces theories and practices of KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga. Laya yoga in-
corporates methods such as meditation on ‘the inner sound’ (´sadba),
leading to dissolution of mental activity. In Modern yoga, dating from
the twentieth century, the work of Íri Aurobindo (1872–1950) is preemi-
nent. His P¯urna Yoga or ‘Integral Yoga’ incorporates elements of R¯aja,
HaÓtha, the G¯ıt¯a’s yogas of action, knowledge, and devotion, and the
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
93

T¯antric KuÓnÓdalin¯ı and Mantra Yogas. P¯urna Yoga offers a spiritual path
relevant in the present circumstances of global crisis, and seeks to inte-
grate the quest for individual liberation with humankind’s evolutionary
destiny.19
A MATRIX OF CLASSICAL YOGA 
AS A RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTIC
Metaphysical and Epistemic Foundations
Yoga’s Therapeutic Paradigm
While Yoga is among humanity’s greatest religious resources for inform-
ing theory and practice in the domain of health, it is a very different rela-
tion between health and spirituality that grounds Yoga’s higher dimen-
sion as a religious therapeutic:
Yoga physiology or psychology thus takes its direction and signiﬁcance
from the reality which is beyond the body or the psyche. This renders
the physio-psychology of yoga sacred. The cultivation of the body or
the mind for their own sake is not yoga. The psychic healing of yoga
has its centre above the psyche; here the wholeness aspired for is that of
holiness.20
Yoga upholds a standard of human well being—psychophysical and spir-
itual—that greatly expands our view of body, health, and human poten-
tial. The wholeness that is holiness, the liberation that is healing in its
fundamental meaning, is the goal of Yogic religious therapeutics. Yoga’s
philosophical foundations have a therapeutic orientation whose concern
“is not only the diagnosis of the human condition but also the prescrip-
tion and effecting of a cure that will make man whole.”21
Yoga’s Diagnosis of the Human Condition
Yoga’s metaphysics diagnoses the human condition as a state of suffering
due to ignorance whose speciﬁc form is misidentiﬁcation of Self with ma-
teriality. By understanding the principles that govern nature and the
human being, a yogin can “diagnose and thus overcome his fundamental
metaphysical illness of ‘mis-identiﬁcation with matter.’”22 Misery, accord-
ing to the Yoga-s¯utras, can and should be prevented [YS 2.16]. The cause
of misery is “the conjunction (saÓmyoga) of the Seer and the Seen” [YS
2.17]. ‘Seer’ or draÓsÓtÓr, [√dÓr´s ‘to see’] and ‘Seen’ designate the two forms
94
religious therapeutics

of primordial Being: puruÓsa or consciousness—the true Self—and prakÓrti
or materiality—the experienceable world, including one’s own body/
mind. PrakÓrti exists for the sake of puruÓsa; their conjunction serves the
puruÓsa’s “recognition of the Self-natures of the two powers” [YS 2.23;
SK 21]. Their conjunction ends when it has caused “knowledge of nature
of the knower,” which is ultimate spiritual freedom [YBh 2.23]. This lib-
eration, called ‘independence’ (kaivalya), is achieved with the individual
puruÓsa’s recognition of its Self-nature as consciousness, wholly indepen-
dent of prakÓrti and all its material evolutes, including the human mind
and body, and everything else in the manifest universe.
The co-presence of prakÓrti and puruÓsa engenders the manifest world
by disturbing the equilibrium of the guÓnas, the three main forces of mat-
ter/energy comprising all physical things and processes. The guÓnas are:
1. Sattva: purity, illumination and awareness
2. Rajas: activity
3. Tamas: stability and inertia [SK 12–21]
The guÓnas are also the three qualities characterizing all things. In Yoga,
states of mind are described as sattvic, rajasic, and tamasic [TV 1.1, YBh
1.2]. “Mental essence is by nature purity; but it puts on impurity by the
taint of disturbing energy (rajas) and inertia (tamas)” [YBh 1.16]. To say
that puruÓsa is pure consciousness is to say that it is awareness entirely in-
dependent of prakÓrti and the guÓnas. It is awareness without an object ex-
ternal to itself, and without an external object, consciousness can be con-
scious of itself. The individual puruÓsa in ordinary human life fails to
recognize itself as pure consciousness, because “even though pure [of
mental contents], it cognizes by reﬂecting or imitating the contents of the
mind” [YS 2.20]. PuruÓsa becomes aware of itself by ‘reﬂecting’ the bud-
dhi or intelligence, which presents objects of knowledge to the puruÓsa.
The Tattva-vai´s¯arad¯ı clariﬁes with an analogy:
Although the moon is not as a matter of fact transferred into pure water,
it is, so to speak, transferred into it. So also, the power of consciousness,
although it is not actually transferred into the buddhi, yet it is, so to
speak, transferred into it, because it is reﬂected into it.
TV 2.20
Metaphysics and soteriology are intimately related in classical Yoga. Es-
sential elements of Yoga’s metaphysics and soteriology are these recipro-
cal functions:
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
95

1. Discriminative knowledge permitting discernment of the true Self as
puruÓsa.
2. Disentanglement from materiality and from materially oriented de-
sire and aversion that cause suffering and impede self-realization.
Sva-sv¯ami-´saktyoÓh svar¯upopalabdhi-hetuÓh saÓmyogaÓh
The purpose of the conjunction (saÓmyoga) of the master [i.e.,the
Seer or experiencer: puruÓsa] and the experienceable world (prakÓrti) is
the experiencer’s recognition of the Self-natures of the two powers.
YS 2.23
Tasya hetur avidy¯a
The cause [of their conjunction] is ignorance [i.e., puruÓsa’s ignor-
ance of its own real nature].
YS 2.24
Tad-abhv¯at saÓmyog¯abh¯avo h¯anaÓm tad dÓr´seÓh kaivalyam
By elimination of ignorance, the conjunction of materiality and
consciousness is eliminated, and this is the Seer’s liberation [kaivalyam:
‘independence’ from prakÓrti ].
YS 2.25
Discernment of puruÓsa is Yoga’s principal soteriological effort. Discern-
ment or discriminative knowledge is called khy¯ati (√khy¯a, ‘to see,’ ‘to
know’). Discriminative knowledge of puruÓsa, the true Self of each per-
son—which is of the nature of God—conditions attainment of vair¯agya,
‘dispassion’ or ‘non-attachment’ (vi, ‘without’; √raj, ‘to enjoy’). Vair¯agya
is the state of cessation of desire for the guÓnas.
Tat paraÓm puruÓsa-khy¯ater guÓnavaitÓrÓsÓnyam
Dispassion (vair¯agya) is highest when, owing to discrimination
between consciousness and materiality, there is no thirst for the guÓnas
[i.e., no thirst for material objects and experiences, which are formed of
guÓnas, the three basic constituents of matter].
YS 1.16
Cessation of desire for the products of the guÓnas is equivalent to freedom
from entanglement in materiality. Entanglement in materiality results
from ignorance of one’s Self-nature as independent of materiality. Ignor-
ance, avidy¯a, is the root cause of bondage and suffering. PuruÓsa-khy¯ati,
discernment of Self, is the remedy for ignorance, and the means of libera-
tion from passion and suffering. Thus puruÓsa-kh¯ayti is the principle med-
icament in Yogic religious therapeutics.
96
religious therapeutics

The Yogic Remedy
Ignorance, avidy¯a [a, ‘not’; √vid, ‘to know’], refers particularly to the
Self’s ignorance of its true nature. Classical Yoga is an eight-fold remedy
to inhibit the activity of the mind, so that the Seer ceases to identify him-
self with the vÓrttis or mental experiences, and thus becomes established in
his true Self-nature, sva-r¯upa (YS 1.2–3). The Tattva-vai´s¯arad¯ı explains:
By the word svar¯upa, one’s own nature, the author excludes the appear-
ance of the calm, the agitated, and the dull, which have been fastened
upon it. The nature of the puruÓsa is consciousness alone, unaffected by
the contact (of objects placed alongside it), not the cognitive action of
the buddhi (the power of intelligence) appearing as calm, etc.
TV 1.3
Because ignorance is considered the source of bondage, liberation re-
quires right knowledge. The importance of knowledge in Yoga is not lim-
ited to problems of epistemology, for in Yoga, knowledge—higher or dis-
criminative knowledge—is itself the remedy for the human condition.
Correct judgment (productive of right knowledge), and incorrect
judgment (productive of wrong knowledge), along with the other mental
processes or vÓrttis—literally ‘turnings’ (√vÓrt, ‘to turn’)—are to be stopped
by a series of preliminary and meditative practices [YS 1.2]. Nirodha,
stoppage of the vÓrttis (√rudh ‘to stop’, ‘to obstruct’) embodies Yoga’s
goal: In the state of nirodha, the Seer is established in its own essential
and fundamental nature [YS 1.3]. In other states, the Seer identiﬁes with
the vÓrttis [YS 1.4]. V¯acaspati gives another analogy for the puruÓsa’s
knowing by means of being reﬂected in buddhi (the intelligence), but then
mistaking the buddhi for itself: the case of one who looks into a dirty
mirror, and concludes, “I am dim” [TV 1.4].
The vÓrttis or processes of the mind occur in ﬁve forms:
1. Pram¯ana: Correct judgment (productive of right knowledge) based
on perception, inference, or authority
2. Viparyaya: Incorrect judgment (productive of wrong knowledge)
based on perception, inference, or authority
3. Vikalpa: Imagination or conceptualization (mental constructions
without corresponding objects) based on images, words, concepts,
and/or symbols
4. Nidr¯a: Sleep (including dreaming and dreamless sleep)
5. SmÓrti: Memory [YS 1.5,6]
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
97

Yoga’s ﬁve-fold classiﬁcation of vÓrttis is an elegant account of the innu-
merable possible instances of human cognition. Right knowledge and
wrong knowledge are derived from perception, inference, and/or
‘authority’ (i.e., a reliable source). In imagination and conceptualization,
images, words, ideas, and/or symbols are generated and/or combined in
forms or sequences that might not have corresponding forms in the exter-
nal world. Memory is the mental re-experiencing of previous experi-
ences, physical and/or mental. In dreaming, images, meanings, and expe-
riences of the ‘subtle body’ or ‘dream body’ occur independently of
sensory input, and dream-cognition is non-rational. Dreamless sleep is
marked by absence of images, meanings, and experiences. Dreamless
sleep resembles the one-pointed mind for which Yoga strives, but sleep
originates in tamas and is therefore contrary to the higher knowledge-
states of sam¯adhi [TV 1.10]. Complex vÓrttis may fall in two or more of
the ﬁve groups, but Yoga holds that any kind of ordinary mental activity
can be accounted for according to the ﬁve-fold classiﬁcation. Yoga seeks
to suppress states of ordinary knowledge and to cultivate higher knowl-
edge. Consciousness that is the person’s true nature does not denote the
ﬂuctuating states of mind wherein we experience the vÓrttis of right and
wrong cognition, imagination, conceptualization, dreaming, deep sleep,
and memory. The mental ﬂuctuations that characterize these states are to
be stilled by abhy¯asa, persistent effort for establishment in citta-vÓrtti-
nirodha, suppression of ordinary mental activity.
Along with abhy¯asa, the yogin practices vairagya, dispassion or non-
attachment [YS 1.12–16]. The exercise of abh¯aysa and vair¯agya lead to
development of higher knowledge, permitting realization of the self as
pure consciousness. Knowledge in Yoga has two levels:
1. Ordinary knowledge
2. Higher knowledge on which liberation depends:
Írut¯anum¯ana-prajñ¯ajbhy¯am anya-viÓsay¯a vi´seÓs¯arthatv¯at.
Higher knowledge (prajñ¯a) is different from knowledge based on
inference or reliable authority, because it has particulars as its object.
YS 1.49
‘Particulars’ as a designation for objects of higher knowledge connotes
the true nature of the things known. Higher knowledge comprehends the
inﬁnitesimal constituents that compose the inner nature of objects, and,
ultimately, puruÓsa can comprehend its own nature as puruÓsa. By contrast,
the ordinary means of knowledge (perception, inference, and authority)
98
religious therapeutics

are capable only of knowing objects as ‘generals’ [YBh 1.49]. Taimni’s
commentary on YS 1.49 clariﬁes the relation between ‘particular’ and
‘general’ objects of knowledge. Objects of knowledge are cognized as
‘particulars’ not because they are known in isolation from other objects
of knowledge, but because their particular nature is revealed in their
being known within a broader context:
It is . . . this inability to see things in the background of the whole which
is the greatest limitation of intellectual perception [ordinary knowl-
edge], and intuitive perception [higher knowledge] is free from this limi-
tation. In the higher realms of consciousness each object is seen not in
isolation but as part of a whole in which all truths, laws and principles
have their due place.23
Higher knowledge is attainable in sam¯adhi, the culmination of
Yoga’s eight accessories. Sam¯adhi itself has a number of successive
knowledge-states leading to ﬁnal liberation. Swami Adidevananda re-
marks that “The empirical soul is sick as long as it is isolated from the
universal spirit.”24 Religious liberation in Yoga overcomes the sickness of
this isolation by seeking a desirable form of isolation, kaivalya: indepen-
dence of the Self from body/mind and materiality. The means to this in-
dependence is discriminative higher knowledge, attained by systematic
cultivation of body/mind and consciousness.
Soteriology
Self-realization by Healing the Afﬂictions (Kle´sas)
Central to the Yoga-s¯utras’ analysis of human suffering is the theory of
the kle´sas, ailments or afﬂictions (the main one being ignorance) that af-
fect the body and mind, and also affect the person at a more fundamen-
tal level of being: the buddhi or faculty of knowing. Buddhi or intelli-
gence (√budh, ‘to know’, ‘to wake’) is the ﬁrst evolute of prakÓrti and the
faculty most similar to puruÓsa, because puruÓsa’s power of pure con-
sciousness gives buddhi the power to know. In classical Yoga’s metaphys-
ics and soteriology, healing at the most fundamental level applies to the
draÓsÓtÓr, the Seer or experiencer. The draÓsÓtÓr is the human being inclusive of
buddhi (the content-free power of intelligence) along with manas, the
mind (with its contents and personal patterns of meaning-constitution).
Also part of draÓsÓtÓr are the body and the sensory-perceptual capacities,
which are functions of cooperating physicality and mentality.
Liberation as healing consists in the draÓsÓtÓr’s “establishment in its
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
99

essential nature”: draÓsÓtuÓh svar¯upe’vasth¯anam [YS 1.3]. The highest pur-
pose of yoga, says Swami Ramakrishnananda, “is to secure the necessary
discipline for the purpose of awakening the spiritual consciousness of
man.”25 Non-establishment in Self-nature is a consequence of the Seer’s
assimilation with the activities of the mind. This non-discrimination of
Self from one’s mental processes results from ‘afﬂictions’ or kle´sas (√klis,
‘to distress, ‘to torment’). With the concept of the kle´sas, the idea of Yoga
as a religious therapeutic comes into sharp focus, for Yoga’s soteriology is
directed to removal of these afﬂictions, which cause suffering and prevent
liberative Self-realization. Dasgupta tells us that Yoga’s goal, the trans-
formation of the buddhi into its purest state, where it steadily reﬂects the
true nature of puruÓsa, requires more than knowledge: “a graduated
course of practice is necessary.”
This graduated practice should be so arranged that by generating the
practice of living higher and better modes of life, and steadying the mind
on its subtler states, the habits of ordinary life may be removed.26
As in other Indian traditions, liberation in Yoga depends on cultiva-
tion of higher knowledge, but Yoga is distinguished by its systematic
means of subduing, purifying, and vitalizing the body and body/mind to
help bring about attainment of higher stages of consciousness, discrimi-
native wisdom, and liberation. Yoga does not concern itself with the sa-
cred in terms of sacred forces, objects, or rites. Yoga is a theistic tradition.
God, known as Î´svara, is free from the inﬂuences of karma and free of all
afﬂictions or kle´sas [YS 1.24]. In Î´svara “the seed of omniscience is unsur-
passed” [YS 1.25]. He is regarded as the great Teacher, the teacher of the
ancient teachers [YS 1.26], who by compassion wishes to teach knowl-
edge and virtue for the liberation of puruÓsas [YBh 1.25]. Î´svara inspires
the aspirant in the effort of self-cultivation. The efﬁcacy of Î´svara-
praÓnidh¯ana, resignation or devotion to God, is clear from the Yoga-
s¯utras’ declaration that sam¯adhi may be directly attained by this means
[YS 1.23]. For some yogins, surrender to God—devotion to God of all
one’s actions of mind, speech, and body [YBh 1.23]—is sufﬁcient for at-
tainment of sam¯adhi, and the yogin need not begin with the preliminary
limbs of Yoga. However, most practitioners need to start at a more ele-
mentary level, so Yoga provides a course of disciplines whereby the kle´sas
may be attenuated and liberative knowledge achieved.
The kle´sas represent varieties of metaphysical illness, afﬂictions of
mistaken attachment to physical and psychophysical aspects of prakÓrti.
There are ﬁve kle´sas:
100
religious therapeutics

1. Avidy¯a: Ignorance of the true nature of reality and Self-nature
2. Asmit¯a: Egoism or sense of ‘I am’
3. R¯aga: Attraction accompanying the desirable
4. DveÓsa: Repulsion that accompanies the undesirable
5. Abhinive´sa: Clinging to life and aversion to death [YS 2.3]
The ﬁrst kle´sa, avidy¯a, or ignorance, is the source (literally the ‘ﬁeld,’
kÓsetra) of the others [YS 2.4]. Avidy¯a is the judging of the impure as pure,
the non-Self to be the Self and so on [YS 2.5]. Halbfass calls avidy¯a a ‘cog-
nitive disease.’ Avidy¯a he says, is “a radical misunderstanding of the world
and one’s true nature. It is essentially self-deception, self-alienation, ap-
parent loss of one’s own identity.”27 Avidy¯a is the root of human bondage
and suffering, and because the overcoming of ignorance is the crux of lib-
eration in Yoga, the overcoming of the ignorance-based kle´sas or afﬂic-
tions is foundational in yogic soteriology. Central to Yogic religious ther-
apeutics is the eradication of ignorance and its derivatives, conceived as
afﬂictions.
The second kle´sa is asmit¯a, ‘I-am-ness’ [asmi, ‘I am’]. This kle´sa is at
the root of thinking that one’s Self consists in one’s faculties of knowing
[YS 2.6]. By analogy, the moon sheds light that is not its own, for it reﬂects
the light of the sun. Asmit¯a is the afﬂiction concerning self-identity; it is
the mistake of thinking oneself to be the sum of one’s mental faculties and
their objects. One of the determinants of health is self-identity, and from
the standpoint of religious therapeutics, asmit¯a, or impaired self-identity,
is a fundamental form of spiritual ill-health. Realization of self-identity is
equivalent to liberation in Yoga; it means healing the debilitation and suf-
fering that result from non-establishment in one’s essential nature.
In kaivalya, asmit¯a is replaced by knowledge of Self as puruÓsa. The
guÓnas cease to transform and cease to produce modiﬁcations that agitate
the mind and interfere with Self-knowledge. In kaivalya, the purity of the
sattva and the puruÓsa are equal [YS 3.56]. Sattva, the guÓna whose nature
is purity and awareness, designates the human’s thirteen-part instrument
of cognition called citta. Citta (√cit, ‘to perceive,’ ‘to know’) is composed
of buddhi, manas, and ahaÓmkara or ego, along with the ﬁve sensory fa-
culties (vision, taste, smell, hearing, and touch), and the ﬁve organs of ac-
tion (voice, hands, feet, excretory organs, and sex organs). The Yoga-
bh¯aÓsya explains the equilibration of sattva with puruÓsa:
When the essence of the intelligence (buddhi), with the dirt of activity
(rajas) and dullness and inertia (tamas) removed, has the notion of the
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
101

distinctness of the puruÓsa as its sole remaining object, and all the seeds
of the afﬂictions (kle´sas) are burnt up, then does it, so to speak, assume
a state of purity similar to that of the puruÓsa.
YBh 3.54
Although citta may attain to the purity of puruÓsa itself, all constituents of
the psychophysical person, including the capacities of knowing, are evo-
lutes of prakÓrti. Equating citta with sattva or purity in this context means
purifying the contents of the mind, so that the individual puruÓsa’s true na-
ture as consciousness manifests without limit. In kaivalya, there is cessa-
tion of the guÓnas’ transformations, which otherwise produce mental activ-
ity. The guÓnas’ transformations cease when they have fulﬁlled their
purpose. The purpose of their combining in myriad ways to produce the
manifold universe is, according to Yoga, to permit puruÓsa’s coming to
know itself by ﬁrst knowing the world of prakÓrti. This is necessary be-
cause the embodied puruÓsa, in order to understand itself as consciousness,
initially needs an object of knowledge in order to experience itself as
knower. By engaging in progressively deeper modes of yogic meditative
knowing, the ultimate natures of prakÓrti and puruÓsa are recognized and
differentiated, until the puruÓsa no longer needs engagement with objects
of knowledge to experience the process of consciousness that is its nature.
The third and fourth kle´sas, r¯aga, ‘attraction’ (√raj ‘to enjoy’) and
dveÓsa, ‘repulsion’ (√dviÓs ‘to abhor’), both arise because of attachment,
that is, the Seer’s relation to things and experiences such that he is subject
to disturbance of mind due to contact with them [YS 2.7,8]. For a yogin
who has attained the goal of self-realization, his sense-organs still make
contact with objects of sensation, but when sensations arise they don’t
agitate the mind or strongly inﬂuence the yogin’s experience or actions.
R¯aga and dveÓsa are rooted in ignorance, whose form in this case is failure
to distinguish what the UpaniÓsads call preya, pleasure, from ´sreya, the
higher good [KaÓth. Up 2:1–2]. On Yoga’s interpretation, r¯aga and dveÓsa
result from attractions and repulsions concerning prakÓrti, and from the
assumption that prakÓrti’s manifestations are ultimate reality.
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal kle´sa is abhinive´sa, desire for life or aversion to
death (√abhi, ‘into,’ ‘toward’; ni ‘completely,’ ‘intensely’; √vi´s ‘to enter,’
‘to be engrossed’). This afﬂiction produces suffering by causing anxiety
about death. Death is ultimately an illusion, for the physical body is an
evolute of prakÓrti, thus not ultimately real. Death is merely the dissolu-
tion of the material constituents that compose the body, not the termina-
tion of a person’s being. In Iyengar’s words, yogic practice permits the
practitioner to experience “unity in the ﬂow of intelligence, and the
102
religious therapeutics

current of self-energy. . . . He understands that the current of self, the life-
force, active while he is alive, merges with the universe when it leaves his
body at death.”28 Aversion to death involves asmit¯a and the mis-
identiﬁcation of body, mind, and senses as the Self. Clinging to life indi-
cates attachment to sensory and cognitive experience, and makes one
subject to suffering as a result of separation from pleasant experience and
contact with painful experience. Fear of death derives also from attach-
ment to a sense of ‘I’: “In all living beings exists the self-benediction,
‘Would that I were never to cease’” [YBh 2.9].
Along with the ﬁve kle´sas are the nine obstacles or antar¯ay¯aÓh (√antar,
‘between’; √ay, ‘to go’):
1. Illness
2. Apathy
3. Doubt and indecision
4. Carelessness
5. Physical and mental laziness
6. Lack of detachment or sensual incontinence
7. Erroneous views
8. Failure to achieve one of Yoga’s eight stages
9. Instability in maintaining an achieved stage [YS 1.30]
Illness, vy¯adhi, is ﬁrst on the list of obstacles and is signiﬁcant for reli-
gious therapeutics because physical illness is speciﬁcally identiﬁed as
interfering with religious progress. Illness and the other obstacles disturb
the mind and “turn the aspirant away from the direct path of Yoga” [TV
1.30]. Yoga conceptualizes illness in Åyurvedic terms, as disequilibrium
of the body’s three constituent dh¯atus or supports [YBh. 1.30; TV 1.30].
Besides the fact that illness can be an obstacle to religious progress, it can
be conditioned by mental states, which suggests the hygienic dimension
of religious therapeutics in Yoga: the therapeutic value of Yoga for treat-
ing psychophysical problems. Swami Adidevananda asserts:
. . . functional diseases are caused by mental conditions which affect the
nervous system. Maladjustment, insecurity, inordinate ambition, fear,
frustration and similar tensions affect mental conditions. Spiritual psy-
chology properly used at an early stage could arrest the progress of
symptoms. Hence the contribution of Yoga therapeutics should be
properly understood.29
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
103

Swami Adidevananda refers here to Yoga’s efﬁcacy for stabilizing mental
disturbances, which have adverse effects on the body. There is coopera-
tion between the hygienic and soteriological dimensions of the Yogic reli-
gious therapeutic: the religious path of Yoga also has curative power for
ordinary psychophysical maladies.
The companions of the obstacles are the ‘symptoms of distraction’
or vikÓsepas (vi, ‘out,’ ‘asunder’; √kÓsip, ‘to throw’). The theory of vikÓsepas
accords with Yoga’s treatment of mind and body as the primary dimen-
sions of a unitary human entity. The vikÓsepas are:
1. DuÓhkha: suffering or mental distress, conditioned by physical or
mental factors
2. Despair or depression
3. Unsteadiness of the limbs or body
4. Irregular breathing [YS 1.31]
The vikÓsepas link the mental with the physical: for instance, mental dis-
tress has physical manifestations including shallow, irregular, or labored
respiration. Conversely, regulation of the breath can stabilize mental dis-
tress. Yoga prescribes a preventative approach to the vikÓsepas: one-
pointed concentration. Rather than permitting one’s mind to be frag-
mented in several directions, one should practice mental concentration on
a single object or principle in order to achieve one-pointedness, ek¯agrat¯a.
Curing vikÓsepa requires the clariﬁcation or puriﬁcation (pras¯adaÓna) of the
mind, achievable by cultivating compassion, good cheer, and indifference
toward vice; by control of the breath, and other means [YS 1.33–39].
Overcoming the kle´sas is directly related to achievement of sam¯adhi.
Subduing the obstacles, antar¯ay¯aÓh, and eliminating vikÓsepa, distraction,
help develop the concentration necessary for sam¯adhi. The kle´sas contain
the reservoir of karmas or actions, which produce the myriad experiences
in present and future lives [YS 2.12–13]: “the mental ﬁeld becomes a ﬁeld
for the production of the fruit of actions only when is it watered by the
stream of afﬂictions” [TV 2.13]. When the kle´sas are destroyed, the vehi-
cle of karmas cannot produce fruit because their generative power is de-
stroyed. The karmas result in joy or sorrow according to whether their
cause is virtue or vice [YS 2.14], but all is misery to persons who have de-
veloped viveka or the power to discriminate:
PariÓn¯ama-t¯apa-saÓmsk¯ara-duÓhkhair guÓna-vÓrtti-virodh¯ac ca duÓhkham eva
sarvaÓm vivekinaÓh.
104
religious therapeutics

All is suffering to discriminating persons, because of pain resulting
from change, anxiety, and their subliminal impressions (saÓmsk¯aras), and
because of conﬂict between the mind’s activities (vÓrttis) and the basic
constituents of materiality (guÓnas).
YS 2.15
Yoga’s knowledge-based remedy for the dis/ease of human bondage is the
dispersion of ignorance, permitting the dissociation of puruÓsa and
prakÓrti. This is liberation from the pain of the human condition. How is
ignorance to be dispersed? By ‘unwavering discriminative knowing’:
viveka-kh¯ayti [YS 2.26]. ‘Discriminative knowing’ means distinguishing
between the experienced world and Self as experiencer. Viveka-khy¯ati in
turn produces discriminative knowledge: prajñ¯a [YS 2.27].
Yog¯a˙ng¯anuÓsÓt¯an¯ad a´suddhi-kÓsaye jñ¯ana-d¯ıptir ¯a viveka khy¯ateÓh.
By practice of the limbs of Yoga, which destroy impurity, higher
knowledge (jñ¯ana) shines forth, reaching up to discriminative knowing
(viveka-kh¯ayti) [i. e, the power to distinguish Self from materiality].
YS 2.28
Liberative knowledge is not only therapeutic for transcending suffering,
it engenders attainment of the human’s soteriological potential: “The
genuine yogin is a metaphysical doctor, who can not only cure the dis-
eases of the mind, but also who can help us in discovering the possibilities
of human consciousness.”30
On the basis of Yoga’s metaphysical view of the person as a psycho-
physical being at the empirical level, but ultimately an entity of the nature
of pure consciousness, health as wholeness and well-being can be ascribed
of the person as puruÓsa, and the term ‘healing’ may properly denote the
process of liberative self-realization. Yoga practice spontaneously pro-
motes physical and psychophysical health. However, more signiﬁcant
about classical Yoga is the way cultivation of the psychophysical person
and health contributes to ultimate transcendence of the body/mind.
Value Theory and Ethics
Health and the Good in Yoga
Value theory is an aspect of Yogic religious therapeutics that clearly ex-
hibits the reciprocal relation of Yoga’s soteriology and its therapeutic im-
petus. The highest good in the classical Indian systems “is attained when
all impurities are removed and the pure nature of the Self is thoroughly
and permanently apprehended.”31 The means to Yoga’s highest good,
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
105

realization of Self as pure consciousness, is stoppage of the activities of
the mind, and consequent development of vivekaja-jñ¯ana, ‘wisdom born
of discriminative knowledge.’
The stream of mind ﬂows both ways; it ﬂows toward good and it ﬂows
toward evil. That which ﬂows on to perfect independence (kaivalya)
down the plane of discriminative knowledge, is named the stream of
happiness. That which leads to re-birth and ﬂows down the plane of un-
discriminative ignorance, is the stream of sin.
YBh 1.12
The Good in Yoga is that which supports the physical and mental purity
necessary for attainment of liberative knowledge. Speciﬁcally, Yoga’s eth-
ical ideal is vair¯agya, desirelessness.32 The mind’s tendency toward activ-
ity, and the emotions that result, are to be checked by cultivation of
vair¯agya and its companion practice, abhy¯asa: persistent effort to bring
the mind from fragmented activity to a state of “calm one-pointedness
and purity” [TV 1.13]. Yoga’s ethics emphasize sattvic or pure actions
and motives, especially for the sake of calming the mind. Sattva, or pur-
ity, characterizes health-preserving and health-promoting practices.
Ethics is the foundation of the eight limbs of Yoga, and value theory is
integral to religious therapeutics. A person’s practice in matters such as
diet, sleep, hygiene, exercise, and mental attitude constitute a fabric of
daily life, grounded in one’s fundamental values (though behavior is consis-
tent with values to varying degrees). Particular physical and mental disci-
plines incorporate the cultivation of good habits, not just for everyday suc-
cess, but to serve an aim of progressive self-transformation. The ﬁrst limb
of P¯atañjala Yoga is yama, embracing ﬁve self-restraints, which together
constitute the “Great Vow” common to many of the Indian traditions.
First Limb: Moral Self-restraints—Yama
Ahi ˙ms¯a, non-injury, the ﬁrst of the ﬁve moral self-restraints, is “not caus-
ing injury to any living creature, in any way, at any time” [YBh 2.30].
Ahi ˙ms¯a is a fundamental ethical principle in Jainism, Hinduism, and
Buddhism, and in Yoga it is the foundation of all the other ethical re-
straints and observances [YBh 2.30]. The restraints pertain to both atti-
tude and action, and non-injury must be practiced toward all sentient be-
ings including oneself. Injury can result in damage to body, mind,
projects, and/or property. Injury compromises health, and this is one rea-
son health is of concern in ethics. However, health in Yoga’s ethics has
signiﬁcance beyond this. Even though Yoga’s aim is spiritual well-being,
106
religious therapeutics

not mere well-being of body and mind, the well-being that Yoga seeks in
ultimate liberation requires self-discipline of body and mind, and that
self-discipline contributes to psychophysical health. While Yoga’s goal is
religious Self-realization, health is regarded as instrumental to this path;
therefore, to maintain one’s health is an ethical obligation.
Non-healthful practices (such as smoking or inappropriate diet) vio-
late the principle of ahi ˙ms¯a. Even haste can be a form of violence, for
damage to self and/or others may result from rushing to do things with-
out sufﬁcient time. Thus behaviors inciting stress-related syndromes,
such as heart disease, aggravated by a sense of time pressure, violate the
principle of ahi ˙ms¯a, so they are contrary to the good, as conceived by
Yoga. Physician Larry Dossey notes the modern Western cultural presup-
position that linear time is “running out,” and our lives with it. He ex-
plores the medical implications of human response to time-markers: “the
watch, the alarm clock, the morning coffee, and the hundreds of self-
inﬂicted expectations that we build into our daily routine.”
Our sense of time is not only a major determinant in our awareness of
pain, it affects our health by inﬂuencing the development and course of
speciﬁc diseases.
Dossey contends that we suffer from “hurry sickness”:
—expressed as heart disease, high blood pressure, or depression of our
immune function, leading to an increased susceptibility to infection and
cancer. 33
The metaphysical foundations of Yoga’s soteriology counter the distress-
ing and erroneous views that Self is body, and that one’s existence ceases
at physical death. Yoga’s ethical foundation of non-injury is a compre-
hensive discipline implying freedom from all destructiveness, whether
based in ill-will, or in ignorance alone. In terms of personal health main-
tenance, ahiÓms¯a requires adjustment of attitudes and behavior to prevent
direct damage to the body, and avoidance of the mental distress that con-
ditions physical illness.
Satya, truthfulness, the second of the restraints, requires that one nei-
ther express non-truths nor omit truths. The purpose of speech is the com-
munication of knowledge. Speech is to be used for the good of others, not
to injure, so Yoga prohibits speech that is “deceptive, confused, or barren
in knowledge” [YBh 2.30]. As with all yogic ethical principles, along
with preserving others’ well-being, satya serves the purpose of preventing
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
107

disturbances to the mind. For example, untruthfulness often perpetuates
complications engendering distress in self and others. This distress might
have manifestations in the form of physical health-problems, as well as
generating obstructive karmic consequences. Another reason for truth-
fulness is to encourage the optimum functioning of buddhi, the faculty of
discriminative awareness. Buddhi allows one to see beyond illusions, and
its cultivation requires truthfulness in word, thought, and deed. Truthful-
ness is a form of ethical integrity, and this means in yogic terms the inte-
gration of one’s knowledge, values, and action. The practice of truthful-
ness at the mundane level is requisite for grasping truth at the ultimate
level, the truth of puruÓsa as the ultimate real.
Asteya, non-stealing, refers to any kind of misappropriation, whether
of goods, money, or undeserved praise or privilege. Mah¯atma Gandhi
considered any possession of goods beyond those needed for the basic
maintenance of life to be a form of theft, as long as there are persons
whose basic needs remain unmet.34 Gandhi’s thinking informs the idea of
the healthy communities: a community’s well-being depends in part on
each citizen’s having access to adequate resources for a wholesome life.
The Yoga-s¯utras’ commentators emphasize that not just theft, but
any inclination toward misappropriation must be overcome: “Inasmuch
as the functioning of speech and body depend upon the mind, the mental
modiﬁcation is mentioned here as the principle factor” [TV 2.30]. Non-
stealing requires development of one’s awareness of the subtler forms of
misappropriation that may arise in the process of eradicating cruder
forms of dishonesty. Consonant with Yoga’s prescription for cultivation
of consciousness as the means of liberation, truthfulness and non-stealing
demonstrate the function of religious therapeutics to perpetuate one’s
spiritual evolution through puriﬁcatory efforts carried out on the stage of
the body, but with the aim of purifying the consciousness.
Brahmacarya, the fourth yama, is restraint of sensual and especially
of sexual enjoyment. Again, this means not merely abstinence from sen-
sual activities and emotions, but eradication of attachment to them, be-
cause craving various forms of sensual enjoyment disturbs the mind and
causes suffering. The Yoga-s¯utras list beneﬁts of each of the yamas, and
the beneﬁt offered for sexual continence is v¯ırya: ‘vigor’ or heroic life-
energy [YS 2.38]. The practitioner sublimates the body for the sake of
greater spiritual power: vital energy ordinarily discharged in sexual activ-
ity may be rechanneled within a spiritual current. The capability of teach-
ing Yoga to others requires attainment of the power consequent on brah-
macarya [YBh 2.38].
108
religious therapeutics

Aparigraha, non-acquisitiveness, is the ﬁfth and ﬁnal yama. This
principle calls for repudiation of all possessions and circumstances not
essential for the maintenance of the body. Here again, the health-related
warrants underlying this principle are preservation of others’ well-being,
and elimination of disturbances to the mind. In this context, one should
reduce one’s concerns about the acquisition, maintenance, and loss of
material possessions. Spiritually, non-acquisitiveness breaks the bonds of
identiﬁcation of self with possessions, and the pleasures and pains that go
with gaining, having, and losing them.
Second Limb: Moral Commitments—Niyama
Íauca, purity, is of utmost importance in Yoga. Purity means physical
cleanliness, mental clarity, and moral rightness. Purity in physical cleanli-
ness—internal and external—is achieved by bathing, and by various
‘washings’ with air in pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, and with water and other means in
yogic physical puriﬁcation techniques.35 Especially important is “washing
away the impurities of the mind” [YBh 2.32]. In ordinary human life, im-
purity is pervasive, and yogic religious therapeutics replace impure physi-
cal and mental materials and actions with increasingly pure ones. What is
purity, in a yogic sense? The guÓna called sattva is purity itself. To purify is
to support the predomination of sattva, the guÓna that is the nature of
buddhi, the power of intelligence. Functionally, something is pure to the
extent that it permits the manifestation of an entity’s true nature as
puruÓsa, and impure to the extent that it supports entanglement in prakÓrti,
thus impeding the expression of puruÓsa.
Purity may be understood in its various applications in terms of the
three ‘bodies’ or ‘vehicles’ composing the person [VC 87–97]. The gross
body is made pure particularly by consumption of sattvic food and drink.
The Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a classiﬁes types of foods according to the three guÓnas
[BhG 17.7–10]. Sattvic food is light, fresh, and nourishing, and includes
grains, seeds, fruit, vegetables, and dairy foods, according to their agree-
ability to a given person’s constitution. Sattvic food promotes health,
¯arogya [BhG 17.8]. The stimulating rajasic foods are very hot, bitter,
sour, dry, salty, or excessively spiced, and include beverages containing
caffeine. Rajasic foods, the G¯ıt¯a says, cause pain and sickness, ¯amaya
[BhG 17.9]. Tamasic foods promote inertia and restrict pr¯aÓna, the vital
life-energy. Tamasic foods include ﬂesh, alcohol, and fermented foods
such as vinegar, and foods of any type that are stale or spoiled.36 R. S.
Khare identiﬁes two main Hindu formulations of the relationship of
food, Self, and ultimate reality. The G¯ıt¯a represents the position that
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
109

“You eat what you are.” In other words, dietary preferences reﬂect a
person’s nature as sattvic, rajasic, or tamasic.
The second formulation bases itself on the upaniÓsadic instruction—pure
nourishment leads to pure mind or nature (ah¯ara´suddhau sattva´suddhi;
see Hume, Principal UpaniÓsads, 1985, 262). As a corollary therefore, a
healthy body is considered to be a byproduct of discriminating and con-
trolled nourishment. Diseases follow from ﬂaws—moral, mental, and
physical.37
Khare’s analysis corroborates the idea of religious therapeutics in the
context of Indian gastrosemantics. He refers to the work of Hindu holy
persons who dispense healing foods and herbs:
Over time, they acquire the dual therapeutic-spiritual authority which
even vaidyas (or “doctors”) cannot dispute. . . . If they are known to
cure incurable bodily diseases, they also treat the “disease” of transmi-
gration—saÓms¯ara (also called bhavaroga).38
Yoga philosophy holds that the very material of the physical body is com-
posed of the guÓnas obtained in the diet, and consonant with the
upaniÓsadic dietary principle, “You are what you eat,” Yoga’s goal of die-
tary puriﬁcation is the actual replacement of the body’s coarser material
with more reﬁned material.
The subtle body is puriﬁed by replacing disturbed thoughts and
emotions with more reﬁned and subtle ones. Puriﬁcation is a self-
perpetuating process, because the more pure body and mind become, the
more they incline toward pure substances, thoughts, and emotions. An
important puriﬁcatory practice for the subtle vehicle is the use of man-
tras. Mantras are sacred sounds, the primordial one being AUM (Om),
the designator of Î´svara [YS 1.27]. The vibrations experienced in produc-
ing or hearing or meditating on mantras permit an inﬂux of spiritual
force, which over time tend to remove obscurity from the subtle body. In
addition to their vibratory powers, some mantras have meanings that are
puriﬁcatory insofar as the practitioner’s ignorance is dispelled by them.
The causal or karmic body is the locus of karmic activity; it is the
body constituted of all the consequences—good and bad—of a person’s
actions in the present life and prior ones. Puriﬁcation in the domain of
the causal or karmic body means burning up the residue of past actions
so that no new consequences result, and so that no new actions are taken
productive of further karmic results. For a yogin, karmas are “neither
white nor black” [YS 4.7], that is, neither good nor evil. They are not
110
religious therapeutics

‘good,’ for the yogin gives up the fruit of action, and not ‘bad,’ because he
does not perform actions [YBh. 4.7]. Yoga’s treatment of the mental and
the physical as reciprocally related dimensions of the unitary person is ev-
ident in the range of applications of ´sauca. Purity is a necessary condition
for psychophysical health, and the spiritual purity supported by physical
health is in turn instrumental for the ultimate healing of liberation.
SaÓmtoÓsa, the second element of niyama, means contentment, “the
absence of desire to obtain more of the necessities of life than one already
possesses” (YBh 2.32). SaÓmtoÓsa means absence of greed, resulting in
calmness and serenity regardless of external or internal circumstances.
Such contentment is one of the determinants of mental health. Content-
ment is a means to the end of mental equanimity, the state wherein mind
is without disturbance, and Self-nature can be realized. To practice con-
tentment is more than stilling mental disturbances as they intrude; it en-
tails preventing their arising.
Tapas, translated as austerity, self-discipline, or puriﬁcation, “con-
sists in endurance of the pairs of opposites” such as heat and cold, and
the desire to eat [YBh 2.32]. The verb √tap means ‘to heat,’ and tapas
may be likened to the puriﬁcation of metals by intense heat so that the
dross is burned away and the pure metal remains. Tapas involves fasting
and observance of various vows, such as the vow of silence. Tapas may
also be performed by practicing pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama. Tapas ordinarily involves
self-discipline of the physical body, with the intention of weakening the
association of the physical body with consciousness, making possible an
awareness of the body as ‘not-self.’ Impurity leads to illness—physical,
mental, and spiritual—and tapas represents practices that not only re-
move impurities but contribute to endurance and non-susceptibility to
help make the body/mind a ﬁt vehicle for the spiritual journey.
Sv¯adh¯aya means self-education. Adhy¯aya means study or education;
its verbal root is √dh¯ı, ‘to think.’ The preﬁx sva, ‘self,’ underscores the
s¯adhaka’s individual effort toward self-realization by exerting his or her
intelligence. Sv¯adh¯aya includes study of scriptures, pondering of religious
and philosophical questions, recitation of mantras, and, ultimately, leav-
ing the texts and disciplines behind and gaining knowledge from within
oneself.
Î´svara-praÓnidh¯ana, surrender to Î´svara or God, means “the doing of
all actions to fulﬁll the purpose of the Great Teacher” [YBh 2.32]. Dedi-
cating oneself to the will of God destroys the ego through merging the in-
dividual with the sacred, the all-embracing consciousness. This niyama is
embodied in the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a’s prescriptions of ni´sk¯ama karma, acting
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
111

without desire, and Karma Yoga, the yoga of action: acting to carry out
one’s responsibility without attachment to the good or bad results of the
action, thus serving divine will rather than one’s own. Surrender to Î´svara
may also take the form of Bhakti Yoga, the yoga of devotion, where
union is achieved through love of God. Whether accomplished by the
yoga of action or the yoga of devotion, surrender to God produces disso-
lution of the ‘I’ or asmit¯a and thus supports sam¯adhi, enlightened con-
sciousness devoid of the traps of egoism.
Yoga’s prescriptions for reconditioning the body and mind widen
the range of their adaptability, making the practitioner’s body, mind, and
senses less vulnerable to the “pairs of opposites” (e.g., heat and cold, joy
and sorrow) that keep one mired in physicality and separated from one’s
true nature. Crawford notes that matter is not equated with evil in Yoga,
for “both the design and function of prakÓrti are aimed at the liberation of
puruÓsa.”39 Yet one of Yoga’s vital concerns is self-understanding in rela-
tion to the material aspects of oneself and the world. The eight limbs of
Yoga map out a progressive journey of subduing one’s subjugation to ma-
teriality and its accompanying physical distractions, mental fragmenta-
tion, and emotional ups and downs. The foundation of Yoga as a reli-
gious therapeutic is a system of ethics that governs relations among
persons, but whose basis is the individual’s mastery of physical and men-
tal dispositions and actions that interfere with stilling the mind.
Physical Practice
The Soteriological Role of Body and Health in Yoga
The soteriological role of the body in Yoga concerns reﬁning, disciplin-
ing, and utilizing the body/mind complex to make it a less obstructive
factor and more suitable instrument for the spirit’s purer expression of
itself.
Spiritual awareness is invariably preceded by physical health and men-
tal hygiene. The latter are the means for the former. So Yoga may be de-
scribed as a science of spiritual healing. Yoga methods are superior to
other methods in so far as they take man in his totality and do not deal
with him superﬁcially.40
Health of the body and non-attachment to physicality are cultivated for
spiritual progress. Practice of Yoga’s ethics, psychophysical disciplines,
and procedures for meditation spontaneously promote health, but health
is a help to spiritual attainment, and is not itself the goal. The physically
112
religious therapeutics

based practices of yoga are ¯asana or postures, pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama or control of
vital energy by control of breath, and praty¯ah¯ara, withdrawal of the
senses. Their chief purpose is preparation of the practitioner for Yoga’s
ﬁnal three limbs: concentration, meditation, and the higher conscious-
ness of sam¯adhi, which we may translate as ‘meditative trance.’ The key
textual source for study of the external limbs of Yoga is Section Two of
the Yoga-s¯utras, S¯adhana-p¯ada. S¯adhana means ‘practice,’ ‘discipline,’ or
‘means,’ and pertains to practice conducive to the attainment of a goal.
Its verbal root is sadh, ‘to accomplish one’s goal,’ or ‘to hit the target’
(also the root of s¯adhu, ‘holy man,’ one who has achieved the aim). The
term s¯adhaka refers to a practitioner, a person who undertakes s¯adhana
with the purpose of accomplishing an aim, particularly a spiritual aim.
Practice of the whole system of eight-fold Yoga is a s¯adhana, but the term
s¯adhana can also refer to a particular practice, such as ¯asana.
Third Limb: Postures—Åsana
Åsana (√as, ‘to sit’) literally means ‘sitting’ or ‘posture.’ Only three of the
196 verses of the Yoga-s¯utras deal with ¯asana.41 According to Patañjali, the
two criteria for proper performance of postures are that they must be
steady (sthira) and comfortable (sukham) [YS 2.46]. The main purpose of
¯asana is to render the physical body non-disturbing to the mind. This has
two primary applications. First, in the stages of meditation of the sixth,
seventh, and eighth limbs, the mind’s activity is successively restricted, and
the body is to remain as externally motionless and internally undistracted
as possible. The ¯asanas are designed so that the body may feel comfortable
and thus for the duration of meditation be of no concern to the mind, so
that the s¯adhaka’s consciousness may take priority in his awareness and
being. Åsana’s other main function is to develop the body’s endurance and
equilibrium. Practice of ¯asana helps one develop non-attachment to the
body and objects of physical enjoyment, and increased capacity for carry-
ing out the responsibilities of life and the yogic path.
Åsana’s role in meditation exempliﬁes the soteriological role of the
body in Yoga: physical well-being is not cultivated as an end in itself, but
because reﬁned awareness and discipline of one’s physical nature contrib-
ute to transcending the limitations of physicality and the ignorance and
suffering that attend it. Yoga accounts for the human condition from its
lowest state of being mired in ignorance and evil, to its highest potential
state: realization of its nature as pure consciousness. Yoga is a practical
system and provides for individuals to begin the path of Yoga at their own
level of awareness and functioning. For most persons, self-understanding
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
113

and action is deeply rooted in physicality, and Yoga makes use of this fact
by providing physical disciplines effective for gaining mastery and insight
with respect to one’s Self-nature.
Performance of ¯asana also develops endurance and equilibrium. En-
durance is the power to act in a sustained way, being ‘ﬁt’ or suited to
tasks requiring a continued application of effort and concentration. En-
durance refers to an individual’s sustained functioning without symp-
toms of debilitation. The term ‘endurance’ may suggest a person’s appli-
cation of sustained energy directed toward an aim, whether religious or,
for instance, athletic. Equilibrium is another signiﬁcant determinant of
health, and this concept is applicable at a number of levels of functioning.
In Åyurvedic medicine, equilibrium signiﬁes a health-supporting relation
among the doÓsas. In physiological terms, equilibrium pertains to condi-
tions such as coordinated nervous and muscular control for maintaining
the body’s posture, and commensurate intake and output of substances
by organs and systems. Psychological equilibrium concerns a person’s re-
silience in maintaining a stable affective state, and functioning effectively
when confronted with difﬁculties. Equilibrium is treated in the Yoga-
s¯utras in terms of ‘the pairs of opposites.’ The mastering of ¯asana pro-
duces resistance to assault by the pairs of opposites, or dvandvas [YS
2.47–48]. The dvandvas, such as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, may
be experienced physically and/or mentally, and they disturb the mind’s
equilibrium. Reducing one’s distraction by the dvandvas is integral to
stilling the vÓrttis or activities of the mind.
Åsana is mastered by ‘relaxation of effort’ and ‘meditation on the
inﬁnite’: ananta [YS 2.47]. Ananta literally means without end (a, ‘not’;
anÓta, ‘end’) and can refer to Î´svara. Relaxation of effort means ceasing to
give mental attention to maintenance of a posture, so that the body is un-
disturbed and the conscious mind is gradually freed from agitation by
physical sensation. Relaxation is a determinant of health, both intrinsi-
cally, as a state of relative freedom from unpleasant tension, and instru-
mentally, as a capacity of resilience that helps one tolerate and recover
from the strain of effort.
In ¯asana the body must become able to maintain physical stability
and to counter deviation from its position during meditation. Iyengar dis-
cusses ¯asana’s unifying functions as follows:
Though the practitioner is a subject and the ¯asana the object, the ¯asana
should become the subject and the doer the object, so that sooner or
later the doer, the instrument (the body) and the ¯asana become one. . . .
114
religious therapeutics

The whole body is involved in this process, with the senses, mind, intel-
ligence, consciousness and self.42
He describes ¯asana’s two aspects as pose and repose. Posing is acting to
arrange the body in a particular posture. Reposing is reﬂecting on the
pose and readjusting it:
. . . so that the various limbs and parts of the body are positioned in
their places in a proper order and feel rested and soothed, and the mind
experiences the tranquility and calmness of bones, joints, muscles, ﬁ-
bres, and cells.43
Health of the physical body at the level of the ‘body (literally, ‘sheath’) of
breath or life-force’—pr¯aÓnamaya ko´sa—is, according to Iyengar, gained
at the level of the cells, which he regards as possessing memory and intel-
ligence. To perform ¯asanas properly entails the elimination of dualities
between body and mind, mind and puruÓsa. Through the health of the
body, the mind and puruÓsa are brought closer. The purpose of ¯asana is
“to lead the mind from attachment to the body towards the light of the
soul.”44 In Iyengar’s “Tree of Yoga” ¯asana is symbolized by branches in
their various positions. The roots of the tree represent yama (the moral
self-restraints), and the trunk is niyama (the moral commitments). The
fourth part of Yoga is expansion of the vital energy, pr¯aÓna, through con-
trol of the breath. Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama is represented by the leaves of the tree,
which permit the tree’s respiration.45
Swami Vivekananda (1863–1902), who was instrumental in intro-
ducing Hinduism to the West, gives brief consideration to ¯asana in his
lectures on classical or R¯aja-Yoga. He recommends that one choose a
meditation posture one can maintain for a long time, with the spinal col-
umn held straight and free, and the weight of the body supported by the
ribs. Vivekananda compares ¯asana in classical Yoga to HaÓtha Yoga,
which emphasizes the health and strength of the physical body. Health in
R¯aja Yoga, he reminds us, is only a means to an end, since an unhealthy
or unﬁt body is the ﬁrst of the obstructions to Yoga practice.46
The effects of ¯asana are subtle and powerful. Practice of ¯asana in-
clines one toward more wholesome pursuits. The awareness and vitality
granted by ¯asana inﬂuence a person’s choices in avoiding debilitating in-
fluences in a range of contexts, for example, unethical dealings, impure
foods, and the extremes of sloth or excessive activity and stress. Cultiva-
tion of good habits, which in turn improve one’s future dispositions, is
well exempliﬁed by ¯asana’s soteriological role for the Yogin. Another
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
115

result of the regular practice of ¯asana is a more acute awareness of one’s
body and its functioning. Daily ¯asana provides an opportunity to take ac-
count of physical strengths and weaknesses, ﬂexibility, and areas of im-
peded energy. Throughout the day, one may spontaneously notice her pos-
ture and circulation, and adjust the body to a closer approximation of the
excellent posture and circulation promoted during the actual performance
of ¯asana. Circulation refers not just to physical substances such as blood,
oxygen, lymph, and chyle, but to pr¯aÓna, the vital energy of the cosmos and
the living organism. Åsana “clears the nervous system, causes the energy
to ﬂow in the system without obstruction and ensures an even distribution
of that energy during pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama.”47 The practice of Yoga is engaged not
only while one does ¯asana, pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, and meditation, but is a constant
commitment. Åsana serves to reﬁne one’s physical nature to be increas-
ingly attuned with the subtle pr¯aÓnic force in oneself, which may be likened
to a current within the great ocean of conscious energy that is puruÓsa.
The soteriological role of the body in Yoga is evident in ¯asana’s
power as a means for one to appropriate and integrate the conditions of
his physical being. This is consonant with Deutsch’s presentation of the
body as an ‘achievement concept,’ and personhood as a matter of inte-
gration and achievement.48 In Yoga, the selfhood that the s¯adhaka seeks
to achieve is not that of self as embodied person, but of that of one’s true
nature as consciousness. Åsana helps the physical body to reveal and
awaken the power of consciousness that infuses the material body, thus
potentiating the discrimination of puruÓsa from prakÓrti.
In addition to its soteriological efﬁcacy, ¯asana has physically thera-
peutic applications. Åyurvedic physician Vasant Lad has shown that
Yoga has value for both prevention and cure of illness:
Yoga brings man to the natural state of tranquility which is equilibrium.
Thus, yogic exercises have both preventive and curative value. Yogic
practices help to bring natural order and balance to the neuro-hormones
and the metabolism and thus provide fortiﬁcation against stress. Yogic
practices for the treatment of stress and stress-related disorders (such as
hypertension, diabetes, asthma and obesity) are remarkably effective.49
Lad lists appropriate ¯asanas for various ailments,50 as does Iyengar in
Light on Yoga.51 An article on ¯asana in the journal Brahmavadin discusses
the importance of health for the achievement of spiritual aspirations and
identiﬁes the joint medical and soteriological function of ¯asana:
The aim of the healing art is twofold inasmuch as it renders the body
impenetrable to disease from the outside and at the same time it does
116
religious therapeutics

not allow the vital currents in the body to leak out and get exhausted.
The postures may be said to be helpful in both these directions.52
The cooperation of healing and salvation by yogic means is warranted
from earliest times in the Hindu tradition: The Atharva-veda says, “With
Yoga I drive far away the sin of thy soul and the disease of thy body” [AV
6:91.1].
Fourth Limb: Regulation of Vital Energy Through Breath—Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama
Practice of various ¯asanas, provided that they are suitable ¯asanas for a
particular person, and correctly performed, contributes to regulation of
the vital energy, pr¯aÓna, and so leads naturally to proper performance of
the next stage of Yoga, pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama. Patañjali deﬁnes pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama as “the
cessation of the motion of inhalation and exhalation” [YS 2.49–50].53
The word pr¯aÓna is derived from the verbal root √an, ‘to breathe,’ while
the root √pra, means ‘to ﬁll.’ Pr¯aÓna means breath, but, more important,
it means vital energy, life-force, spirit, and power. The word pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama is
composed of pr¯aÓna and ayama, ‘extending’ or ‘controlling’ √yam, ‘to
reach’). Vivekananda explains that while pr¯aÓna is often taken to mean
breath, it is actually the energy of the cosmos, and the energy in each liv-
ing body. The motion of the lungs is the most visible manifestation of
pr¯aÓna, and control of the breath is the most direct means of gaining
awareness and control of the pr¯aÓna in oneself.54
According to Vivekananda, pr¯aÓna is the origin of all energy, “the in-
ﬁnite, omnipresent manifesting power of this universe.”55 In the domain
of physics, pr¯aÓna manifests as forces such as motion, gravitation, and
magnetism. In the human body, “It is the pr¯aÓna manifesting as the actions
of the body, as the nerve currents, as thought force.”56 To get hold of the
subtle vibration of pr¯aÓna in oneself is the means, Vivekananda says, of
grasping the whole of pr¯aÓna that is the energy source of the whole uni-
verse, and into which everything resolves at the end of each cycle of
time.57
Pr¯aÓna and its manifestation as breath is crucial for inquiry into body
and religiousness. The English word spirit derives from the Latin, sp¯ır¯are,
‘to breathe.’58 The word ‘spirit’ connotes vital breath, as does the Sanskrit
pr¯aÓna. Like pr¯aÓna, ‘spirit’ suggests incorporeality, and the principle that
gives life to the body. As the life-principle, and in its connotation of im-
materiality, spirit is aligned with divine entities and with the sacred. The
‘spiritual’ is the sacred; human ‘inspiration,’ the drawing of breath, is the
constant sign of our participation in the sacred power of the universe.
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
117

In Western concepts of person, ‘spirit’ can mean a mediating force
between a person’s body and soul. In physiological terms, breath is sub-
ject to both voluntary and involuntary control. Breathing prevails in our
waking, sleeping, and even unconscious states, yet it may be controlled in
its depth, timing, and quality. Yoga identiﬁes breath as an effective
psychophysiological bridge to gaining control of the movement of the
subtle energy, pr¯aÓna—the energy funding the mind’s activities—and thus
to achievement of Yoga’s goal, citta-vÓrtti-nirodha: calming the vÓrttis, or
‘turnings’ of the mind.
To illustrate the function of pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, Swami Vivekananda tells a
parable about a king’s minister whom the king imprisoned in a high
tower. The minister asked his wife to bring to the tower a beetle, some
honey, and some silk thread, pack thread or string, twine, and rope.
The husband ordered her to attach the silken thread ﬁrmly to the beetle,
then to smear its horns with a drop of honey, and to set it free on the
wall of the tower, with its head pointing upwards. She obeyed all these
instructions, and the beetle started on its long journey. Smelling the
honey ahead it crept slowly onwards, in the hope of reaching the honey,
until at last it reached the top of the tower, when the minister grabbed
the beetle and got possession of the silken thread. He told his wife to tie
the other end to the pack thread, and after he had drawn up the pack
thread, he repeated the process with the stout twine, and lastly with the
rope. The rest was easy. The minister descended from the tower by
means of the rope, and made his escape. In this body of ours the breath
motion is the “silken thread”; by laying hold of and learning to control
it we grasp the pack thread of the nerve currents, and from those the
stout twine of our thoughts, and lastly the rope of pr¯aÓna, controlling
which we reach freedom.59
In the most basic terms, pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama involves stopping the breath for some
amount of time between inhalation and exhalation. Ordinary breathing
is erratic, varying with an individual’s mental and physical states.
Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama serves to steady the mind and nerve currents by controlling
the breath, thus controlling the energy of the body/mind system.
To bring under the inﬂuence of the will both the physical and mental
conditions by introducing rhythm into them is the method of the exer-
cise of pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama.60
Iyengar explains: “Normally the breath is unrestrained and irregular. Ob-
serving these variations, and conditioning the mind to control the inﬂow,
outﬂow, and retention of the breath in a regular, rhythmic pattern, is
pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama.”61 The technique of stilling the breath is called kumbhaka.
Kumbha means ‘jar,’ ‘vessel,’ or ‘receptacle’: the body and particularly
118
religious therapeutics

the lungs are the receptacle for pr¯aÓna. In puraka (√p¯ur, ‘to ﬁll’), the lungs
are ﬁlled with air and the breath is held. In recaka (√rik, ‘to empty’), air
is exhaled from the lungs and breathing is suspended [TV 2.49].
B¯ahy¯abhyantara-stambha-vÓrttir de´sak¯ala-saÓmhky¯abhiÓh paridÓrÓsÓto d¯ırgha-
s¯ukÓsmaÓh.
Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama’s modiﬁcations—external [cessation of breath prior to in-
halation], internal [cessation of breath prior to exhalation], and restrained
[restraint of both of these by a single effort]—are regulated by place,
time, and number, thus becoming progressively prolonged and subtle.
YS 2.50
Puraka is ‘external’ pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, and recaka is ‘internal.’ ‘Restrained’
means cessation of both of these ‘by a single effort’ [YBh 2.50].
Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama’s ‘regulation by place’ pertains to directing pr¯aÓna to particular
parts of the body. ‘Regulation by time’ refers to ratios of time for the
three parts of pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama: inhalation, exhalation, and suspension of
breath. Various techniques and ratios of inhalation, exhalation, and re-
tention of breath constitute the different forms of pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, and these
variations serve different purposes for individual practitioners.62 Gradu-
ally pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama becomes more “prolonged and subtle” [YS 2.50]. V¯acas-
pati explains:
This pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama becomes of long duration when it takes up greater
space [measured by the effect of the breath outside the body and the sen-
sation of it within the body] and time. . . . It is subtle, because it is
known by a very subtle trance (sam¯adhi), not because it becomes weak.
TV 2.50
The yogin’s acute awareness and command of pr¯aÓna may progress beyond
the external, internal, and restrained forms, to the fourth and highest form
of pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, by which, Patañjali says, “the covering of light is dissolved”
[YS 2.51–52]. This covering is “that by which the sattva of the thinking
substance is covered, in other words, hindrances and evil” [TV 2.52].
Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama puriﬁes the nad¯ıs or energy channels of the body, and ul-
timately helps to purify the mind of its restless activity, confusion, and
bondage to matter. I. K. Taimni, in his translation of the Yoga-s¯utras,
gives the following simile to convey the effects of one form of pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama,
alternate nostril breathing (Anuloma Viloma), on the pr¯aÓnic currents in
the pr¯aÓnamaya-ko´sa or body of breath:
When we breathe normally the pr¯aÓnic currents follow their natural
course. When we breathe alternately through the two nostrils their nor-
mal ﬂow is disturbed in some way. The effect may be likened to the ﬂow
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
119

of water in a pipe. When the water is ﬂowing in one direction placidly,
silt and other things may be deposited at the bottom and are not dis-
turbed to any marked extent by the water. But try to force the water in
opposite directions alternately and you at once disturb the deposit, and if
the process is continued long enough the pipe gets cleaned ultimately.63
Each of the ﬁve pr¯aÓnas or v¯ayus, vital ‘breaths,’ ‘airs,’ or ‘forces,’ is re-
sponsible for functions within a particular region of the body, as shown
in the table below. Ap¯ana v¯ayu, the ‘downward air’ also has the meaning
of displaced pr¯aÓna. When a person is unsteady, confused, or otherwise
disturbed, his pr¯aÓna is not conﬁned within him, but is scattered beyond
his body. A yogin, on the other hand, is “one whose pr¯aÓna is within the
body.”64 Ap¯ana v¯ayu can also refer to impurities in the body, which can be
reduced at the subtle level of pr¯aÓnic energy by the cleansing force of
pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama. Invoking the HaÓtha Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a’s image of the center of
the body as ‘the seat-of-ﬁre’ [HYP 3.65–66], Desikachar maintains that
deﬁlements in the body interfere with pr¯aÓna entering the body. On inha-
lation, pr¯aÓna in the air surrounding the body is drawn into the body
where it meets the ap¯ana or impure air. On exhalation, the ap¯ana moves
toward the pr¯aÓna. The powers of respiration, digestion, and metabolism
in the center of the body are likened to ﬂames, and the energy of pr¯aÓna in
120
religious therapeutics 
The Five V¯ayus or Vital Forces
Ud¯ana V¯ayu: Rising Air
Operates between throat and top of head, responsible for processes
including speech.
Pr¯aÓna V¯ayu: Vital Air
Operates between throat and navel, controls, respiration and
circulation.
Sam¯ana V¯ayu: Equal Air (carries nutriment, etc., equally to all parts of body)
Operates between navel and heart; its main responsibility is con-
trol of digestion.
Vy¯ana V¯ayu: Pervading Air
Operates throughout the whole body, assisting other v¯ayus. It controls
body movement, gross nerves, and the subtle n¯ad¯ıs or energy channels.
Ap¯ana V¯ayu: Downward Air
Operates from navel to soles of feet; controls excretion, and sexual
and reproductive functions.
YBh 3.3865

this region in effect ‘burns’ the deﬁling ap¯ana upon inhalation. Equally
important is the expulsion of this burnt residue, achieved by exhalation.
The diverse patterns of inhalation, exhalation, and retention of breath
maximize pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama’s puriﬁcatory functions.66 In classical Yoga,
pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama demonstrates the soteriological role of the body by its ca-
pacity to increase the health and vitality of the body, and to reduce the
citta-vÓrttis or ‘mind-waves,’ preparing the s¯adhaka for attainment of the
higher states of consciousness in the ﬁnal three ‘inner limbs’ of Yoga,
which are progressively deeper stages of meditation.
Pr¯aÓna is integral to Yoga’s understanding of health. Disease can be
characterized in terms of disturbance in the balance of pr¯aÓna in the body,
“so the best way for keeping the body free from disease is by preserving an
even circulation of pr¯aÓna.”67 Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama’s chief purpose is to gain control
of pr¯aÓna for the sake of attaining enlightened consciousness. Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama
concentrates pr¯aÓna within the body by stilling the mind through regulat-
ing the pr¯aÓna-carrying breath. Reciprocally, yogic mental culture produces
greater mental clarity, thereby reducing distress, reﬂected in regulation of
the operations of breath and pr¯aÓna in the body. Eliade writes that
pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama stabilizes physiological unevenness, and is the gateway to a
deeper mode of being:
Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, we should say, is an attention directed on one’s organic life,
a knowledge through action, a calm and lucid entrance into the very es-
sence of life.68
Fifth Limb: Withdrawal of the Senses—Praty¯ah¯ara
Praty¯ah¯ara is the transition between the ﬁrst four preparatory compo-
nents of Yoga and the ﬁnal three meditative components. The word is
composed of the adjective prati, ‘against,’ ‘return,’ or ‘withdrawal,’ and
hara, ‘bearing’ or ‘bringing’ (√hri, ‘to hold,’ ‘to carry’). A technical term
in Yoga, praty¯ah¯ara refers speciﬁcally to withdrawal of the senses from
their objects. Desikachar suggests a ﬁgurative way to interpret the term:
¯ah¯ara means ‘food,’ so praty¯ah¯ara suggests “withdrawing from that on
which we are feeding.”69
Sva-viÓsay¯asaÓmprayoge citta-svar¯up¯anuk¯ara ivendriy¯aÓn¯am praty¯ah¯araÓh.
Withdrawal of the senses (praty¯ah¯ara) is that in which the senses,
by not contacting their objects, imitate, so to speak, the nature of the
mind.
YS 2.54
TataÓh param¯a va´syatendriy¯aÓn¯am.
From this is gained ultimate mastery over the senses.
YS 2.55
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
121

The Yoga-bh¯aÓsya explains what is meant by the senses imitating the na-
ture of the mind: “The senses are restrained, like the mind, when the mind
is restrained” [YBh 2.54]. Although the Yoga-s¯utras treat praty¯ah¯ara in
S¯adhana-p¯ada, the chapter on practice, praty¯ah¯ara shares with the
antar¯a˙ngas (the three ‘internal limbs’ of Yoga-meditation: dhy¯ana,
dh¯araÓna, and sam¯adhi) the characteristic that it arises only when neces-
sary conditions are met, rather than being a practice that one can choose
to perform, as one can perform ¯asana and pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama.
That which is attempted by praty¯ah¯ara may therefore be said to be the
destruction of [the mind’s] natural tendencies and the intrinsic desire on
its part to rush out and attach itself to objects, and thereby to bring it
under the control of higher and spiritual faculties. . . . Praty¯ah¯ara is not
therefore the exercise of merely withdrawing the energies working in the
senses and centering them in the mind, but of withdrawing the mind
from its tendencies to join the senses, and bring its faculties of feeling
and willing under control.70
Praty¯ah¯ara consists in the senses ceasing their usual functions of con-
tacting objects of perception and transmitting sensory information to the
mind. Instead, the mind is fully involved with its object, such as the per-
formance of pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, and the usual link between the mind and senses
is severed. Praty¯ah¯ara, like the components preceding it, utilizes and sub-
limates the physical body, speciﬁcally, the sensory capacities, to prepare
for Yoga’s higher stages of meditative consciousness.
Cultivation of Consciousness
The Polarity of Sam¯adhi and Vy¯adhi (Illness)
Of the many themes that can be explored regarding yogic meditation and
higher consciousness, this study of yogic religious therapeutics empha-
sizes the polarity of sam¯adhi or higher consciousness, and vy¯adhi, illness.
Integration is a pivotal concept in the opposition of sam¯adhi (whose na-
ture is ek¯agrat¯a, one-pointed concentration) and vy¯adhi, which connotes
fragmentation. The word sam¯adhi means ‘putting together’ or integrat-
ing. It is formed of the preﬁx sam, ‘with’ or ‘together,’ and the verbal root
√dh¯a, ‘to put,’ ‘to give.’ Vy¯adhi on the other hand is composed of the
same verbal root √dh¯a, preceded by the preﬁx vi, ‘out,’ ‘asunder.’ Thus
vy¯adhi literally means ‘to put out’: to disconcert or fragment. Illness is a
dis-integrating hindrance to spiritual progress because it keeps one
oriented to the physical body and contradicts the recovery of primordial
122
religious therapeutics

Unity, named by Eliade the supreme goal of life in the Indian tradition,
and “a dream that has obsessed the human spirit from the beginnings of
its history.”71 Yoga seeks to counteract dis-integration, whose forms in-
clude physical illness and mental distress, to help bring about states of
higher knowing and being. Sam¯adhi is the quintessential form of reinte-
gration—the recovery of Unity. The polarity of integrated higher knowl-
edge and states of disability opens perspectives on meanings of well-
being, both psychophysical and spiritual. Vy¯adhi implies dis-integration
or fragmentation. Yoga counteracts dis-integration, which manifests as
physical and mental dysfunction and distress.
Yoga’s ﬁnal three limbs or components are called antar¯a˙nga, the
‘internal limbs’ (antar, ‘inner’; a˙nga, ‘limb’), as distinguished from the
ﬁrst ﬁve ‘external limbs,’ bahir¯a˙nga (bahis, ‘outer’) [YS 3.7]. The internal
limbs are progressively pure meditative stages. In Yoga’s inner limbs, the
mind’s activity is conﬁned within increasingly focused spheres: ﬁrst on a
particular object of concentration (dh¯araÓn¯a), then with unwavering
awareness of the object in the state of meditation (dhy¯ana), and ﬁnally, in
the eight stages of sam¯adhi, in increasing meditative absorption.
Dh¯araÓn¯a, dhy¯ana, and sam¯adhi are together called saÓmyama, by which
one attains prajñ¯a: higher, liberative knowledge [YS 3.4,5].
Sixth Limb: Concentration—Dh¯araÓn¯a
Åsana and pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama are practiced to reduce distractions arising from
the body/mind, and praty¯ah¯ara consists in elimination of mental distrac-
tion from sensory sources. On the foundation of these preliminary com-
ponents, dh¯araÓn¯a is a further reﬁnement of consciousness undertaken to
conﬁne the mind’s activity within particular boundaries.
De´sa-bandha´s cittasya dh¯araÓn¯a.
Concentration (dh¯araÓn¯a) is the conﬁning of the mind to one place
[i.e., to an object of meditation].
YS 3.1
The word dh¯araÓna is also derived from the verbal root √dh¯a, which has
meanings including ‘to hold,’ and refers to holding a chosen object in the
mind. Objects that may be chosen for concentration include points in the
body, mantras or sacred sounds, or an image of a deity or revered master
[TV 3.1]. Concentration on an object in dh¯araÓn¯a is not worship of the ob-
ject or what it represents; the object merely serves as a single focal point
for the mind’s complete attention.
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
123

Dh¯araÓn¯a is an ek¯agrat¯a a ‘ﬁxing on a single point,’ but it differs from
the ek¯agrat¯a of sam¯adhi states, for in dh¯araÓn¯a, one-pointedness serves the
purpose of comprehension—highly focused, but nevertheless ordinary
subject-object comprehension.72 Ek¯agrat¯a in the stages of sam¯adhi, how-
ever, evolves from one-pointed subject-object comprehension to the
meditator’s absorption in the object of meditation. Yoga’s wisdom about
human nature is evident in its inclusion of dh¯araÓn¯a, for dh¯araÓn¯a provides
limited freedom for the mind to consider various aspects of the object of
concentration, rather than demanding immediate and complete restric-
tion of the mind’s activity. The s¯adhaka’s aims in dh¯araÓn¯a are two: to re-
duce the frequency of the mind’s wandering from the object of concentra-
tion, and to increase the magnitude of one’s alertness and awareness.
V¯acaspati notes that dh¯araÓn¯a, dhy¯ana, and sam¯adhi “are related to one
another as cause and effect consecutively, and their order of causation is
ﬁxed” [TV 3.1]. In Iyengar’s Tree of Yoga, dh¯araÓn¯a is the sap of the tree.
As sap pervades all parts of the tree, concentration on a chosen object
should pervade the yogin’s being.73 In the present context, where integra-
tion is a major factor in healing and liberation, the practice of dh¯araÓn¯a in-
itiates one-pointedness and provides a bridge from non-fragmented
awareness at the level of ordinary cognition, to the fully uniﬁed con-
sciousness of sam¯adhi.
Seventh Limb: Meditation—Dhy¯ana
While dh¯araÓn¯a is the mind’s limiting its attention to a single object of con-
centration, dhy¯ana or meditation is the achievement of sustained and un-
wavering attention to the object.
Tatra pratyayaikat¯anat¯a dhy¯anam.
Meditation (dhy¯ana) is the uniﬁed ﬂow of the mind in that place
[i.e., the ‘place’ concentrated on in dh¯araÓn¯a].
YS 3.2
The transition from dh¯araÓn¯a to dhy¯ana is spontaneous, not requiring any
new technique, and, likewise, sam¯adhi is attainable without new tech-
niques once dh¯araÓn¯a and dhy¯ana are established.74 While dhy¯ana is the
state of full attention to the object of concentration, sam¯adhi is the
mind’s total absorption in it. In Iyengar’s model, dhy¯ana is the ﬂower,
preceding the fruit of sam¯adhi.75
The verbal root of the word dhy¯ana is √dhi, ‘to think.’ Dhy¯ana is
not ordinary discursive thinking, but rather the mind’s undiluted one-
pointed meditation. Progression from dh¯araÓn¯a to dhy¯ana is represented in
124
religious therapeutics

the term pratyaya-eka-t¯anat¯a. Pratyaya refers to the effort or contents of
the mind, and eka-t¯anat¯a means “ﬂowing as one” (eka, ‘one’; √tan, ‘to
extend,’ ‘to expand’).
Dhy¯ana may be described as that process by which the mind is con-
stantly concentrated on a single object to the exclusion of other objects
in such a way as to put an end to all internal reactions from both past
and present impressions, to completely annihilate the very tendency to
undergo manifestations and run into all sorts of forms, to overcome all
disturbing memories and thoughts, whether pleasurable or painful, and
to be able to work with the single impression of restraint, assuming one
form and state, and possessing the sole character of the absorbing
thought or memory.76
The faculty of mental concentration used in Yogic meditation is necessary
to all stages of Yoga, and indeed “no profession in this world can we suc-
ceed in, if we do not develop this power.”77 However, the concentration
exercised in dh¯araÓn¯a, dhy¯ana, and sam¯adhi is a higher form of concentra-
tion. Yogic meditation is not of the same order as secular meditation. Eli-
ade is adamant that the experience of Yogic meditation exceeds ordinary
meditative experience in purity and density, and, further, that dhy¯ana per-
mits comprehension of the inner form of objects. He gives the example of
the meditation on ﬁre, which permits the yogin to have insights such as
comprehension of the physiochemical process of combustion, identiﬁca-
tion of this process with the combustion that occurs in the human body,
identiﬁcation of the ﬁre before him with other forms of ﬁre including the
sun, cognizance of ﬁre at the plane of the ‘inﬁnitesimals’ that compose it,
recognition of ﬁre as prakÓrti, mastery of the ‘inner ﬁre’ by pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama,
and—by extension from microcosm of self to macrocosm of world—
mastery of the actual coals before him.78
The passage from dhy¯ana to sam¯adhi is marked by the dissolution of
distinctions between the subject, object, and process of meditation. Com-
plete integration of experience arises, and the meditator is aware only of
“the new ontological dimension represented by the transformation of the
‘object’ (the world) into ‘knowledge-possession.’”79 This break to a
higher order of knowing and being is the yogin’s entry into the stages of
sam¯adhi.
Eighth Limb: Meditative Trance—Sam¯adhi
In sam¯adhi, the yogin has consciousness only of the object of meditation,
for the mind is ‘absorbed’ in the object and loses awareness of itself:
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
125

Tad ev¯artham¯atra-nirbh¯asaÓm svar¯upa-´s¯unyam iva sam¯adhiÓh.
Meditative trance or sam¯adhi is the same as meditation (dhy¯ana),
except that the mind shines with the light of the object alone, and is de-
void, so to speak, of its own nature.
YS 3.3
Sam¯adhi is by nature indescribable. It is commonly associated with other-
worldliness, but states of consciousness resembling its lower stages are
not as distant as one might assume. Iyengar says that sam¯adhi is glimpsed
by a musician engrossed in playing music, or an inventor making a dis-
covery in a state of concentration devoid of egoism.80 However, while the
ﬁrst stages of sam¯adhi involve ordinary (albeit ‘absorbed’) cognition, the
higher stages require prolonged effort, and constitute a ‘raptus’ (or rup-
ture of plane), characterized by Eliade as “a passage from being to know-
ing” leading ﬁnally to the fusion of all “modalities of being.”81 The term
sam¯adhi is translated as ‘absorption’ or ‘trance’ (from the Latin trans¯ıre,
‘to go across’). ‘Trance’ denotes states of consciousness in which one is
detached from awareness of sensory stimuli.82 Sam¯adhi is a form of
trance, but not all trance is sam¯adhi. Hypnotic trance falls in the category
of vikÓsipta: states of mind that are distracted but occasionally steady.83
VikÓsipta is one of the ﬁve states of mind listed in the Yoga-bh¯aÓsya:
1. Wandering
2. Forgetful
3. Alternately steady and distracted
4. One-pointed
5. Restrained
YBh 1.1
Hypnotic trance is merely a provisional state of concentration, but the
trance state of sam¯adhi is a sustained one-pointedness. Trance state is
characteristic of shamanic practice. However, while shamanic trance is
ecstatic—a journeying outside oneself to other regions of the cosmos—
“Yoga pursues enstasis, ﬁnal concentration of the spirit and ‘escape’ from
the cosmos.”84
The bh¯aÓsya on the Yoga-s¯utra’s ﬁrst verse says that Yoga is sam¯adhi.
After listing the ﬁve stages of mind, the commentator says:
That however, which in the one-pointed mind, fully shows forth an ob-
ject existing as such in its most perfect form, removes the afﬂictions,
loosens the bonds of karma and thus inclines it toward restraint, is said
126
religious therapeutics

The Eight Stages of Sam¯adhi
SABÎJA SAMÅDHI
(Sam¯adhi ‘with seed’)
Sam¯adhi with saÓmsk¯aras (impressions of experience) 
productive of mental activity.
Samprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi (= sam¯apatti: coalescence of mind with object)
= cognitive sam¯adhi, with support (with object of meditation):
four types of sam¯apatti (coalescence of mind with object):
Samprajñ¯ata-vitarka: with reasoning (tarka) =
cognition of gross elements (mah¯abh¯utas) of object of meditation:
1. SAVITARKA SAMÅPATTI: Concentration on gross form of 
meditation-object with awareness of its name and associated concepts.
2. NIRVITARKA SAMÅPATTI: Concentration on gross form of
meditation-object without awareness of its name and associated
concepts.
Samprajñ¯ata-vic¯ara: With discriminative reﬂection (vic¯ara)=
cognition of subtle elements (tanm¯atras) of object of meditation.
3. SAVICARA SAMÅPATTI: 
With awareness of the subtle elements’ qualities.
4. NIRVICARA SAMÅPATTI: 
Without awareness of the subtle elements’ qualities.
5. SAMPRAJÑÅTA–ÅNANDA:
Cognition of intelligence (buddhi)
and experience only of bliss (¯ananda) and ego (asmit¯a).
6. SAMPRAJÑÅTA-ASMITÅ:
Cognition of materiality (prakÓrti) pure of modiﬁcation,
and experience only of ego (asmit¯a).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oscillating between stages of samprajñ¯ata, 
and between sab¯ıja (6) and nirb¯ıja (8):
7. ASAMPRAJÑÅTA OR NIRODHA SAMÅDHI:
Supracognitive sam¯adhi; without support 
(without object of meditation).
8. NIRBÎJA SAMÅDHI
Sam¯adhi ‘without seed’: ‘Dharma-cloud sam¯adhi.’

to be the Cognitive Trance (samprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi). . . . When however
all the modiﬁcations come under restraint, the trance is Supra-Cognitive
(asamprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi)
YBh 1.1
The literal meaning of sam¯adhi is ‘putting together’ (sam: ‘with’;
√dh¯a ‘to put’). Non-yogic meanings of sam¯adhi include ‘to join,’ ‘to
arrange,’ and ‘to put in order.’ Absorption is a central connotation of
sam¯adhi: Sam¯adhiyante asmin iti sam¯adhiÓh: “Sam¯adhi is that in which
all is absorbed.”85 Dasgupta renders sam¯adhi as “unifying concentra-
tion.”86 Connections between sam¯adhi and integration include:
1. Sam¯adhi’s basis: The psychophysical integration that makes sam¯adhi
possible
2. Sam¯adhi’s process: Integration of mind with object
3. Sam¯adhi’s purpose: Reintegration of the yogin with puruÓsa
Sam¯adhi culminates Yoga’s eight limbs, but is not itself the culmination
of Yoga. Sam¯adhi denotes a range of states of higher consciousness nec-
essary for liberation. Similar to the way the external limbs of Yoga (1–5)
are instrumental to the internal limbs (6–8), the lower stages of sam¯adhi
are instrumental to the higher stages [YS 3.7–8]. The lower stage of
sam¯adhi is sab¯ıja, ‘with seed,’ that is, with viable saÓmsk¯aras, literally, ‘im-
pressions,’ subtle forms of experience, which remain in the mind and pro-
duce mental activity and bondage. In sab¯ıja sam¯adhi, new saÓmsk¯aras are
prevented, and existing ones are “kept under control and made invisible
to the viviﬁying impulses from the outside.”87 In nirb¯ıja sam¯adhi all
saÓmsk¯aras are destroyed, even the saÓmsk¯aras generated in sab¯ıja sam¯adhi
[YBh 1.51]. Sab¯ıja sam¯adhi has two varieties: samprajñ¯ata, involving
cognition applied to objects of meditation (thus called sam¯adhi with sup-
port), and asamprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi, which is supracognitive and without a
supporting object of meditation. Eliade writes that in samprajñ¯ata
sam¯adhi the yogin
. . . is still conscious of the difference between his own completely puri-
ﬁed consciousness and the Self; that is, he is conscious of the difference
between citta reduced to its luminous mode of being (sattva) and
puruÓsa. When this difference disappears, the subject attains
asamprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi, now every vÓrtti is eliminated, ‘burned’; nothing
remains but the unconscious impression (saÓmsk¯ara) and at a certain mo-
ment even these imperceptible saÓmsk¯aras are consumed, whereupon
true stasis ‘without seed’ (nirb¯ıja sam¯adhi) ensues.88
128
religious therapeutics

The four types of samprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi (also called sam¯apattis or
‘coalescences’ of mind with the object of meditation) correspond to the
four states of the guÓnas: the particular, the universal, the differentiated,
and the undifferentiated [YS 2.19], as shown in the table below.
Asamprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi may arise between the stages of samprajñ¯ata
sam¯adhi. It oscillates between the ﬁnal stage of sab¯ıja sam¯adhi and the
dawning of nirb¯ıja sam¯adhi. Asamprajñ¯ata sam¯adhi is the nirodha stage
of sam¯adhi, wherein there is no mental activity.
The mind in this state is in pure vacuity so to say; there are only some of
the germs of thought in the form of potencies. The ‘I’ of the mind re-
mains long in this nirodha in a state of absolute objectlessness; all the
potencies are destroyed, and at last the citta is annihilated in the sense
that it returns back to prakÓrti, never again to bind puruÓsa.89
Nirodha means stoppage (√rudh, ‘to stop,’ ‘to obstruct’). The nirodha
state is the necessary condition for passage into nirb¯ıja sam¯adhi, which
involves three ‘transformations’ or parin¯amas: sam¯adhi, nirodha, and
ek¯agrat¯a. Transformation to sam¯adhi is the cessation of ‘many-
pointedness’ and the arising of one-pointedness, ek¯agrat¯a. This ﬁrst
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
129
The Four Stages of Samprajñ¯ata Sam¯adhi (The Sam¯apattis)90
VITARKA
Vi´seÓsa or particular guÓna-state.
Vi´seÓsa refers to the state of the lower mind that regards ob-
jects as distinct from one another and separate from divine
consciousness.
VICARA
Avi´seÓsa or universal guÓna-state.
Avi´seÓsa designates the higher mind’s power to identify uni-
versal categories and principles underlying particulars.
ANANDA Li˙nga or differentiated guÓna-state.
Li˙nga means a mark that identiﬁes. In the ¯ananda or bliss
stage, all objects are experienced as part of universal con-
sciousness, yet each remains distinguishable.
ASMITA
Ali˙nga or undifferentiated guÓna-state.
Ali˙nga means without mark or differentiating characteristic.
In the asmit¯a stage (awareness of ‘I am,’ but without bliss),
objects lack distinct identity for the yogin. Consciousness is
pure: distinct objects of course continue to exist, but the
yogin is aware instead only of the whole of puruÓsa.

transformation is sam¯adhi parin¯ama. Then follows ek¯agrat¯a parin¯ama,
where arising and subsiding cognitions are the same. In the third trans-
formation, nirodha parin¯ama, the citta-vÓrttis or ‘mind-waves’ are sup-
pressed between the arising and cessation of impressions [YS 3.9–12].
With nirodha established, and having thus entered nirbj¯ıa sam¯adhi,
the yogin attains the highest sam¯adhi: dharma-megha-sam¯adhi. Megham
means ‘cloud,’ and dharma-megha-sam¯adhi is sometimes translated as
‘cloud of virtue,’ suggesting the pouring forth of rains of goodness, but
this is a ﬁgurative interpretation. V¯acaspati explains dharma-megha-
sam¯adhi as “the stage when all other thoughts cease to exist, then he be-
comes possessed of constant discriminative knowledge” [TV 4.29]. Based
on V¯acaspati’s clariﬁcation, we might take dharma in its meaning of
‘thing or object’ and surmise that the dharma-cloud refers to a state
wherein external stimuli and internal saÓmsk¯aric impulses are nulliﬁed for
the yogin, and pure consciousness is experienced, similar to the way
things become invisible in thick fog. From the higher knowledge or
prajñ¯a attained in dharma-megha-sam¯adhi, the yogin realizes the distinc-
tion of puruÓsa from prakÓrti, and is thence liberated, kevali.91 A j¯ıvan-
mukta, one ‘liberated in life’ has enlightened understanding of his own
consciousness as part of the all-embracing puruÓsa.
The claim that liberation is healing in Yoga is supported by the pola-
rity of vy¯adhi, illness, and sam¯adhi, conceived in terms of its integrative
qualities. Vy¯adhi, the disintegrative condition of illness, is the ﬁrst and
foremost of the nine obstacles to the integrated state of sam¯adhi [YS
1.30]. The word yoga in its sense of ‘yoking’ itself signiﬁes integration:
sam¯adhi—whose nature and means of attainment is integration—is the
fruit of Yoga practice and the means to liberation. Yoga seeks to counter-
act psychophysical disintegration, a basic form of which is ill-health.
More signiﬁcantly, Yoga seeks to remedy the dis-integrated state of the
mind, so the yogin becomes reintegrated with the primordial power of
consciousness that is her true Self-nature.
A number of determinants of psychophysical health are thematic in
yogic religious liberation. For example, a chief determinant of health,
freedom from pain, warrants the interpretation that the overcoming of
suffering resulting from the kle´sas—afﬂictions affecting the soul as well
as body/mind—is part of attainment of health in an ultimate, spiritual
sense. Self-identity is another determinant of health in its ordinary mean-
ing, and is also integral to yogic liberation. By naming establishment in
Self-nature as Yoga’s aim [YS 1.3], the Yoga-s¯utras at their very outset
ground the claim that Yoga permits the realization of health in an ulti-
mate sense. The concept of integration funds the distinction between
130
religious therapeutics

sam¯adhi and vy¯adhi. In this chapter’s ﬁnal section, “Liberation as Heal-
ing in Classical Yoga,” conclusions about the therapeutic elements of
Yoga’s soteriology are informed by analysis of a web of concepts pre-
sented to demonstrate the following:
• Commonalities of holiness and wholeness
• The role of integration as a corollary of wholeness
• Freedom and identity as goals of both religion and medicine
LIBERATION AS HEALING IN CLASSICAL YOGA
In classical Yoga, liberation is healing in an ultimate sense. With few ex-
ceptions, the Hindu traditions hold that the human body is different
from the true Self that is eligible for liberation. The person’s fundamen-
tal nature is understood as spiritual, rather than physical, psychologi-
cal, rational, or otherwise, and the Hindu traditions offer religious pre-
scriptions for attaining well-being at the most fundamental level, the
spiritual. The term ‘health’ in its ordinary meaning pertains to physical
and psychological well-being, but integral to the claim that liberation is
healing is the premise that the extension of the word ‘health’ can be le-
gitimately broadened to apply to the well-being of the person’s ultimate
nature.
Healing and Yoga’s Therapeutic Paradigm
Analysis of Yoga reveals two major domains of the relationship between
health and religiousness:
1. Health as an aid to religious progress: puriﬁcation and conditioning
of the body and mind in order to support greater spiritual awareness
and progress.
2. Liberation as healing: attainment of freedom from limitations and
suffering, resulting from realization of one’s true Self-nature as
consciousness.
According to Vy¯asa’s Yoga-bh¯aÓsya, Yoga and medical science have a
common therapeutic paradigm, as shown on the next page. Vy¯asa’s thera-
peutic paradigm conveys the fundamental meaning of health in Yoga: ulti-
mate well-being consisting in freedom from limitations and suffering, and,
foundational to this, the unimpaired manifestation of Self-identity. A
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
131

therapeutic paradigm can be excavated as follows from these central pas-
sages of the Yoga-s¯utras:
PariÓn¯ama-t¯apa-saÓmsk¯ara-duÓhkhair guÓna-vÓrtti-virodh¯ac ca duÓhkham eva
sarvaÓm vivekinaÓh.
All is suffering to discriminating persons, because of misery result-
ing from change, anxiety, and their subliminal impressions (saÓmsk¯aras),
and because of conﬂict between the mind’s modiﬁcations (vÓrttis) and the
basic constituents of matter (guÓnas).
YS 2:15
HeyaÓm duÓhkham an¯agatam.
Suffering not yet come can be eliminated (heyam).
YS 2:16
DraÓsÓtÓr-dr´syayoÓh saÓmyogo heya-hetuÓh.
The cause (hetu) of suffering is the conjunction of Seer and seen.
YS 2:17
Tasya hetur avidy¯a.
The cause [of the conjunction of Seer and seen ] is ignorance [i.e.,
puruÓsa’s ignorance of its true nature as consciousness].
YS 2:24
Tad-abh¯av¯at saÓmyog¯abh¯avo h¯anaÓm tad dÓr´seÓh kaivalyam.
By removal (hanam) of ignorance, the conjuction between Seer and
seen is eliminated, and this is the liberation of the knower.
YS 2:25
Viveka-khy¯atir aviplav¯a h¯anop¯ayaÓh.
The means of removal (h¯anop¯aya) [of ignorance] is unwavering dis-
criminative knowing.
YS 2:26
132
religious therapeutics 
Yoga’s Therapeutic Paradigm in the Yoga-bh¯aÓsya
Medical Science
Yoga
1. Illness
Cycle of suffering and rebirth (saÓms¯ara)
2. Cause of illness
Cause of saÓms¯ara: ignorance (avidy¯a)
3. Goal: Restoration of health
Liberation (mokÓsa): independence 
(kaivalya)
4. Remedy
Discriminative knowledge (vivekakhy¯ati)
YBh 2.15

Yog¯a˙ng¯anuÓsÓth¯an¯ad a´suddhi-kÓsaye jñ¯ana-d¯ıptir ¯a viveka-khy¯atheÓh.
By practice of the components of Yoga, which destroy impurity,
higher knowing shines forth, reaching up to discriminative knowing.
YS 2:28
Yama-niyam¯asana-pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama-praty¯ah¯ara-dh¯araÓn¯a-dhy¯ana-sam¯adhayo’
ÓsÓt¯ava˙ng¯ani.
Yoga’s eight components are: moral self-restraints, moral obser-
vances, posture, regulation of breath, withdrawal of the senses, concen-
tration, meditation, and meditative trance.
YS 2:29
In an analysis of the four-fold division of the Yoga-´s¯astra, the Åyurvedic
medical science, and the Buddha’s Four Noble Truths, A. Wezler dis-
cusses the term ¯arogya, ‘health’ (a ‘not,’ rogya ‘broken,’ from √ruj, ‘to
break’). Wezler notes that ¯arogya connotes restoration to a condition free
of disease, presupposing an original state of health.92 In this vein, Halb-
fass suggests that an important bridge between medical and soteriologi-
cal ‘health’ in the Indian traditions is:
. . . an appeal to the idea of a “return” in a non-temporal sense, a redis-
covery and retrieval of an identity and an inherent, underlying perfec-
tion that has always been there, and that has to be freed from obscura-
tion, confusion, and disturbance.93
His analysis of Sanskrit terms for health indicates that self-identity is
central to a concept of health that bridges medical theory and soteriology.
Sv¯asthya, ‘abiding in oneself’ connotes:
. . . “coinciding with oneself,” being in one’s true, natural state, free
from obstruction; it is a state of health and balance as well as of identity
and true self-understanding, “being oneself” in a physical as well as a
cognitive sense.94
Halbfass observes that in the Indian conception of liberation, met-
aphysics ultimately transcends medicine,95 and that the ‘health’ that
Yoga offers “transcends all merely physical healing.’’96 This interpreta-
tion accords with the view of healing expressed in the S¯aÓmkhya-k¯arik¯a,
the text providing much of Yoga’s metaphysical foundation. Medicine
does not relieve suffering with certainty and ﬁnality, “therefore, one
should entertain a desire for knowledge of those means, other than
these evident means, which ﬁnally and completely remove misery”
(SKB 1.1).
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
133

Yoga’s four-part therapeutic paradigm not only identiﬁes the com-
mon healing functions of Yoga and medical science, but also conveys that
Yoga offers health of a superior kind. The meanings connoted by the
term ‘health’ depend on our metaphysical conception of the human
being. Yoga regards the person’s true nature as consciousness, while the
body, senses, and mind are considered evolutes of primordial matter,
prakÓrti, the ground of entanglement in materiality, ignorance, and suffer-
ing. In Yoga, the true Self as consciousness takes priority over the
psychophysical self in establishing the meaning of health. We ordinarily
speak of health in reference to the well-being of the body and mind, but
at its basic conceptual level, health means wholeness and well-being. De-
terminants or criteria of physical health derivable from the texts of
Åyurvedic medicine are applicable to Yogic liberation—notably, whole-
ness, integration, identity, and freedom. These Åyurvedic determinants of
health are integral to grounding the claim that in classical Yoga, libera-
tion is healing in an ultimate sense.
Wholeness and Holiness
Wholeness in the context of human health connotes a state without im-
pairment and suffering. A holistic perspective recognizes the interdepen-
dence of factors constituting person and environment, and that inﬂuence
states of health and illness. Yoga’s prescription for liberation is paradig-
matic of holistic treatment of the dimensions of the person. Practice of
the eight components of Yoga cultivates human physicality, psychology,
morality, and spirituality by integrating the functions within and among
134
religious therapeutics 
Yoga’s Therapeutic Paradigm in the Yoga-s¯utras
Heya
To be eliminated:
The ailment to be eliminated: duÓhkha: suffering.YS 2.15, 2:16
Hetu
Cause of the ailment:
The cause of the ailment is misidentiﬁcation of Self. 
(knower) and non-Self (knowable).
YS 2:17, 2:24
H¯ana
Removal of the ailment:
Knowledge of appropriate remedy.
YS 2.25
H¯anopayaMeans of elimination of the ailment:
Therapy, remedy, medication.
YS 2:26, 2:28, 2:29

these domains. An example is pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, control of subtle vital energy
achieved by regulating the gross physical action of the breath, which is
practiced to help establish the conditions necessary for meditative con-
sciousness. Etymological analysis of both English and Sanskrit terms cor-
roborates the claim that health and holiness have common ground. The
modern English word ‘holy’ descends from the Indo-European root
√kailo-, whole. A descendent of kailo is the Old English h¯al, meaning
‘whole.’ ‘Holy’ and ‘health’ are both derived from h¯al.97 The word
‘salvation,’ derived from the Latin salus, meaning both ‘healthy’ and
‘whole,’ also suggests the idea of healing from the afﬂictions of the
human condition.98
The contrast of vy¯adhi and sam¯adhi, divergent in respect of integra-
tion, invokes Yoga’s meaning of yoking, that is, unifying and integrating.
Integration is a concept derivative of the concept of wholeness: to inte-
grate is to make something whole by bringing its parts into functional re-
lation. A primary form of integration in Yoga refers to a state of con-
sciousness integrated in the respect that it manifests pure awareness,
silent and still, without the awareness-fragmenting distractions of the
vÓrttis, or ‘turnings’ of mental activity. The ﬁrst ﬁve components of Yoga
can help one achieve brief instants of this non-fragmented and integrated
concentration in Yoga’s sixth component, dh¯araÓn¯a or concentration.
When the state of concentration is sustained, one is in meditation,
dhy¯ana. In sam¯adhi, integration of consciousness is complete: the mind’s
potential activities are wholly integrated in one-pointed meditative ‘con-
sciousness of consciousness’ [YS 3.3; 3.11–12].
The perspective of ‘holism’ considers entities and systems as com-
posed of, and functioning within, integrated and mutually inﬂuential
subsystems, rather than as isolated concatenations of separate parts.
What is the sense of ‘whole’ in the context of the holy? The holy is be-
yond the limitations of the human state and the mundane world. The re-
lated term ‘sacred’ descends from the Latin verb sacr¯are, from the Indo-
European root √sak-, ‘to sanctify’99 and suggests puriﬁcation and
dedication.100 ‘Sacred’ connotes that which is pure. In Yoga, purity is the
determinant of the sacred. Yoga endeavors to increase purity in body and
mental life, attitude and action. To the extent that these are pure, the Self
as consciousness may manifest itself. In medical theory, purity is the con-
ceptual category opposite of pathogenicity. Purity in the sense of physical
asepsis is a primary concern of medical science, and in the domain of reli-
gion, purity is a criterion for distinguishing between the sacred and the
profane.
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
135

If we leave aside pathogenicity and hygiene from the concept of im-
purity, we uncover the underlying principle of impurity as ‘matter out of
place.’ This approach, according to Mary Douglas, “implies two condi-
tions: a set of ordered relations and a contravention of that order.’’101 In
classical Yoga, the order that impurity contravenes is the proper relation
of puruÓsa and prakÓrti. PuruÓsa should have contact with prakÓrti only to
the extent necessary for the discrimination of itself from matter. Purity
then, means non-attachment to materiality. PuruÓsa is eternally calm,
clear, and at peace, whereas prakÓrti is unconsciousness, ever agitated and
in tension. Entanglement in materiality is impurity. That which is sacred
is pure, in virtue of being undeﬁled by materiality and ignorance. Purity
in Yoga, in the most elemental terms, is realization of the primordial
wholeness of the spiritual Self.
Identity and Freedom
Medical health and spiritual health both entail freedom from limitations
and suffering, and the manifestation of one’s identity. Among Sanskrit’s
etymological reﬂections of the common meanings of healing and reli-
gious liberation is the verbal root √muc, ‘to free,’ the root of the word
mokÓsa, ultimate liberation. Muc can also be used in the sense of healing:
vy¯adheÓh muc means to free a person from illness, and from accompany-
ing limitations and distress.102
Freedom in Yoga entails liberation from the human condition with
its inevitable limitations and suffering, but, moreover, liberation to the
realization of one’s true identity. Freedom in the physical domain has
both internal and external dimensions. Physical freedom in an outward
sense signiﬁes absence of interference to a person’s exercise of choice and
action. Health is the inward dimension of physical freedom: health is
contingent in part on one’s vitality and inner resources to accomplish his
or her purposes. Actualized self-identity in the context of psychophysical
health means having the aspects of oneself functioning together so that
their integrity is preserved and one can act in ways that support thriving
and accomplishing one’s goals. Illness, on the other hand, entails interfer-
ence with physical and/or psychological functioning, and produces
symptoms causing temporary or permanent limitations in the functioning
of body and/or mind.
Liberation in Yoga is realization of Self-identity. Although attain-
ment of liberation in Yoga results in well-being and non-suffering, Yoga’s
ultimate goal is realization of a Self-identity that permits freedom from
136
religious therapeutics

attachment to objects of pleasure and pain. Non-attachment in turn re-
sults in non-suffering. Well-being and non-suffering are merely beneﬁts
of liberation, similar to the way that physical health is a valuable result of
the physical self-cultivation undertaken to support meditative practice
and attainment of liberative knowledge. The ultimate meaning of healing
in Yoga is the attainment of identity and freedom; relief of suffering is
corollary to this attainment. Relief of suffering and the promoting of
well-being are essential attributes of both religion and medicine, and our
understanding and practice of medicine and the healing arts can be in-
formed by metaphysical insights gained from Yoga-´s¯astra. An implication
for medicine is that healing, like liberation, involves more than relieving
impairment and suffering; it means promoting wholeness, integration,
identity, and freedom.
In Yoga, health in the psychophysical domain is subsidiary to the
wholeness and well-being that is the Self’s abiding in its true nature. This
follows from Yoga’s standpoint on the preeminence of puruÓsa over
prakÓrti. The inherent wholeness and recovery of well-being of Self is of
ultimate value. The body is not only impermanent, but even the greatest
physical vitality is irrelevant once attachment to materialist views and ex-
periences is dissolved. Therefore in Yoga, the fundamental meaning of
health is the well-being of liberated consciousness, a state wherein whole-
ness, integration, Self-identity, and freedom obtain, and one attains im-
munity to the vicissitudes of the material natural world and those of one’s
own body and mind.
While medical healing is concerned primarily with the particular ail-
ments of individual persons, the idea of religious health invokes well-
being that transcends the personal. Progress on the yogic path entails in-
creasingly greater well-being, ﬁrst at the psychophysical level, then
spiritually, as the psychophysical dimension serves its liberative purpose
and is transcended. Ultimate well-being is freedom from all that obscures
one’s spiritual Self. The Self does not require healing, for it is intrinsically
whole and well, and not subject to sickness and suffering. Healing in an
ultimate sense means curing psychophysical limitations, and limited
understandings, that interfere with the recovery of the spiritual Self.
classical yoga as a religious therapeutic
137

Fields: Religious Therapeutics page 138blank

Chapter Four
TANTRA AND AESTHETIC THERAPEUTICS
The various yogas give different priority to the role of the body. HaÓtha
Yoga, part of the T¯antric tradition, is the form of yoga that most strongly
emphasizes physical health and the soteriological role of the body. But
even in HaÓtha Yoga, the body is a vehicle for the attainment of spiritual
aims. The currents of pr¯aÓna or vital energy are directed by means of phys-
ical disciplines such as ¯asana and pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, but the yogin controls these
currents of vital energy for the sake of religious realization. The HaÓtha
text GheraÓnÓda SaÓmhit¯a opens with a verse praising HaÓtha Yoga as the
ﬁrst rung on the ladder to R¯aja or classical Yoga. Eliade observes that the
HaÓtha texts’ repeated assurances that their physical practices “destroy
old age and death . . . illustrate the real meaning and ﬁnal orientation of
these techniques.”1 Speciﬁcally, liberation and not physical health is
HaÓtha yoga’s ultimate goal.
Classical Yoga assumes the existence of two primordial kinds of
being: materiality and consciousness. Yoga does not reconcile this meta-
physical dualism by argumentation. Instead, a pragmatic justiﬁcation is
offered for the conjunction and ultimate separation of consciousness and
materiality. Metaphysical dualism is integral to classical Yoga’s soteriol-
ogy. Materiality—comprising mind/body and world—is necessary for the
Self’s experiencing itself and realizing that Self is not of the nature of mat-
ter. While Self-realization entails dualism—independence of conscious-
ness from material and psychological nature—at the same time, practice
of classical Yoga is paradigmatic of mind/body holism. Yoga’s pragmatic
holism, however, does not solve the ontological split between materiality
and consciousness. Classical Yoga disvalues material nature, the body,
139

relationality, sexuality, and the feminine (which is the gender of prakÓrti or
materiality). These elements are central in the T¯antric tradition, whose
monistic ontology is not subject to the problems of metaphysical dual-
ism. Tantra offers alternatives to the ascetic life recommended by classi-
cal Yoga. Tantra shares classical Yoga’s aim of spiritual Self-realization,
but in Tantra, embodiedness and sacredness remain compatible. This
chapter treats somatic and therapeutic elements of T¯antric yogas. Tantra
adds to the model of religious therapeutics the domain of aesthetic thera-
peutics, that is, healing of body/mind and spirit through sensory experi-
ence and religious arts, such as music and dance. As an example of com-
parative inquiry into religio-aesthetic therapeutics, I explore the healing
functions of sacred music.
BODY AND T¯ANTRIC YOGAS
Features of T ¯antric Practice
T¯antrikas believe that the various religious texts were provided for differ-
ent eras. The Kul¯arÓnava Tantra says:
For the ﬁrst of the four world ages ´sruti (Veda) was given; for the sec-
ond, sÓmti (the teaching of the sages, dharma´s¯astra, etc.), for the third,
pur¯aÓna (the epics, etc.), and for the fourth, ¯agama (the Tantras).2
In the M¯ah¯anirv¯aÓna Tantra, P¯arvat¯ı describes the ﬁrst yuga or age, the
KÓrtya or Satya Yuga, as an age of virtue and happiness. In the second or
Dv¯apara Yuga, dharma was disordered and the Vedic rites no longer ef-
fective. The third or Treta Yuga was marked by the loss of one-half of
dharma, and illness of people’s bodies and minds. The present age is the
K¯ali age: dharma is destroyed, and people are gluttonous, malicious, stu-
pid, shameless, and suffering. For this crude age, Tantra is prescribed
[MNT 1:20–52]. The K¯am¯akhy¯a Tantra classiﬁes persons according to
three dispositions: the pa´su or animal, the v¯ıra or heroic, and the divya or
divine.3 These correspond generally to S¯aÓmkhya’s three guÓnas: tamas (in-
ertia), rajas (activity), and sattva (awareness). While sattva is the ideal in
classical S¯aÓmkhya-Yoga, Tantra holds the v¯ıra to be the disposition most
suited to the present Kali age [MNT 1:54–61]. T¯antric s¯adhana can be
undertaken only under the direction of a qualiﬁed guru, a spiritually
awakened person, who grants “an inﬂux of spiritual energy” (´saktip¯ata)
which releases potentials from within the aspirant.4 Some knowledge
140
religious therapeutics

must be imparted by a g¯uru and cannot be gained from texts. M. P. Pan-
dit writes: “No text gives the s¯adhana in full for it cannot. The crucial
part, the life of the s¯adhana in fact, is communicated in person, in secret,
by the Teacher to the disciple.”5
T¯antric practice is not restricted to the performance of speciﬁc spiri-
tual disciplines, but it is meant to be integrated in all moments of life.
Characteristic of the T¯antric approach to daily life is spontaneity and
acute attunement with one’s environment. Kakar quotes a contemporary
T¯antrika, a Bengali economist in his early forties, whose family has prac-
ticed Tantra for three generations:
The true t¯antrik is always in a state of nonsuppression and enjoyment.
The purpose of every moment of life is to experience ¯ananda. Ånanda is
true enjoyment of everything that comes your way. If there is a heat
wave, I will not try to make it less by using a fan or an air conditioner.
Nor will I try to put up with the heat by turning my mind away and
bearing it in the manner of the Stoics. The true t¯antrik puts himself, or
rather is, in a body-mind state where he enjoys the heat . . . as he will
enjoy the cold. Ideally, a t¯antrik is in such a state of attunement with his
environment, with what is possible, that his desire awakens just at the
moment that the universe is willing to grant it . . . he has developed his
capacity for attention and is intensely aware of where he is and what he
is doing at every single moment of time. . . . In fact, in his state of non-
suppression and attunement, a real t¯antrik becomes aware a little earlier
that others when a storm is due or a heat wave is coming so as to be pre-
pared to enjoy them.6
A central principle of T¯antric philosophy is kriy¯a, the principle of sponta-
neous activity. Kriy¯a has resonance with the Taoist idea of hsiao-yao yu,
‘free and easy wandering,’ or tzu-jan: ‘spontaneity,’ and Suﬁsm’s mauja,
‘free and joyous activity.’ Within Hinduism, kriy¯a is comparable to the
Vedanta doctrine of l¯ıl¯a, the sportive play of Brahman by which the uni-
verse is created. Kriy¯a is the s¯adhaka’s free action, issuing from desireless-
ness. It is distinct from volitional or ethical action—where will is ex-
erted—and also distinct from neurotic behavior, unfree because it is
driven by inner psychological tensions.7 As regards systematic practice,
Tantra’s fundamental method, like that of classical Yoga, is meditation. A
point of divergence is that while classical Yoga aims for meditative states
increasingly free of materiality, in Tantra, symbols are central as supports
for meditation. Main forms of T¯antric meditative symbols are mantras or
sacred sounds, yantras or visual symbols, and mudr¯as or ritual gestures.
These symbols consolidate and organize energy between practitioner and
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
141

cosmos. Transformation of energy, ´sakti, is an inescapable fact of exis-
tence, and T¯antric s¯adhana uses systematic practices to yoke cosmic en-
ergy and manifest it in more sublime ways. Foundational to this is puriﬁ-
cation, explained by Woodroffe in terms of making the pure guÓna called
sattva (purity and illumination) predominate by utilizing the guÓna rajas,
the dynamic principle of the two other guÓnas.8 Classical Yoga, on the
other hand, recommends sattvic or pure activities, foods, and so on, for
supporting the predomination of purity.
The aim of T¯antric s¯adhana is reintegration of the consciousness
(which is fragmented by various mental activities) and recovery of one’s
identity with cosmic consciousness, Param Íiva. Eliade identiﬁes two
stages of T¯antric s¯adhana: cosmicization of the human being, and tran-
scendence of the cosmos. The preeminent sign of transcendence is the
kuÓnÓdalin¯ı’s union with Íiva in the sahasr¯ara cakra.9 Yogic disciplines of
dh¯araÓn¯a and dhy¯ana, concentration and meditation, are necessary for the
interiorization of iconography, a universe of symbols that the s¯adhaka en-
ters and assimilates, incorporating into himself the sacred force sustain-
ing them. The T¯antric approach to s¯adhana is illuminated by ny¯asa, a
practice related to iconographic meditation. Ny¯asa (√ny¯as, ‘to place’) is
‘ritual projection’ of divinities into various parts of the body:
The disciple ‘projects’ the divinities, at the same time touching various
areas of his body; in other words, he homologizes his body with the
T¯antric pantheon, in order to awaken the sacred forces asleep in the
ﬂesh itself.10
Pragna R. Shah explains the signiﬁcance of ny¯asa as the s¯adhaka’s realiz-
ing that his body and mind are of the nature of consciousness, and by
spreading the presence of consciousness throughout himself, he grasps
his primordial divinity.11 Yantra and mantra are important tools of T¯an-
tric practice, serving as supports for meditative concentration. More than
this, they are emanations of the primordial unity; they embody the cos-
mic manifestation. In the concrete forms of visual-patterns (yantra) and
sound-patterns (mantra), they are assimilable by the s¯adhaka for the res-
toration of his own identity with Param Síva. A yantra is a diagram
“drawn or engraved on metal, wood, skin, stone, paper, or simply traced
on the ground or a wall.”12 The features of a yantra symbolize the ele-
ments of creation, human faculties, obstacles to progress, the various
breaths, deities, and many other aspects of T¯antric soteriology.
Ír¯ı Yantra contains a series of contiguous triangles, the upward ones
representing the masculine Íiva and the downward ones the feminine
142
religious therapeutics

Íakti, converging to a central point (bindu), signifying the undifferen-
tiated Brahman.13 Yantra literally means instrument, or a device to hold
or control; its verbal root is √yam, ‘to control.’ The idea of the yantra il-
luminates the nature of T¯antric practice wherein mystical communica-
tion is established with some level of the universe’s countless levels, “in
order ﬁnally to reduce them to unity and master them.”14 John Thomas
Casey, who rendered the yantra in Figure 4.1, observes that Ír¯ı Yantra is
naturally captivating to the sense of vision. Concentration on the yantra
sustains a dynamic tension between archetypal elements such as
bounded/boundless, and diversity/unity, evoked by the containing square
and the expanding circle. Ír¯ı Yantra stimulates multi-planed awareness; a
prominent example is the primordial sense of directionality. The four
gateways recall the front/back/left/right orientation that conditions the
experience of embodied beings. Casey captures the essence of Ír¯ı Yantra’s
power in noting the efﬁcacy of the Great Yantra as a meditative object for
collecting attention to a single point.15
Sexuality in Tantra
Kakar identiﬁes in Tantra “a recognition, even a celebration of man’s sen-
suous nature.”16 This remark should not be taken to mean that Tantra ad-
vocates sensual and sexual indulgence, but rather that among the Indian
traditions, and even among world religious traditions, Tantra distin-
guishes itself by its reverence for the body and emphasis on the religious
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
143
Figure 4.1 Ír¯ı Yantra, drawn by John Thomas Casey

role of physicality. Cosmic energy, ´sakti, takes the form of kuÓnÓdalin¯ı en-
ergy in the human body, and sexual energy is among its dominant forms.
In the physical enjoyment of sex, this energy is directed downward from
the sv¯adhiÓsÓth¯ana cakra. In T¯antric practice, directing this energy upward
through the cakras to the highest one, sahasr¯ara cakra, where union of
Íakti and Íiva takes place, is a divinization of human vital energy.17 A
main reason for Tantra’s being misunderstood is its use of a symbolic vo-
cabulary incorporating erotic images. Sexual symbolism is employed in
Tantra, but references to the divine coition of Íiva and Íakti pertain to
the polar aspects of reality, and are not meant in gross anatomical
terms.18
Tantra has been maligned for the ‘Five Mak¯aras’ (ﬁve things that
begin with the letter m): ritual use of wine (madya), meat (m¯aÓmsa), ﬁsh
(matsya), mudr¯a (parched or fried grain), and sexual intercourse (mai-
thuna). These elements are not necessary features of T¯antric practice,
but, when employed, Tantra requires that they be utilized within the con-
text of worship, without excess, and after puriﬁcation.19 As regards ritual
sexual union, even among those sects that employ it, some practice it
symbolically only. Where ritual sexual union is practiced, its quality is
that of T¯antric s¯adhana in general: immobilization. In T¯antric s¯adhana’s
goal of immobility on the three planes of thought, breath, and sexual sen-
sation, “there is imitation of a divine model—the Buddha, or Íiva, pure
Spirit, motionless and serene amid the cosmic play.”20 In classical Yoga,
the masculine puruÓsa is the quiescent Seer, and all creative activity issues
from the feminine prakÓrti. Similarly in Tantra, the male aspect is passive,
and the female aspect Íakti produces all activity. Eliade remarks on T¯an-
tric Yoga’s paradoxical arresting of manifestation and disintegration by
going ‘against the current’ (ujana s¯adhana) to recover primordial Unity:
The paradoxical act takes place on several planes at once: through the
union of Íakti ( = kuÓnÓdalin¯ı) with Íiva in the sahasr¯ara, the yogin brings
about inversion of the cosmic process, regression to the undiscriminated
state of the original Totality; “physiologically,” the conjunction sun-
moon is represented by the “union” of the pr¯aÓna and ap¯ana—that is, by a
totalization of the breaths; in short, by their arrest; ﬁnally, sexual union,
through the action of the vajrol¯ımudr¯a realizes the “return of semen.”21
Maithuna or ritual intercourse can serve as a support for pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama and
dh¯araÓna through regulation of respiration and concentration. The goal is
the very opposite of sensual enjoyment, and sexual climax is prohibited.22
Sensuality can be a vehicle that “produces the maximum tension that
144
religious therapeutics

abolishes normal consciousness and inaugurates the nirv¯aÓnic state,
saÓms¯ara, the paradoxical experience of unity.”23 An alternate T¯antric tra-
dition (perhaps the oldest one, according to Banerji) permits sexual cli-
max, “like the offering of sacred oil poured into an altar of ﬁre.”24
As regards non-ritual sexuality in the context of spiritual life,
Mishra indicates that two main qualities are to be cultivated: an attitude
of reverence toward sex, and genuine love of one’s partner. The Kul-
¯arÓnava Tantra says that the sex act is to be done in the spirit of worship, not
for bhoga or enjoyment.25 Sex as given in nature is bhoga, but its use as a
form of s¯adhana requires its sublimation within a greater spiritual do-
main. The sanctity of sexuality is warranted in the Indian tradition apart
from Tantra. In the UpaniÓsads one of the manifestations of Brahman ‘as
food’ (i.e., as the outermost sheath of the ‘ﬁve bodies,’ the one supported
by food) is the immortality and bliss in the generative organs [Tait. Up.
3:10.2–3]. Other UpaniÓsads refer to the sexual act in terms of a ritual of-
fering [BÓrhad Up. 6:2.13; Ch¯and. Up. 5:8.1–2]. In the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a
Lord KÓrÓsÓna refers to himself as Kandarpa, the deity of desire who em-
powers procreation [BhG 10:28]. Loving one’s partner has the ethical di-
mension of concern for her or his well-being, and the religious dimension
of experiencing primordial unity with that person. The partner makes
possible the instantiation of a cosmic polarity wherein non-duality may
be realized. Tantra’s views of sexuality exemplify the T¯antric leitmotif of
using material nature to sublimate that which appears base, and to trans-
form nature so as to reveal its inherent sanctity as part of the sacred body
of the Absolute. Mishra writes that sex has become mechanical and in-
sipid in contemporary free-sex society, and that the remedy, from a T¯an-
tric standpoint, is cultivation of love, grounded in religiousness.26
Tantra’s valuing of the feminine is a characteristic that sets it apart
from much of the Hindu tradition. In Tantra’s metaphysical foundations,
the feminine and the masculine are poles of the Íiva-Íakti unity, and in
practice women are eligible both to receive and to confer initiation into a
religious order. The Yogin¯ı Tantra, and the contemporary text Tantra-
tattva, highly recommend initiation by a female guru.27 The T¯antric guru
of Íri RamakÓrÓsÓna was a woman, Yogeshwari. Despite its commitment to
the polarity and cooperation of the masculine and the feminine, Kakar
notes that Tantra’s texts proceed from the viewpoint of male practition-
ers, and he suggests that Tantra has “greater resonance for the male
psyche and physiology.”28 Other sources indicate that in practice males
dominate in T¯antric religious practice and leadership, though the Íakta
groups actually extend full privileges to females.29
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
145

KuÓnÓdalin¯i Yoga
Yoga’s universality shines beautifully in its many forms throughout
countless Indian schools and sects, Hindu and non-Hindu, Vedic and
T¯antric. The incorporation of yoga-practices in a range of Indian reli-
gious traditions, and yoga’s thriving in the world beyond India, attest to
the broad applicability of its methods. There is no pure Veda-based
yoga nor pure Tantra-based yoga. Though Patañjali’s classical Yoga is
one of the six ¯astika or Veda-accepting dar´sanas, it contains elements of
T¯antric yoga, a main characteristic of which is the cosmic physiology of
the cakras (‘wheels’) and nad¯ıs (‘rivers’). These are, respectively, the
centers and channels of energy in the psychophysical organism. Al-
though classical Yoga sees the body in terms of S¯aÓmkhya’s ﬁve elements
and Åyurveda’s three dh¯atus or supports, the texts of classical Yoga also
contain references to the subtle physiology central in Tantra. For exam-
ple, in the Tattva-vai´s¯arad¯ı V¯acaspati discusses meditation on ‘the lotus
of the heart’ between the chest and abdomen, and refers to the suÓsumÓn¯a,
the main energy-channel leading to the highest cakra [TV 1.36]. The
Yoga-s¯utras’ mystical aspect is evident in Section 3, Vibh¯uti-p¯ada, the
section on extraordinary powers. An example is knowledge of the
systems of the body attainable by saÓmyama, meditative concentration,
on the navel-cakra [YS 3.30].
Tantra incorporates and adapts the various yogas of the Yoga
UpaniÓsads, which preceded Patañjali’s Yoga-s¯utras. The approximately
twenty Yoga UpaniÓsads present a range of yoga practices, including the
classical elements of moral restraints and commitments, postures,
pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, sense-withdrawal, and meditation leading to sam¯adhi. But
unlike classical Yoga, the Yoga UpaniÓsads emphasize the subtle physiol-
ogy of cakras and nad¯ıs. The Yoga UpaniÓsads in general assume Brah-
man as the one real, and take yoga’s goal to be the realization of Brah-
man.30 Dasgupta ﬁnds that T¯antric and other modes of worship were
inﬂuenced by the Yoga UpaniÓsads, and that some yoga practices were de-
veloped in accordance with T¯antric Íaiva and Íakta doctrines.31
Tantra maintains that there can be cooperation rather than opposi-
tion between enjoyment in the world (bhukti) and the way of liberation
(mukti): “Tantra is a meeting ground of bhoga (enjoyment) and yoga.”32
While classical Yoga aims to ‘burn up’ the saÓmsk¯aras or seed-potentials
of action, Tantra’s approach is the maturation (parip¯aka) of seed-desires
by exhausting them through their fruition. Mishra criticizes classical
Yoga’s concept of ‘burning’ the saÓmsk¯aras. While actual seeds can be
146
religious therapeutics

burnt, Mishra says, the analogy breaks down when applied to human de-
sires. Human desires are part of the Lord’s sportive creation of the world,
l¯ıl¯a, and their actualization into worldly activity is an aspect of the fulﬁll-
ment of the Lord’s creation.33 Like classical Yoga, Tantra holds that at-
tachment and aversion, not worldly objects themselves, produce bondage
and suffering. The T¯antric solution is neither indulgence nor eradication
of desire, but enjoyment without attachment. Tantra advises against re-
pression of inclinations, recommending that one witness one’s thoughts
and desires, and not suppress them, thus granting the mind opportunity
to sublimate thoughts and desires by integrating them, rather than eradi-
cating them.34
The aim of T¯antric yoga is the realization of Param Íiva. Fundamen-
tal to T¯antric s¯adhana is KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga, a form of Laya Yoga.35 Laya
Yoga incorporates the system of the cakras and kuÓnÓdalin¯ı energy.36 Laya,
from the verbal root √l¯ı, ‘to dissolve,’ means the yoga of dissolution, that
is, the dissolution of self into Brahman. Dissolution is explainable in
terms of the S¯aÓmkhya elements:
In the T¯antric form of Laya Yoga or in ÓsaÓtcakrabheda, the ﬁve gross
constitutional elements (pañca mah¯abh¯uta) of both body and universe
dissolve in their source. It means during the process of yoga, the earth
element dissolves into water, water into ﬁre, ﬁre into air, and air into
¯ak¯a´sa (space). And this ¯ak¯a´sa element further dissolves into their essence
like sound, touch, form, taste, and smell which merge again into intelli-
gence (buddhi), egoism (ahaÓmk¯ar), etc., and ultimately into the spirit or
consciousness.37
Dissolution into Brahman is sought by means of yogic practices that per-
mit union within oneself of Íiva-Íakti. KuÓnÓdalin¯ı, from the word
kuÓnÓdala, ‘coil,’ refers to the energy or ´sakti of the universe in the form it
takes within the human organism. Íakti as kuÓnÓdalin¯ı is conceived as a
small snake coiled at the base of the spinal column. Activating and direct-
ing this cosmic energy within oneself is at the root of Tantra and of
KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga. KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga may be called the yoga of energy. Its
concern is stimulating the ascent of one’s vital cosmic energy so that the
kuÓnÓdalin¯ı that is Para-Íakti may pierce through the several energy-centers
or cakras (literally, ‘wheels’), and unite with Íiva, who resides in the high-
est cakra, at and above the top of the head.38
The dev¯ı who is Íuddha-sattv¯a pierces the three li˙ngas [within the cakras],
and having reached all the lotuses [cakras] which are known as Brahm¯a-
nad¯ı lotuses, shines therein in the fullness of her luster. Thereafter in her
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
147

subtle state, lustrous like lightning and ﬁne like the lotus ﬁbre, she goes
to the ﬂame-like Íiva, the Supreme bliss and, of a sudden, produces the
bliss of liberation.
SCN 51
Based on S¯aÓmkhya’s metaphysical scheme of the ﬁve basic elements that
constitute the cosmos and the human organism, Tantra holds that the
cakras are subtle essences or tanm¯atras of these elements existing within
functional loci of the body. The ÓSaÓt-cakra-nir¯upaÓna describes the six cak-
ras with their associated colors, deities, seed-sounds (b¯ıja-mantras) and
other characteristics, as shown in the table below.39
The nad¯ıs or channels that carry the body’s energy are 72,000 in
number according to Tantra. The most important of them is the
suÓsumn¯a, which is parallel with the spinal column and leads to the high-
est cakra. The two other main nad¯ıs are the iÓd¯a to suÓsumn¯a’s right, and
the pi˙ngal¯a to its left [SCN,1]. The ascent of kuÓnÓdalin¯ı is stimulated by
yogic practices such as ¯asana or postures, kumbhaka or retention of
breath, and bandhas or ‘locks’ (√bandh, ‘to bind’). When the bandhas
148
religious therapeutics 
The Seven Cakras
Cakra
Location
Element
Seed-sound
1
M¯ul¯adh¯ara
between anus and genitals Earth
laÓm
“Root,” “Substratum”
2
Sv¯adhiÓsÓth¯ana
at root of genitals
Water
vaÓm
“Abode of the self”
3
MaÓnip¯ura
solar plexus
Fire
raÓm
“Jewel of the navel”
4
An¯ahata
heart
Air
yaÓm
“Unstruck” (referring to the unstruck sound)
5
Vi´suddha
throat
Space
haÓm
“Pure”
6
Åjñ¯a
between eyes
Mahat
Aum 
“Commander,” 
(Mahat is the Great: 
“one who knows
includes all elements)
Additional to the six, because it is partly within body, and partly beyond it:
7
Sahasr¯ara
top of and above head
visarga 
“Thousand-spoked”
(a release 
of breath)

are applied to a particular region of the body, such as the m¯ul¯adh¯ara or
‘root’ cakra, that region is contracted to concentrate energy there. A re-
lated practice is performance of mudr¯as or ritual gestures, which permit
manipulation of cosmic energy within the body. Woodroffe explains that
these practices “rouse kuÓnÓdalin¯ı so that the pr¯aÓna withdrawn from iÓd¯a
and pi˙ngal¯a may by the power of its ´sakti, after entry into the suÓsumn¯a,
or void (´s¯unya) go up to the Brahma-randhra (the opening of the
suÓsumÓn¯a-nad¯ı at the crown of the head).”40 The commentary of the ÓSaÓt-
cakra-nir¯upaÓna provides some sense of how this occurs:
The yogin should sit in proper posture . . . and steady his mind by the
khechar¯ı mudra. He should next ﬁll the interior of his body with air
and hold it in with kumbhaka, and contract the heart. By doing so the
escape of upward breath is stopped . . . he should contract the anus and
stop the downward air . . . by so doing the ﬁre of k¯ama-v¯ayu there is
kindled, and the kuÓnÓdalin¯ı gets heated (excited) thereby.
SCN 1 commentary
The text describes kuÓnÓdalin¯ı’s ascent and piercing of the cakras. Finally
she “drinks the excellent nectar issuing from Param Íiva.” She then re-
turns to her place in the m¯ul¯adh¯ara or root cakra: “As she returns she in-
fuses rasa (the ‘juice’ of life) into the various things she had previously ab-
sorbed into herself when going upward” [SCN 53 & commentary].
Sam¯adhi in Tantra is this mystical union of Íiva and Íakti. KuÓnÓdalin¯ı
Yoga’s conception of sam¯adhi is very different from that of classical
Yoga, because on the T¯antric interpretation, rather than achieving inde-
pendence for the body as classical Yoga intends, the body itself partici-
pates in enlightenment and liberation. One of the ways body participates
in T¯antric practice is in the use of mantra, the experiencing of sacred
sound.
Mantra Yoga
The idea of mystical sounds has roots in the Vedas. The great seed-sound
Aum (Om) is the source of, and the summation of, all sounds.41 Aum is
identiﬁed in the Yajur-veda with Brahman, with the Vedas, and with emi-
nent gods. In classical Yoga, Om is the designator of the Lord Î´svara. The
Br¯ahm¯aÓnas contain mantras later used in Tantra, but it remained for
Buddhist and Íaiva Tantra to accord mantra the status of a vehicle of sal-
vation, mantray¯ana.42 Speech is the mother of creation in the Hindu tradi-
tion. In the ÓRgveda, v¯ac, the personiﬁcation of speech, says:
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
149

I bring forth the Father, at the summit of this (cosmos). My womb (ori-
gin) is within the waters, in the ocean. Thence I extend myself through-
out all the worlds; yonder heaven also I touch with my peak.
I also blow forth (pervading everything) like the wind, taking to myself
all the worlds. Beyond the heaven, beyond this earth, so have I become
in grandeur.
RV 10: 125.7–8 (trans. Edgerton)
Mantra Yoga uses the ontological power of the word in the context of
T¯antric s¯adhana’s interiorization of cosmic forces. A mantra is a ‘seed-
sound’ or sequence of seed-sounds, called b¯ıjas (b¯ıja, ‘seed’). Each mantra
has “a characteristic pronunciation and intonation that the disciple nor-
mally learns from his g¯uru.”43 The verbal root of mantra is √man, ‘to
think,’ but more broadly, ‘to consider,’ ‘to learn,’ ‘to understand.’ As re-
gards the meaning of mantras, some are composed of actual words, while
others are composed purely of non-word combinations of seed-sounds.
In either case, the seed-sounds comprising the mantra have esoteric
meanings understood by the mantra’s possessor. Mantras transcend the
realm of representational language; the seed-sounds are considered to be
of the nature of Brahman and manifestations of Íakti or cosmic energy.
According to the ViÓsva-s¯ara Tantra, Brahman in its fundamental form as
sound, ´sabda-brahman, is the substance of all mantras, and exists in the
body of the person, j¯ıv¯atma. Íabda-brahman has an ‘unlettered form’
(dhvani), that is, a primal sound not produced by the human voice, and
also a ‘lettered’ form (varÓna), which is produced by the voice. Dhvani is
the source of varÓna, and is a subtle aspect of the j¯ıv¯a’s vital ´sakti.44 Mantra
is a ‘symbol’ in the archaic sense: “It is simultaneously the symbolized
‘reality’ and the symbolizing ‘sign.’”45
Important practical and philosophical aspects of mantra are the use
of the b¯ıjas or phonemes as supports for concentration and “the elabora-
tion of a gnostic system and an interiorized liturgy through revalorization
of the archaic traditions concerning ‘mystical sound.’”46 A central in-
stance of the interiorization of mystical sound is KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga’s con-
cept that each of the cakras has a certain number of petals on which ap-
pear the written forms of particular seed-sounds or b¯ıja-mantras,
together comprising the forty-nine sounds of the Sanskrit alphabet.47
Consonant with the Vedic view that the world emerged ultimately from
the vibration of ´sabda-brahman, the sounds of the Sanskrit alphabet are
thought to embody the constituent energies of the universe, and thus the
sounds are sometimes called m¯atÓrk¯a ‘sources’ (matÓr, ‘mother’).48 In
Woodroffe’s words: “as from a mother comes birth, so from m¯atÓrk¯a or
150
religious therapeutics

sound, the world proceeds.”49 L. P. Singh writes that each letter of m¯atÓrk¯a
varÓna is living energy: “They are the acoustic root of the different waves
and vibrations of the cosmos. These letters are the representative sonoric
manifestations of the universe.”50
A b¯ıja-mantra is a mystic symbol ending with a nasal sound, writ-
ten in Sanskrit’s Devan¯agar¯ı script with the sign called anusv¯ara: a dot
above the syllable. The anusv¯ara is transliterated by an m with a dot ei-
ther above or beneath it: ˙m/Óm. Sometimes an alternate symbol is used:
the anun¯asika, which means ‘through the nose. The anun¯asika is also
called candrabindu, ‘dot within a moon’: (˘
·). The sound indicated by
these signs is pronounced somewhat like the -ng- in the English word
ﬁnger, or song. When intoning b¯ıja-mantras, the nasal ending is not pro-
nounced as an m sound, at the lips, but is “sounded nasally, high up in
the bridge of the nose.”51 This is why mantras written in Roman translit-
eration sometimes end with -ng instead of m. Basically, a b¯ıj¯a-mantra
consists of a single nasalized seed-sound, but compounds such as HÓr¯ım
and AiÓm are also called b¯ıjas.
B¯ıja-mantras serve as supports for meditation, and as the s¯adhaka
progresses, their sounds, and their written forms on speciﬁc petals of the
cakras, are said to become perceptible by mystical or supra-empirical
hearing and vision. Om or Aum is written
, with stylistic variations.
Aum is the seed-sound of the sixth cakra, in the region between the eyes,
and its ending is a labial m sound. Omk¯ara, the primordial sound Om, is
said to be heard spontaneously when the kuÓnÓdalin¯ı rises and opens the
‘inner vision’ of this ‘third eye.’52 The location of the b¯ıja-mantras at the
various cakras is not arbitrary, but expresses a precise physiocosmic cor-
respondence: The ﬁfty primordial sounds (the forty-nine + kÓsam) have
points of resonance within particular regions of the body. For a simple
demonstration, chant the fourth cakra’s seed-sound yaÓm, and the b¯ıja-
petal sounds kaÓm, khaÓm, gaÓm, ghaÓm, and so on. Compare the vibration
in the area of the fourth cakra, the heart region, against the locus of vi-
bration of haÓm, the seed-sound of the ﬁfth cakra in the throat region (its
b¯ıja-petal sounds begin with vowels: a Óm ¯aÓm, iÓm ¯ıÓm, and so on).
Mantra’s efﬁcacy depends in part on the fact that, correctly recited,
mantras can ‘become’ what they represent:
Each god, for example, and each degree of sanctity have a b¯ıja-mantra,
a “mystical sound” which is their “seed,” their “support”—that is, their
very being. By repeating this b¯ıja-mantra in accordance with the rules,
the practitioner appropriates its ontological essence, concretely and di-
rectly assimilates the god, the state of sanctity, etc.53
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
151

The Mah¯anirv¯aÓna Tantra gives instructions for use of the mantra Om
SaccidekaÓm Brahma: “O, the One-Being-Consciousness Brahman”
[MNT 3:12–49]. A sense of how the b¯ıja-sounds embody both meaning
and ontological power is conveyed in the text’s unfolding of Om (Aum)
to reveal that A signiﬁes the protector of the world, U its dissolver, and M
its creator [MNT 3:32]. Eliade notes that a whole system of metaphysics
may be concentrated in a mantra, citing the Mah¯ay¯ana Buddhist text
AÓsÓtas¯aha´srika-prajñ¯a-p¯aramit¯a, progressively reduced to the mantra ‘pra,’
by which practitioners are supposed to grasp the meaning of prajñ¯a-
p¯aramit¯a metaphysics.54
There are three main forms of mantra recitation: v¯acanic or aloud,
upanÓsu or silently with the lips moving, and m¯anasika or mental. While
Vedic hymns are chanted aloud, Tantra considers silent mantra-recitation
superior.55 The repetition of mantra is called japa. Mantra-japa has the
power, according to BhartÓrhari’s V¯akyapad¯ıya,56 to remove ignorance, re-
veal truth, and lead to realization of liberation. Mantras may also be used
in preparation for activities of daily life, making the practitioner recep-
tive for an awaiting experience.
For instance, a mantra composed of the sounds VaÓm, AiÓm, and AiÓm-
VaÓm is recommended in preparation for listening to music. The b¯ıja AiÓm
represents the goddess Sarasvat¯ı, deity of language, music, and learning.57
According to Kakar, Ai Óm is associated with the state of wonder, while
VaÓm is a sound used as an opening syllable when the practitioner is aim-
ing for a state of expanded awareness.58 Such a mantra is considered pu-
riﬁcatory:
. . . this clears the practitioner’s inner ear, and prepares his mind to enjoy
the music . . . used in this way, the mantra acts as a ritual which raises the
emotional level of the user to a point where the actual signals are received
with the utmost clarity and acted on in the most appropriate way.59
In the Yoga-s¯utras, where spiritual progress depends on the stilling of the
vÓrttis or turbulent activities of the mind, mantra is recommended for still-
ing the mind by meditation on God. Classical Yoga’s second limb, ni-
yama, includes sv¯adhy¯aya, study, and one kind of study is repetition of
Om, the designator of Î´svara [YBh 2:32].
The mind of the yogin who constantly repeats the praÓnava (Om) and
habituates the mind to the constant manifestation of the idea it carries
(i.e., Î´svara), becomes one-pointed.
YBh 1:28
152
religious therapeutics

The commentary invokes the Vedic assertion of the coexistence and eter-
nal relation of a word and its meaning, and implies that knowledge aris-
ing from the mantra Om leads ultimately to direct perception of Î´svara.60
In ÓSaÓt-cakra-nir¯upaÓna, however, a fundamental application of mantra is
the rousing of the dormant kuÓnÓdalin¯ı by the mantra H¯uÓm-k¯ara [SCN 50].
Liberation according to both classical Yoga and Tantra requires freeing
the mind of its fragmentive activity. Mantra is a yogic practice that is
therapeutic in virtue of its power to counter the dissipation of mental en-
ergy, and to channel the s¯adhaka’s power to realize a higher state of
being.
AESTHETIC THERAPEUTICS IN TANTRA
Hinduism’s therapeutic impetus is evident in Ía˙nkara’s speaking of ulti-
mate liberation as health, sv¯asthya, ‘self-abiding,’ and all the way back to
this hymn to Rudra (Íiva) in the ÓRgveda, among the most ancient texts
on earth:
May I attain a hundred winters, O Rudra,
through the most comforting remedies given by you!
Drive away from us enmity, farther away distress,
away diseases—in all directions!
. . . Bring us across to the further shore of distress
for our well-being. Keep away all onsets of inﬁrmity!
. . . Cause our heroes to thrive with your remedies!
I hear of you as the best physician of physicians.
RV 2:33.2–4 (trans. Maurer)
If it is granted that liberation is healing, in the sense of gaining freedom
from limitations and suffering, each of the many Hindu religious and
philosophical traditions can be seen, on its own terms, as having some
therapeutic concern. In seeking a more comprehensive account of reli-
gious therapeutics, the initial model derived from classical Yoga and
Åyurveda is next expanded with Tantra’s ‘aesthetic’ therapeutics. I
understand aesthetic not only in reference to art, but also in its original
sense, pertaining to sense perception [Gk. aisthenasthai, ‘to perceive’].61
Tantra’s concept of the body as part of the sacred creation, and as an in-
strument and subject of enlightenment, opens the way for aesthetic forms
of religious practice, such as music and dance, whose therapeutic proper-
ties are both psychophysical and spiritual.
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
153

Therapeutic Elements of Tantra
Tantra’s impetus as a religious therapeutic is evident in the Mah¯anirv¯aÓna
Tantra when Íakti addresses Íiva as “Lord among physicians of earthly
ills” [MNT 4:7]. The word used for ills is bhavavy¯adhi, explained by
Woodroffe as meaning “both the ill of existence itself (i.e., the cycle of re-
birth and death), and the ills ﬂowing therefrom.”62 Among Indian tradi-
tions, Tantra is outstanding for its concern with practical problems over
philosophical ones, and on this basis, Basu notes Tantra’s afﬁnity with
the art of medicine.63 Eliade locates the source of Tantra’s therapeutic
concern in its conception that the great ailment of human life is ‘suffer-
ing.’ Suffering, in soteriological terms, arises from “the shattering of the
primordial Unity,” co-extensive with the creation and coming-to-be of all
things.64 T¯antric religious therapeutics therefore focus on the recovery of
unity, particularly utilizing somatic experience for meditation and attain-
ment of liberative knowledge. Psychologically, Tantra implies that the
healthy personality is integrated—not fragmented—especially in virtue of
its recommending that desires be sublimated or otherwise recast, rather
than being eliminated or repressed. Kakar puts it this way:
The healthy personality in Tantra is neither passive nor desireless; it has
only redeﬁned the terms of the struggle between desire and a world
which is often unable and unwilling to gratify it.65
Tantra, with other Indian traditions, promotes liberation by means of
knowledge, but (like classical Yoga), its psychophysical therapeutics are
liberative as well.66 Tantra holds that ignorance of the identity of self and
ultimate reality produces spiritual illness, and perpetuation of the cycle of
death and rebirth. Shah identiﬁes a range of therapeutic applications of
T¯antric theory and practice, presenting perspectives on health conceived
in terms of equilibrium among Yoga’s ﬁve pr¯aÓnas or vital airs, Åyurveda’s
three doÓsas, and the ﬁve mah¯abh¯utas or basic elements of S¯aÓmkhya.
Shah examines the therapeutic powers of four manifestations of
kuÓnÓdalin¯ı energy. Its kriyavat¯i aspect is kuÓnÓdalin¯ı’s manifestation on the
physical plane. This is the domain of vital energy resulting from practice
of HaÓtha Yoga. KuÓnÓdalin¯ı’s kalavat¯ı aspect pertains to energy manifest as
the digestive ﬁre, whose function is necessary for physical health. The ved-
hamay¯ı aspect concerns the rising of kuÓnÓdalin¯ı through the cakras. Each
cakra is associated with a particular mah¯abh¯uta or element, and with cul-
tivation of one’s power to control the ascent of kuÓnÓdalin¯ı, the s¯adhaka is
said to be able to inﬂuence the ﬁve elements, whose proper proportions
154
religious therapeutics

determine one’s state of health. Finally, the varÓnamay¯ı aspect concerns
pronunciation of the varÓnas, the sounds of the Sanskrit alphabet. Each of
the forty-nine sounds is a manifestation of the vaikhari or audible form of
´sabdabrahman, and according to the T¯antric text Íarada Tilaka, each
sound is associated with either the iÓd¯a-nad¯ı (governing vital currents), or
the pi˙ngala-nad¯ı (governing mental currents). For instance, short vowels
are contained in pi˙ngal¯a and long vowels in iÓd¯a. To appreciate how this
functions concretely, pronounce aloud and compare the different qualities
of the Sanskrit short vowel a (‘uh’), and the long vowel ¯a (‘aah’). Shah hy-
pothesizes that the excess of vital current can produce erratic functions
within the body-mind complex, while the excess of mental current may
lead to physical inﬂexibility and rigidity in the personality.67
Vyaas Houston, founder of the American Sanskrit Institute (War-
wick, New York), corroborates the claim that oral Sanskrit can inﬂuence
psychophysical states. In his discussion of how a person can become ex-
quisitely aware of the unique resonance of each of Sanskrit’s forty-nine
sounds, he compares the effects of uttering aspirated and unaspirated
consonants:
. . . one of the great pleasures of the Sanskrit language lies in the alter-
nation between minimal-breath and maximal-breath consonants. The
minimizing of breath while producing a consonant, when for example,
touching the tip of the tongue behind the teeth in ta, brings about an in-
tensely focused one-pointedness of concentration; while a consonant re-
leased with maximal breath, like tha has an expansive liberating effect.
It releases pressure from the heart and chest, and creates a happy re-
laxed feeling.68
M¯antric utterances thus have application as a religious therapeutic using
the medium of speech: correct pronunciation of suitable combinations of
letters produces resonances that can equilibrate the circulation of ener-
gies in a person. Shah writes that this therapeutic application of
kuÓnÓdalin¯ı’s varÓnamay¯ı aspect can be performed by a healer on behalf of a
patient. The ﬁrst three aspects, however, can be utilized only by an indi-
vidual whose T¯antric practice has developed her power to use kuÓnÓdalin¯ı’s
manifestations on behalf of her own health.69
Sacred Music
T¯antric music and dance are religious arts expressing the two fundamen-
tal manifestations of primordial Íakti or energy: vibration and move-
ment. Íiva is known as NaÓte´svara, lord of the dance (√naÓt ‘to dance’).
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
155

This appellation reﬂects the T¯antric conception of constant motion
within the cosmos. A dancer, through ritual gestures (mudr¯as), becomes
attuned to, and manifests, the rhythms of the cosmos, thus instantiating
(for self and for those witnessing the dance) the primordial oneness of self
and Brahman. This function of ritual dance is religiously therapeutic:
dance serves to restore well-being by permitting direct experience of—
and thus knowledge of—the relation of self with the sacred. Religious
dance has therapeutic properties in the psychophysical domain as well.
For the better expression of mood and meaning, a dancer utilizes the
yogic practices of breath control (pr¯aÓnay¯ama) and postures (¯asana) to
gain calmness of mind, physical ﬁtness, and ﬂexibility.
Music, too, is a manifestation of the cosmic Íakti. The N¯ada-
bindupaniÓsad, which instructs about the yogic liberative practice of lis-
tening to the ‘inner sound’, articulates the value of sound for developing
meditative concentration:
The mind, the snake abiding in the hole of the interior of the body,
caught by (the snake-charmer of) sweet sound, completely forgetting the
world, does not run anywise, becoming one-pointed.70
The ‘inner sound,’ n¯ada, is one of the levels of the manifestation of
´sabda-brahman, or the Absolute as Sound. N¯ada is supra-sensuous
sound, audible only with sufﬁcient meditative effort and puriﬁcation of
the nad¯ıs or nerve currents. The Yoga-´sikhopaniÓsad distinguishes four
forms of ´sabda-brahman. The most subtle is para-´sabda or supreme
sound, associated with the m¯ul¯adh¯ara or root cakra. Next is pa´syanti-
´sabda, ‘visible sound,’ by means of which yogins see the universe. It is as-
sociated with the an¯ahata cakra of the heart area. An¯ahata means
‘unstruck,’ and refers to self-generating sound. Pa´syanti-´sabda is also
known as an¯ahata, sound that does not issue from material vibration.
The unstruck sound is heard as the praÓnava, that is, the sacred sound
Om, which is according to the Yoga-s¯utras, the designator of Î´svara. The
third form of ´sabda-brahman is madhyama-´sabda, ‘middle sound,’ desig-
nating the forty-nine sounds of the Sanskrit alphabet. Finally, the coars-
est form of sound is vaikhara-´sabda, ‘manifest sound,’ whose manifesta-
tion is speech.71 Tantra, even with its emphasis on the body, recommends
silent recitation of mantra. This attests to the strength of the Indian incli-
nation to transcend or sublimate physicality. Both ‘inner’ and ‘outer’
sound are important in Tantra, but in the context of body and religious-
ness, physically audible sound—particularly in the form of sacred
music—is important in Tantra’s aesthetic therapeutics.
156
religious therapeutics

R¯agas, or melodic frameworks, cultivate meditative awareness in
both musicians and listeners. The verbal root of r¯aga is √raj or rañj, ‘to
color’ ‘to please’: “Hence the term occupies a rich semantic ﬁeld that in-
cludes such things as color, feeling, intensity, passion, love, and beauty.
The primary aim of a r¯aga, then, is to bring delight by stimulating an
emotional response in the hearer.”72 From a T¯antric standpoint, r¯agas can
calm and concentrate the mind, and stimulate it aesthetically in the direc-
tion of religious realization.
Whether or not one accepts T¯antric interpretations of how dance
and music can contribute to spiritual realization, Tantra provides useful
articulations of the spiritual potential of engagement with art. Tantra em-
braces the somatic and the aesthetic within its religious domain, and pro-
vides a conception of art that is both therapeutic and religious. If we take
the term aesthetic in its fundamental meaning of pertaining to sense expe-
rience, and the term art in its broader connotation as applicable to forms
that evoke meanings beyond themselves, Tantra indicates that the realm
of aesthetics can be a signiﬁcant dimension of religious therapeutics. In-
sight into religious therapeutics in the domain of aesthetics could be de-
veloped by considering the healing applications of religious expressions
such as Navajo and Tibetan sand-paintings, and the use of sacred music,
dance, and other arts in a range of traditions.
SACRED MUSIC AS A RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTIC
Across world traditions, sacred music is valued for its healing powers, for
example, in the peace and well-being induced by hearing Gregorian
chant, and the use of indigenous American (American Indian) medicine
songs sung in curing ceremonies. The T¯antric conception of body as an
instrument of liberation grounds a notion of sacred music as a religious
therapeutic, as does the notion of ´sabda-brahman, sound as the origin
and fundamental expression of being. The Kashmir Íaiva text Span-
dak¯arik¯a (Stanzas on Vibration) conveys that the purpose of mantra is the
achievement of unobscured consciousness. The following passage from
the commentary SpandavivÓrti of R¯aj¯anaka R¯ama expresses that the use
of mantra for physical healing is of the same order, but of a lesser degree
that the use of mantra for the imparting of supraphysical wholeness:
(Mantras) that have not become one with the supreme Lord [by “seiz-
ing the strength” associated with Íiva] are no more than mere phonemic
sounds, subject to creation and destruction. . . . However, by laying
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
157

hold of that strength, their powers to perform their functions, be they
of a superior order (such as the imparting) of initiation of an inferior,
(such as) remedying (the effects) of a scorpion’s venom, transcend all
limitations.73
From the standpoint that liberation is healing in the ultimate sense, the
following discussion uses T¯antric foundations to illustrate inquiry into a
speciﬁc theme—sacred music—showing how music functions as a reli-
gious therapeutic. Comparative applications emphasize the healing
power of sacred music in a variety of Asian and American Indian tradi-
tions. Three main themes are addressed:
• Sound as a focus for meditation and a stimulus to the expansion of
liberative knowledge and consequent well-being.
• The healing and liberative efﬁcacy of breath-control in song, chant,
and the playing of wind instruments.
• The function of music for experiential identiﬁcation of Self and the
sacred.
Harold Coward writes that in all world religions, the oral experience of
scripture is as important, or more important, than the written:
The dominance of the written text for contemporary Westerners is
partly a result of the impact of modern, print-dominated culture on reli-
gious experience. But it is quite out of line with the traditional experi-
ence of scripture as found in the world religions and in Native American
religious experience. In each tradition the scripture began orally and to
varying degrees has remained a basically oral phenomenon.74
Not only spoken and heard scripture, but other forms of language are im-
portant in religious life: performative speech, chant, and song can all be
used in a sacred manner. By sacred in this context I mean that language
and music are ways of experiencing relatedness with what is holy. Both
classical Yoga and Tantra incorporate the power of mantra as a focal
point for meditation, and a stimulus to the realization of one’s true nature
and well-being. V¯acaspati’s commentary on the Yoga-s¯utra says that repe-
tition and understanding of Om is “the means of feeling the presence of
the Lord everywhere, in all circumstances and phenomena” [TV 1:28].
Sound is so important in T¯antric practice that Tantra is also called
Mantra-´sastra. Tantra articulates the theme of ritual identiﬁcation of
(forces of) Self with (forces of) cosmos. One of the most palpable ways to
experience this identiﬁcation is in the production and perception of sacred
158
religious therapeutics

music. The word s¯adhana—devoted practice of a discipline for the purpose
of spiritual self-healing and enlightenment—can apply to sacred music.
How Is Sacred Music Therapeutic?
Clearly music can be religious—in its content, and its power to induce
reverent and even meditative states. Music also symbolizes (participates
in and points to) sacred forces. But how is sacred music therapeutic? A
non-dualistic concept of the person, conceived not as a compound of the
two substances ‘mind’ and body’—but described by terms ‘mind’ and
‘body’ to designate two main dimensions of human experience—entails a
theory of etiology or causation of disease wherein mental and physical
states are understood as mutually inﬂuential. A fundamental manifesta-
tion of this phenomenon is the fact that emotional distress activates
neurochemicals that can compromise vitality and immunity. Conversely,
mental calm has a healthful effect on the body. Sacred music serves many
functions, and one of them is to calm the mind/body so that well-being
can prevail. Physician Harold G. Koenig comments on numerous medical
studies concerning neurochemical health factors:
Persons who are depressed have increased secretion of cortisol, from the
adrenal glands. This natural substance interferes with the immune
system, which is the body’s major defense against cancer, infections, and
other outside invaders. In fact, this is the substance that doctors give pa-
tients who receive heart, kidney, or liver transplants to suppress their
immune systems so that their bodies will not reject the transplanted
organ. Psychological distress also causes the adrenal glands to secrete
epinephrine and nor-epinephrine, substances that cause constriction of
blood vessels, which may contribute to high blood pressure, diseases of
the arteries that feed the heart (coronary arteries), and possibly irregu-
larities in hearth rhythm (arrhythmia). Finally, psychological stress in-
creases activity in a part of the nervous system called the autonomic ner-
vous system, which may cause or worsen heart and blood vessel
problems, as well as induce stomach ulcers, and many lower bowel or
colon problems. Consequently, persons with emotional problems such
as depression, anxiety, or those who are under chronic stress may be
under greater risk of dying from a number of stress-related diseases.75
In addition to the physiologically therapeutic beneﬁts of religious experi-
ence, including participation in sacred music, a deeper appreciation of sa-
cred music as a religious therapeutic is possible on the interpretation that
religious liberation is itself healing. Music’s healing effects in the psycho-
physical dimension contribute to religious realization equivalent to fun-
damental healing of our human condition.
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
159

Breath, Music, and Healing
A fundamental inspiration for inquiry into music as medicine is Yoga’s
prescription of control of the breath for establishing meditative con-
sciousness. In using the word inspiration here, I wish to convey its double
meaning of stimulation of feeling or creativity, and its literal meaning,
from the Latin inspir¯are ‘to breathe into.’ The force behind sacred speech
and song is breath. Air is the constant support of our physical life, and
breathing is the fundamental human interaction with the energy of the
cosmos. The medium of the sound of the ﬂute is breath, the vehicle of
pr¯aÓna, the current of life. To play the ﬂute requires control of breath, not
pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama as it is practiced for yogic meditation, but with pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama’s
essential property of specially timed inhalation and exhalation, and,
more important, its effect: breaking the tendency toward breathing that
is thoughtless and erratic. Instead, the breathing is regulated and a medi-
tative state ensues from the quieting of what classical Yoga called the
vÓrttis, the ‘turnings’ of mental activity. Ordinary breathing tends to be
shallow, but in pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama and other breath-disciplines, breath is made
more even, and deeper breathing infuses the body/mind with vitalizing
oxygen, in turn infusing the practitioner spiritually with more pr¯aÓna.
In Navajo philosophy, the word ni¬ch’i is translated by James K.
McNeley as ‘Holy Wind’:
Suffusing all of nature, Holy Wind gives life, thought, speech, and the
power of motion to all living things and serves as the means of commu-
nication between all elements of the living world.76
Health and well-being are central concerns in the Navajo worldview. The
term hózhó has meanings along the lines of beauty, harmony, order, and
well-being. Through ritual, hózhó is restored to an individual’s being,
and through speech and song, hózhó is then imposed into his universe,
carried by ni¬ch’i:
After a person has projected hózhó into the air through ritual form, he
then at the conclusion of the ritual, breathes that hózhó back into himself
and makes himself part of the order, harmony, and beauty he has pro-
jected into the world through the ritual mediums of speech and song.77
Paciﬁc Northwest traditional healer and oral historian Johnny Moses
(Whisstemenee: Walking Medicine Robe) is a member of the Nootka and
Tulalip nations, and a practitioner of a medicine way called SiSíWiss,
which means Sacred Breath. He says:
160
religious therapeutics

Singing and sound can change the way you think or how you feel. We
use healing songs to strengthen people and to help them discover the
richness of their being. We have songs that can even heal a person who
is suffering.78
Moses explains that the Samish word s¯ı’¯ılh means ‘to sing,’ ‘to pray,’ and
‘to cry.’ In expressing the healing power of sacred song Moses says, “We
believe that when you sing, your cry will turn into a song.79 He says of
healing ceremonies: “We sing for a person in sorrow to uplift them, to
give them energy, to give them life-force.”80 Breath has special signiﬁ-
cance here: sacred songs carry the breath of the ancestors, which contin-
ues to help and heal the living generations. Not printed words, but the
breath-infused words of traditional teachers, healers, singers, and the
oral historians known as storytellers perpetuate healing knowledge and
the spirit of life.
Body as Instrument of Sacred Music
A major feature of Tantra is the ontological presupposition that the uni-
verse, and everything in it, is a manifestation of the one Brahman. Emer-
gent from this principle is a positive attitude toward material nature and
the human body. T¯antric practice utilizes material nature in order to
transcend subjugation to materiality. Tantra regards the body as part of
the sacred creation, and as enlightenable itself. T¯antric religious thera-
peutics focus on recovery of the primordial unity of Self as cosmos, and
utilize somatic experience for meditation and the attainment of libera-
tion. Music is a manifestation of primordial ´sakti or energy. Swami
Prajñ¯an¯ananda explains that the n¯ada ´sakti or primordial sound energy is
experienced by both musician and listeners:
Gradually the awakened energy penetrates all the force centers of the
body and ﬁnally reaches the thousand petalled lotus of the sahasr¯ara . . .
and then the s¯adhaka-artist and the sincere music listeners feel divine
communion of the j¯ıv¯atman and p¯aram¯atma. They attain the fruition of
the n¯ada s¯adhana, which enables them to cut asunder the knots of nesci-
ence and realize the transcendental Brahman.81
The human body is the instrument of sacred speech and song. William
Powers’ study of Lakota sacred language utilizes Levy-Bruhl’s idea of
‘appurtenances’ to explore the idea of speech and song as extensions of
the body.82 Sacred music can be vocal or instrumental. Sacred music
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
161

played on instruments extends song from the human performer so that it
resonates, not in the musician’s voice-box, but in an object, such as a
drum. Fundamental musical instruments (after the human voice) are the
drum, the rattle, and the ﬂute. In the Lakota language the names of these
instruments show that musical instruments are conceived as extensions
of the body: The drum is waapapi, ‘things struck with the hands,’ the rat-
tle is wayuˆhlaˆhlapi, ‘things rattled with the hands,’ and the ﬂute is waya-
jopi, ‘things played by blowing.’83 These instruments, made with a array
of designs and materials, have religious and therapeutic uses throughout
world cultures.
The voice of the drum is the heartbeat of Mother Earth. It is not that
the drumbeat represents her heartbeat, but the drum makes audible the
pulses of nature, of which our heartbeats are an instance. Drumming is a
discipline that can bring about a meditative state. It does this by making
audible a regular rhythm that is stabilizing to one’s heart and other vital
rhythms, and to one’s mental rhythms as well. Stabilization of psycho-
physical rhythms, as yoga demonstrates, induces meditative states of con-
sciousness. Drumming or listening to drumming can accomplish this in a
very powerful and direct way because the drumbeat is not only heard
with the ear, but its vibrations are felt throughout the body. In the social
dimension, the drum can have great unifying power for a group of peo-
ple, be they marching together, dancing, singing, playing music, listening
to music, or participating in ceremony.
Breath is the physical force that produces the sound of the ﬂute.
Riley Lee is an ethnomusicologist and master of the shakuhachi, a Japa-
nese ﬂute traditionally made of bamboo. Asked about the therapeutic
value of playing the shakuhachi, Lee jests that his family could dispel the
myth that this ﬂute-master lives an entirely serene life. Lee observes how-
ever, that playing the instrument has the therapeutic beneﬁts of recipro-
cally requiring and developing relaxation in three areas of the body that
are signiﬁcant energy-centers, and which tend to accumulate tension: the
jaws, the diaphragm, and the occipital area where the neck joins the
skull. As regards the function of the shakuhachi for religious liberation,
Lee notes the use of the ﬂute by Zen monks who play it as a bridge to
meditative consciousness and liberation, in some cases playing only one
song all their lives.84 Despite Lee’s admission that his life can be very hec-
tic, to hear and see him play the shakuhachi is to witness the musician-
ship of a person whose psychophysical integration and vitality allow him
to play music whose sound is sublime—uplifting to the spirit—and is
thus both therapeutic and religious.
162
religious therapeutics

Elements of Healing in Sanskrit Chant
Among forms of sacred speech and song, sublimity is wonderfully mani-
fest in Sanskrit chant. Like music, Sanskrit uplifts the heart. Houston
writes:
Sanskrit is a language designed for maximum uninterrupted resonance.
It is language as music, attracting the full attention of the speaker or
singer with the articulation of each syllable blending perfectly without
the slightest friction into the next syllable.85
Sanskrit sounds are combined according to rules of euphonic combina-
tion called saÓmdhi (‘union,’ from sam, ‘together,’ √dh¯a ‘to put’).
SaÓmdhi permits “the most perfect uninterrupted ﬂow of the most eu-
phonic blending of letters into words and verse.” For instance, the
greeting NamaÓh te, “Salutations to thee,” becomes Namaste; the
sounds are blended to maintain a current of resonance. In the chanting
of Sanskrit scripture or of mantras, the experience of unbroken resona-
tion pervades one’s entire body and extends beyond oneself.86 To send
forth one’s voice, and feel its vibration join the vibrations of the world
extending all around oneself, can be a direct and marvelous experience
of primordial unity. The rules of saÓmdhi serve purposes of efﬁciency
and aesthetics in both oral and written Sanskrit, but saÓmdhi’s greatest
importance is the power it gives Sanskrit as a vehicle for inducing medi-
tative consciousness, and the higher knowledge that meditative con-
sciousness supports. Other features of Sanskrit also serve this purpose.
An essential feature of the language is the purity of Sanskrit’s basic
sounds, described by Houston as “a coherent selection of the most
pure, distinct, and focused sounds that can be made by the human vocal
instrument.”87
The breath-patterns required for chanting is another feature of San-
skrit that supports meditative awareness. For instance, the arrangement
of the consonants in the Sanskrit alphabet is based in part on alternation
of aspirated and unaspirated sounds, such as ta and tha. According to the
Taittir¯ıya UpaniÓsad, pronunciation requires attention to sound, accent,
quantity, force, articulation, and combination [Tait. Up. 1:2]. Correct
pronunciation both requires and cultivates breath-control, and thus
chant, like the playing of the ﬂute, has qualities like those of pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama:
regulation of breath leads to calming of the vÓrttis, the activities of mind
that produce bondage and suffering. Meditative awareness gained in San-
skrit chant is thus rooted in the physical experience of:
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
163

1. Vocal sound-resonation
2. Control of breath
3. One-pointed concentration required to produce the sounds of the
mantra or verse being chanted.
Acute attention to locating the precise point of articulation of a sound
(for instance, guttural, in the throat, or labial, at the lips), along with at-
tunement to the correct use of breath to produce the sound, counters
fragmentation of consciousness and helps one to develop the one-
pointedness of mind prescribed by Yoga.
The somatic and aesthetic dimensions of Sanskrit exemplify the sot-
eriological role of the body in the experience of sacred sound. We ordi-
narily think of language as a cognitive phenomenon, and regard the phys-
ical articulation of speech as incidental to the communication of
meaning. Certainly language exists to convey meaning, but the meanings
in Sanskrit’s awesome body of literature are carried by currents of sound
with amazing beauty, and the power to modify states of consciousness.
Mental concentration on Sanskrit verses, and the resonation of their
sound with one’s own body as its instrument, can be an experience of the
highest order of enjoyment, a therapeutic that utilizes human physicality
in a sublime way.
Healing in Identification of Self with Cosmos
Harold Coward explores how the spoken word can “evoke the Divine
word of which it is an earthly resonance.”
A direct correspondence is seen as existing between the physical vibra-
tions of the noumenal chant and the noumenal vibrations of the tran-
scendent. The more the physical vibrations of the uttered chant are re-
peated, the more Transcendent power is evoked in experience until one’s
consciousness is puriﬁed and transformed.88
An instance of religiously transformative chant is Tibetan overtone
chanting. Individual monks chant not single notes, but multiple-note
chords. Coward writes that chanting “enables the monks to feel the evo-
cation of the interdependence of the universe—a meaning that can be
said symbolically in the chanted sounds and gestures, but not said expli-
citly.”89 Tibetan Buddhist overtone chant expresses that things are more
than they seem: the higher overtone frequencies are held to stand in the
same relation to the extremely low fundamental tone as spiritual reality
stands to the world we think we inhabit.90
164
religious therapeutics

The ﬂute, by means of breath, has the sound of the wind, so its
music easily evokes experiencing the unity of self and cosmos. Kevin
Locke (Tokeya Inajin), a Lakota musician and instrument maker, says of
the ﬂute:
. . . the ﬂute is the essence of the wind, especially Niya Awicableze, the
Enlightening Breath, the ﬁrst waft on which the meadowlarks return to
the Northern prairies. The ﬂute gives voice to the beauty of the land and
is the sound of the wind as it rustles the grasses and leaves, scales the
buttes and mountains, or skims the surface of lakes and streams.
To send forth the clearest sound the ﬂute must be made with great
care and understanding of how the wind-like breath of its user will
move invisibly through the ﬂute to draw out a beautiful melody. The
music becomes the means of a mysterious unseen communication that
ﬂows from one heart to another, one spirit to another.91
The ﬂute can sing the sound of the wind in a canyon, and the musician is
the locus of the canyon-wind’s reinstantiation as sound made by human
intelligence, breath, and the instrument he has crafted. Flutes are gener-
ally made of plant materials, marking another dimension of the relation-
ality of beings realizable through sacred music. The part of a tree used to
make a ﬂute is not severed from the living creation. It continues to live,
not biologically, but as a resonator for the breath of a human being, and
a resonator for the voice of the wind. Locke speaks of the sounds of the
four prime instruments as vehicles of the life-force, and as means to expe-
rience one’s identity with the creation and its sacred forces. The religious
and therapeutic power of music is conveyed in Locke’s likening the music
of these instruments to the thunderstorms that allow the prairies to
bloom. The drum is the thunder “that shakes the human heart out of its
slough of despondency.” Flute songs are “the wind that puriﬁes and
breathes life into the human heart.” The rattle’s sound is the refreshing
rain, and the human voice is streaks of lightning that “illuminate the
heart and charge it with energy and enlightenment.”92 The power of sa-
cred instrumental music is all the greater if the musician has crafted his
own instrument and experiences the unity of creation in his transform-
ing—for example, part of a cedar tree into a ﬂute with a living voice.
Sound as a Bridge Between Substantial and 
Non-substantial Being
Sound is physical—it involves energy being conducted through air (a ma-
terial medium of distantly spaced molecules) and impinging physically on
tantra and aesthetic therapeutics
165

the hearer’s eardrum, even impinging on the hearer’s body. But sound is
not ‘material’ in the sense of substantiality: sound is not a substance ex-
tended in space. Experiencing the reality of the non-material realm
through experiencing sound is a powerful way to realize the reality of the
spiritual, with spiritual connoting, in part, non-materiality. The opposi-
tion of the material and the spiritual does not, however, imply the oppo-
sition of the material and the sacred, for ‘spiritual’ and ‘sacred’ are not
equivalent terms. Furthermore, unlike traditions such as Advaita
Ved¯anta and classical Yoga that regard materiality as inferior, Tantra and
indigenous American religious philosophies esteem the natural world and
human physicality as compatible with the sacred. Traditions such as
these ground the idea of music as medicine.
In the Hindu view of language, it is the ‘vibrating’ spoken word that
has power; words are manifestations of the Divine.93 Chant issues from a
material source—the human body/mind. But even though the resonation
of the chanting voice is physical, it is not material. Thus it provides direct
experience of the reality of the spiritual. The singer’s voice radiates out
from his body/mind into the atmosphere, creating a ﬁeld of sound that
joins with the ﬁeld of vibration in which all Being participates. Sacred
song transforms consciousness in a healing way. In singing, the vibrations
of sound return to the singer, and egoism is destroyed with his awareness,
not that he is chanting, but that he is an instrument resonating the song of
that which is sacred. In this attunement, the singer can be as an unstruck
drum, resonating in concert with the musical vibrations surrounding it.
166
religious therapeutics

Conclusion
COMMUNITY:
RELATIONALITY IN
RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
The model of religious therapeutics presented in this study received its
basis from classical Yoga (branches 1–5), and was supplemented with
Åyurvedic medical therapeutics (6), and T¯antric aesthetic therapeutics
(7). Now to complete the model, the domain of community is added,
using Hindu and other world traditions, to produce the following set of
branches.
Branches of Religious Therapeutics
1. Metaphysical and epistemic foundations
2. Soteriology (theory of salvation or liberation)
3. Value theory and ethics
4. Physical practice
5. Cultivation of consciousness
6. Medicine and health-care
7. Aesthetics
8. Community
This study addressed the problem that the psychophysical person is
bound to struggle with problems concerning embodiment and health, and
took the position that the spiritual Self suffers no illness, thus religiousness
167

offers a means of realizing one’s primordial wholeness and freedom. I as-
sumed the Hindu standpoint that healing, in religious terms, does not
mean curing the spiritual Self, for the spiritual Self is not subject to sick-
ness. I argued that healing in a religious sense means overcoming impedi-
ments that interfere with realizing (i.e., knowing and achieving) one’s
Self-nature in its full identity and freedom. Classical Yoga, which pro-
vided a foundation for the model of religious therapeutics, aims for the
transcendence of material nature. But even though classical Yoga pro-
vides an extensive system of religious therapeutics, it neglects relational-
ity, for its goal is kaivalya, ‘independence’ of Self as consciousness from
entanglement in material nature, including the body, nature, and social-
ity. Having integrated into the model Åyurveda’s holistic contribution to
the understanding and preservation of health, and Tantra’s approach that
enlightenment is attainable through physicality and aesthetic experience,
the model now requires a component embracing relationality. The idea of
community embodies meanings of relationality between person and the
sacred, among persons, and among the aspects of creation.
The idea of community thus has applications in the domains of reli-
gion, human social life, and ecology. In religion, community refers to par-
ticipation in, or contact with, that which is sacred. The word community
derives from the Latin comm¯unis, ‘common,’ which connotes shared
interests. The Indo-European root of common and community is √mei,
‘to change,’ ‘to go,’ ‘to move.’ Derivatives of the root mei refer to the ex-
change of goods and services. Mei and its derivative ‘common’ also pro-
duce the word communication, pertaining to the transmission of informa-
tion or meaning. In the context of religious therapeutics, communication
includes prayer, ritual speech, scripture, and sacred music, which are vehi-
cles for communicating with the sacred, and for conveying among human
beings various means of getting in contact with the sacred.
Tantra holds material nature as sacred, thus grounding the valuation
of relationality, and among Indian traditions, Åyurveda gives the most at-
tention to the signiﬁcance of the biophysical environment, as illustrated
by Åyurveda’s view of pharmacology. Pharmacology is a major branch of
both Åyurveda and contemporary scientiﬁc medicine. The Åyurvedic
view of pharmacology exempliﬁes Åyurveda’s ethos of bio-spiritual com-
munity. Plants, which provide food and medicine, are central in Hindu
religious cosmology. Exploration of community in the context of reli-
gious therapeutics spans themes including sacred song, and human
beings’ relationships with plants. In the spirit of honoring relationality
within the many domains of life embraced by religious therapeutics, con-
sider these verses from the UpaniÓsads:
168
religious therapeutics

The essence of things here is the earth.
The essence of the earth is water.
The essence of water is plants.
The essence of plants is a person (puruÓsa).
Ch¯and. Up. 1:1.2
Agni or ‘ﬁre,’ the transformative energy of the life process, exists not just
in the human being but throughout living nature. In the plant kingdom,
photosynthesis is one of agni’s manifestations. The plants we consume as
food and medicine transmit agni to us. When digestive agni is strong,
food affords maximal nourishment, but when agni is weak, compro-
mised digestion can contribute to disease. Plants in Åyurvedic pharma-
cology and dietetics have both medical and religious signiﬁcance:
Herbs can transmit that agni to us, their capacity to digest and trans-
form, and this may augment our own power of digestion, or give us the
capacity to digest substances we normally cannot. The agni of plants
can feed our agni. Through this interconnection, we join ourselves with
the cosmic agni, the creative force of life and healing.1
Frawley and Lad invoke this UpaniÓsadic view in examining connections
between plant medicines and mantras. Both regulate pr¯aÓna: similar to a
mantra’s transmitting the seed-energies of consciousness into the mind,
medicinal plants transmit the seed-energies of nature into the body to re-
store well-being.
Traditions such as Buddhism, Neo-Confucianism, and indigenous
religions of the Americas and other continents show the importance of
community—ecological, social, and spiritual. The religious potential of
human relationality with nature emerges in David Kalupahana’s exam-
ination of the Buddhist understanding of freedom or nirv¯aÓna in terms of
health or ease (sukha). Freedom is attainable by overcoming egoism, so
that passion, hatred, and confusion can be eliminated. “Living in sur-
roundings where one can realize the interdependence of human life and
nature” can support the gaining of knowledge that destroys egoism.2 Ka-
lupahana conveys that natural surroundings—the forest grove, the empty
abode—provide a retreat from “the attractions and repulsions generated
by artiﬁcial forms of life.” Physical and mental health are better sustained
in unpolluted, natural environments, thus early Buddhist aramas or mon-
asteries were generally simple residences surrounded by woods or or-
chards.3 Beyond nature’s supporting human well-being, the natural world
itself possesses Buddhahood, according to some Chinese and Japanese
community:relationality in religious therapeutics
169

Buddhists. William R. LaFleur investigates the soteriological role of na-
ture according to the twelfth-century Buddhist monk Saigy¯o, whose use
of natural ‘images’ in his poetry serves to “create a union of the subject
and the real object of his image-ing, that is, the Reality itself.”4 K¯ukai
(eighth/ninth century), founder of Japan’s Shingon school of Buddhism,
explains the Buddhahood of plants:
The Dharmakaya consists of the Five Great Elements within which
space and plants-and-trees [s¯omoku] are included. Both this space and
these plants-and-trees are the dharmakaya. Even though with the physi-
cal eye one might see the coarse form of plants-and-trees, it is with the
subtle eye that the subtle color can be seen. Therefore, without any al-
teration in what is in itself, trees-and-plants may, unobjectionably, be re-
ferred to as [having] Buddha [-nature].5
K¯ukai posits the identity of the Buddhist Absolute, the dharmakaya or
‘body of the dharma’ “with all forms and things in the phenomenal,
mundane world.”6 For K¯ukai and Saigy¯o, concrete phenomena in nature
have a soteriological function, at once symbolizing and participating in
the Absolute.
Plants are one of the four basic elements in Lakota metaphysics as
explained by Lakota elder Wallace H. Black Elk. The four elements are
ﬁre, water, rock, and green. Green refers to the plants that Grandmother
Earth grows out of her body. Black Elk describes being in the woods, ex-
periencing the plants breathing and communicating among one another:
“I am part of it,” he says, “so there’s a chemical language. I was happy
there knowing I was related to them.”7 Black Elk is conversant with the
discourse of Western disciplines, in which he identiﬁes fours ‘languages’:
the scientiﬁc, legal, psychological, and religious. Here he uses the word
chemical to invoke a context of relationality in which living plants ex-
change life-force with other participants in the web of life.
Ecologically, community pertains to the relations among all the en-
tities that constitute nature. Life and health in biological terms (for the
person as ‘the body of food’ in Hindu terms) depend on the nourishment
extracted from other life-forms within the food chain. In human social
life, health and healing depend in part on relations with others. In this
connection, Kalupahana says that early Buddhism did not seek to “en-
able a person to attain spiritual health and not be part of this world.”
The disease of suffering, caused by craving, is not merely an individual,
psychological matter; elimination of craving requires reforms at the level
of community:
170
religious therapeutics

It involves a complete change in ideology, whether it be in economics,
sociology, politics, or morals. It is freedom or nirv¯aÓna not in a world
that transcends the world of experience, but one in which the individual
and society enjoy the best of health and happiness.8
The Buddha identiﬁed malnutrition as a disease, and as a cause of the
root disease: suffering. Physical malnutrition is a prime threat to health,
and was identiﬁed by the Buddha as destructive of the moral fabric of so-
ciety. Thus individuals’ having adequate means of earning a living is
foundational to the health of individual and society.9
Health inﬂuences, and is inﬂuenced by, community. Health is not
just a matter of one’s own systems functioning well within oneself; health
requires that entities and systems throughout a community participate in
mutually helpful exchanges. Besides the fact that health is contingent on
community in terms of factors such as food supply, the healing process it-
self requires community, but community conceived more broadly than
human social community. To request healing is to appeal to a source out-
side oneself to help restore well-being. In saying this I do not deny the in-
nate power of self-healing. In fact, healing must ultimately be generated
from within oneself, but its instigation may come from a source that
somehow redirects or infuses energy to permit the re-establishment of in-
tegrity in the affected system.
The request for healing may be made of such sources as a medical
practitioner, a religious practitioner, a human community, a deity, or a
tradition, such as Yoga. I have argued that identity is an integral determi-
nant of health: Part of what it means to be in health is to have the aspects
of oneself functioning in a sufﬁciently integrated way, so that one can
participate in experiences that manifest and sustain one’s Self-nature.
Against the view of classical Yoga, I submit that identity can be found in
relationality. To have knowledge of, and actualization of, one’s Self-
nature means to establish one’s identity in relation to something. The re-
lation may be conceived from the standpoint of the UpaniÓsadic statement
of the relation of the individual self or Åtman with the one Brahman: Tat
tvam asi, “That thou art.” Or the relation may be conceived, as it is in
classical Yoga, in the terms “I am not that,” by locating one’s identity in
puruÓsa, consciousness, and recognizing that one is not of the nature of
matter or prakÓrti. In Tantra, Self-nature is realized in terms of identity
with nature and the divine. Lakota religion, as another example, suggests
the realization of self-identity in terms of relatedness with the natural
world and sacred forces. The Lakota invocation Mi¯tu¯kuye Oyas’in¸, “All
community:relationality in religious therapeutics
171

My Relations,” uttered at the conclusion of prayers and sacred songs,
and at completion of stages of ritual, embodies a cosmological, religious,
and ethical recognition and reverence for the interdependence and sa-
credness of all aspects of creation.
Far from being the ‘absence of disease,’ health is life’s natural ten-
dency. Order and well-being are not just prevailing properties of life, they
are warp and woof. Nature’s tendency is toward thriving—adaptation,
equilibrium, and development. In the religious domain, the human being
in its true nature is whole and well, needing only the healing that removes
impediments to its perfect nature. The fact that health is fundamental is
evident in the miraculous fact that, most of the time, we don’t get sick,
despite the fact that we continually come in contact with infective agents
and other threats: physical, biological, and psychological. When we are
sick or injured, healing means restoration of original order and well-
being. When, for instance, a leg is broken, medical treatment restores
that leg, recreates its real nature, reestablishes its identity as my leg, and
my identity as one who walks.
To request healing is to afﬁrm health as fundamental to our nature.
To recognize that we need healing, whether for physical or emotional con-
ditions, or in religious terms, for our human limitations and suffering, pre-
supposes the order and well-being of life. To heal is to recover primordial
unity, the non-fragmented state in which aspects of self are operating in
community, and the person participates in community with other beings
in the biophysical and social environments, and with the forces of the sa-
cred, however conceived. Community designates webs formed of many
kinds of participation and interaction among the constituents of life.
Human life depends on community, grounded in interaction and commu-
nication. The provinces of community encompass the assimilation of oxy-
gen and nourishment, companionship and love between persons, manage-
ment of institutions for social welfare, and in the domain of religiousness,
fulﬁlling one’s relation with that which is sacred.
Health is fundamental to nearly every human enterprise, and is thus
an important consideration in planning and evaluating situations in con-
texts such as social welfare and education. The determinants of health
suggested in this study, for instance, development and freedom from
pain, are offered to contribute concepts and vocabulary for supporting
well-being in a variety of settings. The themes that emerged in analysis of
determinants of health (biological and ecological, medical and psycho-
logical, sociocultural and aesthetic, and metaphysical and religious) are
echoed in the reconstruction of the model of religious therapeutics. Our
172
religious therapeutics

various ﬁelds of knowledge offer diverse conceptual and methodological
resources for understanding and perpetuating health. This study suggests
for further inquiry and action related to health, not just inter-disciplinary
but transdisciplinary approaches. In other words, we can do more than
apply concepts and methods of philosophy, medicine, religion, anthro-
pology, and so on, and (after the manner that holistic medicine recom-
mends focusing on the patient and not the science) take the human being,
not the discipline, as a starting point. In responding to the wholeness of
the human being, we can create more integrated—and thus more heal-
ing—constellations of the registers of human knowledge.
Whether the body is conceived as different from the person’s true
nature, to be transcended along with the rest of material nature, as classi-
cal Yoga holds, or whether body is considered part of the sacred creation
and integral to religious life, body remains essential to religious commu-
nication. Communication can be accomplished by language, both oral
and textual, but in a large share of religious communication, the body is
indispensable. Sacred language and songs, and practices such as Yoga’s
¯asana, pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama, and meditation techniques are formalized means of
contacting the transcendent, of realizing one’s sacred Self-nature. The
performance of formalized means of religious communication requires
the body, and their transmission depends on a living teacher, one who has
mastered them, not just cognitively, but who carries the knowledge of
their proper use in her or his psychophysical self.
Inquiry into the body in Hinduism reveals not a Cartesian material
body, but a range of concepts of body as a conscious locus of activity, a
system of subsystems participating in active relation within a web of
other systems—biophysical, social, and spiritual. Examples are the
UpaniÓsad’s ﬁve sheaths model, the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a’s ‘ﬁeld’ conception of
the person, Åyurveda’s ecological view of body and land as the two kinds
of place, and Tantra’s identiﬁcation of person as a physioconscious mi-
crocosm within the physioconscious world macrocosm. Each of these
concepts of the human being counters not only the Cartesian view of
body, but counters the stereotype that the Indian traditions assume a du-
alistic view of body and Self.
One’s religious aim might be transcendence of the body, or religious
realization in one’s embodied state, but, in either case, our journey in
this world is an embodied one, and religious life demands our reconcil-
ing in some way the dimensions of sacredness and physicality. The larger
share of humanity is not inclined toward ascetic life; therefore it is valu-
able to articulate connections between religiousness and healthful living
community:relationality in religious therapeutics
173

that utilize and support wholesome physicality, and healthful community
life. All our activities—in householding, work, relationship, social wel-
fare, recreation, the arts, and so on—can be performed in a spirit that af-
ﬁrms wholeness and holiness.
Om! One should reverence the Udg¯ıtha (song) as this
syllable, for one sings the loud chant beginning with ‘Om.’
The essence of things here is the earth.
The essence of earth is water.
The essence of water is plants.
The essence of plants is a person.
The essence of a person is speech.
The essence of speech is the ÓRg (hymn)
The essence of the Rg is the S¯aman (chant).
The essence of the S¯aman is the Udg¯ıtha (song)
The ÓRg is speech.
The S¯aman is breath.
The Udg¯ıtha is this syllable Om.10
Om!—This syllable is the whole world . . .
. . . Om is the Self indeed . . .11
174
religious therapeutics

NOTES
INTRODUCTION: THE IDEA OF RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
1. Paul Tillich, “The Meaning of Health” in Religion and Medicine, Essays
on Meaning, Values, and Health, ed. David Belgum (Ames: The Iowa State Uni-
versity Press, 1967) 11–12.
2. Oxford English Dictionary [OED], 2nd edition, 20 volumes. Prepared by
J. A. Simpson and E. S. C. Weiner (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989) 14:525–26,
s. v. ‘save’; 16:36, ‘soteriology.’
3. OED, 14:420, s. v. ‘salvation.’
4. American Heritage Dictionary, Appendix: “Indo-European Roots” (Bos-
ton: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1981) 1541, s. v. ‘sol-.’
5. OED, 14:525–26, s. v. ‘save.’
6. OED, 17:904–05, s. v. ‘therapeutic.’
7. Wilhelm Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection: Explorations in Indian
Thought (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1991) 250.
8. Kenneth Zysk, “Mantra in Åyurveda” in Understanding Mantras, ed. Har-
vey P. Alper (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1989) 134.
9. Vamberto Morais, “The Contribution of Yoga to Modern Life” in The Na-
ture of Religious Man, ed. D. B. Fry (London: Octagon Press, 1982) 129.
10. John M. Koller, “Human Embodiment: Indian Perspectives” in Self as
Body in Asian Theory and Practice, ed. Thomas P. Kasulis, Roger T. Ames, and
Wimal Dissanayake (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993) 46–47.
11. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, 250.
CHAPTER 1: BODY AND PHILOSOPHIES OF HEALING
1. Plato, Phaedrus, 64c-67b. Collected Dialogues of Plato, ed. Edith Hamil-
ton and Huntington Cairns (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1961).
2. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Will to Power [1901], trans. Walter Kaufmann
and R. J. Hollingdale (New York: Vintage Books, 1968) 131.
3. Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra [1892], trans. R. J. Holling-
dale (Baltimore, MD: Penguin Books, 1977) 62.
175

4. Eliot Deutsch, Creative Being, The Crafting of Person and World (Hon-
olulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1992) 59.
5. Roger T. Ames, “The Meaning of Body in Classical Chinese Philosophy,”
in Self as Body in Asian Theory and Practice, ed. Thomas P. Kasulis, Roger T.
Ames, and Wimal Dissanayake (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1993) 164. First published in International Philosophical Quarterly 24 (1) March
1984.
6. Ames, “The Meaning of Body in Classical Chinese Philosophy,” in Self as
Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 158.
7. Deutsch, Creative Being, 62.
8. Maxine Sheets-Johnstone, ed., Giving the Body Its Due (Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 1992) 2.
9. Drew Leder, The Absent Body (Chicago and London: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1990) 4.
10. René Descartes, Discourse on the Method, in The Philosophical Writings
of Descartes, 2 vols. Trans. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald
Murdoch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, 1985) 1:151.
11. Cited in Richard B. Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy: The Organic
Solution to the Mind-Body Problem (Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1983) 7.
12. Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy, 8.
13. Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy, 22.
14. Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy, 22–24.
15. Descartes, Description of the Human Body, in Philosophical Writings,
1:134.
16. Ouvres de Descartes, ed. Adam and Tannery, Vol. 4:161–170, 345–48,
cited in Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy, 96–97.
17. Albert A. Johnstone, “The Bodily Nature of the Self or what Descartes
Should Have Conceded Princess Elizabeth,” in Giving the Body Its Due, ed.
Sheets-Johnstone, 19.
18. Robert Stoothoff, Translator’s Preface to Passions of the Soul, in Philo-
sophical Writings of Descartes, 1: 325.
19. Johnstone, “The Bodily Nature of the Self,” in Giving the Body Its Due,
ed. Sheets-Johnstone, 22.
20. Descartes, Meditations on First Philosophy, Second Meditation, in Philo-
sophical Writings, 2:17.
21. Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, trans. Colin
Smith (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1962).
22. Sheets-Johnstone, “The Materialization of the Body: A History of West-
ern Medicine, A History in Process,” in Giving the Body Its Due, ed. Sheets-
Johnstone, 133.
23. William Heidel, Hippocratic Medicine, 128–29, cited by Sheets-
Johnstone in “The Materialization of the Body” in Giving the Body Its Due, ed.
Sheets-Johnstone, 147.
24. Francis Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats: An Ecological
Theme in Hindu Medicine (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987) 120,
129.
176
notes to chapter one

25. David Michael Levin and George F. Solomon, “The Discursive Formation
of the Body in the History of Medicine,” Journal of Medicine and Philosophy 15
(1990) 518, 519.
26. Sheets-Johnstone, “The Materialization of the Body,” in Giving the Body
Its Due, 142.
27. N. H. Keswani, The Science of Medicine and Physiological Concepts in
Ancient and Medieval India (New Delhi: All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
1974) 25.
28. Sheets-Johnstone, “The Materialization of the Body,” in Giving the Body
Its Due, 134.
29. Levin and Solomon, “The Discursive Formation of the Body,” 524.
30. Levin and Solomon, “The Discursive Formation of the Body,” 528.
31. Levin and Solomon, “The Discursive Formation of the Body,” 530.
32. Levin and Solomon, “The Discursive Formation of the Body,” 533.
33. Wilhelm Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection: Explorations in Indian
Thought (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1991) 265.
34. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, 237.
35. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, 275.
36. John M. Koller, “Human Embodiment: Indian Perspectives,” in Self as
Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 45.
37. Koller, “Human Embodiment,” in Self as Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 47.
38. Koller, “Human Embodiment,” in Self as Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 48.
39. Fritz Staal, “Indian Bodies,” in Self as Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 59–60.
40. Tattv¯artha-s¯utra 5.16, cited in Staal, “Indian Bodies,” in Self as Body, ed.
Kasulis et al., 60.
41. Koller, “Human Embodiment,” in Self as Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 47–48.
42. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, 269–73.
43. Koller, “Human Embodiment,” in Self as Body, 46.
44. Wimal Dissanayake, Introduction to Part Two, “The Body in Indian The-
ory and Practice,” in Self as Body, 41–42.
45. Diane B. Obenchain, “Spiritual Quests of Twentieth-Century Women: A
Theory of Self-Discovery and a Japanese Case Study,” in Self as Person in Asian
Theory and Practice, ed. Roger T. Ames, Thomas P. Kasulis, and Wimal Dissa-
nayake (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993) 127.
46. S. C. Banerji, A Brief History of Tantra Literature (Calcutta: Naya Pro-
kash, 1988) 1–5.
47. Surendranath Dasgupta, A History of Indian Philosophy, 5 vols. (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922–1955) 5:20.
48. Dasgupta, History of Indian Philosophy, 1:71.
49. Mircea Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, trans. Willard R. Trask
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, Bollingen Series Vol. 76, 1958) 200.
50. Banerji, Brief History of Tantra Literature, 8.
51. Sudhir Kakar, “Tantra and T¯antric Healing” in Shamans, Mystics and
Doctors: A Psychological Inquiry into India and its Healing Traditions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1982, 1991) 151.
52. Banerji, Brief History of Tantra Literature, 25.
53. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, 154.
notes to chapter one
177

54. Manoranjan Basu, Fundamentals of the Philosophy of Tantras (Calcutta:
Mira Basu Publishers, 1986) 136.
55. Lalan Prasad Singh, Tantra, Its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis (Delhi: Con-
cept Publishing, 1976) 116 n12.
56. Banerji, Brief History of Tantra Literature, 122–23.
57. Singh, Tantra, its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis, 128.
58. Eliot Deutsch, Advaita Ved¯anta, A Philosophical Reconstruction (Hon-
olulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1969, 1980) 30.
59. Deutsch, Advaita Vedanta, 32.
60. Kamalakar Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradition (Varanasi: Ardd-
hanarisvara Publications, 1981) 44.
61. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 206.
62. Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradition, 22–24, 32.
63. Singh, Tantra, Its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis, 43.
64. Singh, Tantra, Its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis, 140.
65. Ratnas¯ara Tantra, cited in Pragna R. Shah, Tantra, Its Therapeutic Aspect
(Calcutta: Punthi Pustak, 1987) 12.
66. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 227.
67. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 228.
68. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 235–36, 239–40.
69. Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradition, 63–64.
70. Shah, Tantra, its Therapeutic Aspect, 79.
71. Oxford English Dictionary [OED], 2nd edition, 20 vols. Prepared by J. A.
Simpson and E. S. C. Weiner (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989) s. v. ‘sublimate.’
72. Singh, Tantra, Its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis, 140.
73. Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradition, 77.
74. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, 224.
75. R. K. Sharma and Bhagwan Dash, Caraka-saÓmhit¯a of Agnive´sa, Text with
English Translation and Critical Exposition Based on Cakrap¯aÓnidatta’s Åyurveda
D¯ıpik¯a, 3 volumes (Varanasi: Chowkhambha Sanskrit Series Ofﬁce, 1976, 1977,
1988) xxii.
76. Vasant Lad, Åyurveda, The Science of Self-Healing (Santa Fe, NM: Lotus
Press, 1984, 113–14.
77. Gerald James Larson, “Åyurveda and the Classical Hindu Philosophical
Systems,” in Body as Self, ed. Kasulis et al., 106. First published in Philosophy
East and West 37 (3) July 1987.
78. Jean Filliozat, The Classical Doctrine of Indian Medicine (Delhi: Munshi-
ram Manoharlal, 1964) 26.
79. Cromwell Crawford, “Åyurveda: The Science of Long Life in Contempo-
rary Perspective,” in Eastern and Western Approaches to Healing, ed. Anees A.
Sheikh and Katharina S. Sheikh (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1989) 11–12.
80. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, x.
81. Plato, Timaeus, 89c. Collected Dialogues of Plato.
82. Huang Ti Nei Ching Su Wên: The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine, trans. Ilza Veith (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972) 97.
83. Larson, “Åyurveda and the Hindu Philosophical Systems,” in Self as
Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 108.
178
notes to chapter one

84. Vaidya Bhagwan Dash and Acarya Manfred Junius, A Handbook of
Åyurveda (New Delhi: Concept Publishing Co., 1983) 11.
85. Crawford, “Åyurveda: The Science of Long Life,” in Eastern and Western
Approaches to Healing, ed. Sheikh and Sheikh, 15.
86. Crawford, “Åyurveda: The Science of Long Life,” 15.
87. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 159, 205.
88. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 168.
CHAPTER 2: MEANINGS OF HEALTH IN ÅYURVEDA
1. David M. Eisenberg, MD, and Ronald C. Kessler, Cindy Foster, Frances E.
Norlock, David R. Calkins, and Thomas L. Delbanco. “Unconventional Medicine
in the United States: Prevalence, Costs, and Patterns of Use,” New England Jour-
nal of Medicine 328 (Jan. 28, 1993) 246–52. See also Oscar Janiger, MD, and
Philip Goldberg, “Daring to Be Different,” Hippocrates 7 (6 June 1993) 42–48.
2. Gerald James Larson, “Åyurveda and the Hindu Philosophical Systems,”
in Self as Body in Asian Theory and Practice, ed. Thomas P. Kasulis, Roger T.
Ames, and Wimal Dissanayake (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1993) 104. First published in Philosophy East and West 37 (3) July 1987.
3. Quotations from the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a and Ayurveda-d¯ıpik¯a are from the
English translation of the Caraka-saÓmhit¯a by R. K. Sharma and Bhagwan Dash, 3
vols. (Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Vol. 94, 1976, 1977, 1988), in
consultation with the translation of P. V. Sharma: Caraka-saÓmhit¯a: Agnive´sa’s
treatise reﬁned and annotated by Charaka and redacted by DÓrÓdhabala, 4 vols.
(Varanasi: Chaukhamba Orientalia, Jaikrishnadas Åyurveda Series Vol. 36,
1994, 1995).
4. “Constitution of the World Health Organization,” in Concepts of Health
and Disease, Interdisciplinary Perspectives, ed. Arthur L. Caplan, H. Tristam En-
gelhardt, Jr., and James J. McCartney (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing
Co., 1981) 83.
5. Susan Sontag, Illness as Metaphor (New York: Random House, Vintage
Books, 1977, 1979) 3.
6. Deepak Chopra, Perfect Health (New York: Harmony Books, 1991) 3.
7. Deepak Chopra, Quantum Healing: Exploring the Frontiers of Mind/Body
Medicine (New York: Bantam Books, 1989) 110.
8. Chopra, Quantum Healing, 131.
9. Caroline Whitbeck, “A Theory of Health” in Concepts of Health and Dis-
ease, ed. Caplan et al., 613.
10. Paul Tillich, “The Meaning of Health,” in Religion and Medicine: Essays
on Meaning, Values and Health, ed. David Belgum (Ames: The Iowa State Uni-
versity Press, 1967) 5.
11. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science [1882], trans. Walter Kaufmann
(New York: Random House, 1974) 177.
12. H. Tristam Engelhardt, Jr., “The Concepts of Health and Disease,” in
Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 42–43.
13. “Constitution of the World Health Organization” in Concepts of Health
and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 83.
notes to chapter two
179

14. Christopher Boorse, “Health as a Theoretical Concept,” Philosophy of
Science 44 (1977) 542.
15. Georg Canguilhem, On the Normal and the Pathological, trans. Carolyn
R. Fawcett (New York: Zone Books, 1989) 200–201.
16. Rudolph Virchow, “Natural Scientiﬁc Methods and Standpoints in Ther-
apy,” trans. S. G. M. Engelhardt. In Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan
et al., 188.
17. Drew Leder, The Absent Body (Chicago and London: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1990) 89.
18. Burton Watson, trans. The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1968) 361.
19. Yoel Hoffmann, Japanese Death Poems, Written by Zen Monks and
Haiku Poets on the Verge of Death (Rutland, VT, and Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle,
1986).
20. Vaidya Bhagwan Dash and Acarya Manfred M. Junius, A Handbook of
Ayurveda (New Delhi: Concept Publishing Co., 1983) 2.
21. Vasant Lad, “The Concept of Disease Process,” Lecture 4, Lectures in
Åyurveda, audio cassette series, 6 volumes (Albuquerque, NM: The Ayurvedic In-
stitute, no date).
22. Dash and Junius, A Handbook of Åyurveda, 2.
23. René Dubos, “Hippocrates in Modern Dress” in Ways of Health: Holistic
Approaches to Ancient and Contemporary Medicine, ed. David S. Sobel (New
York and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979) 208.
24. Howard Brody and David S. Sobel, “A Systems View of Health and Dis-
ease,” in Ways of Health: Holistic Approaches to Ancient and Contemporary
Medicine, ed. David S. Sobel (New York and London: Harcourt Brace Jovano-
vich, 1979) 93n.
25. Brody and Sobel, “A Systems View of Health and Disease,” in Ways of
Health, ed. Sobel, 91.
26. Brody and Sobel, “A Systems View of Health and Disease,” in Ways of
Health, ed. Sobel, 93.
27. Jozsef Kovács, “Concepts of Health and Disease,” Journal of Medicine
and Philosophy 14 (1989) 261.
28. Kovács, “Concepts of Health and Disease,” 262.
29. Richard B. Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy: The Organic Solution
to the Mind-Body Problem (Baltimore, MD, and London: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1983) 1–4.
30. Abraham Maslow and Bela Mittelmann, “The Meaning of ‘Healthy’
(Normal) and of ‘Sick’ (Abnormal)” in Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Ca-
plan et al., 47.
31. John Sanford, Healing and Wholeness (New York: Paulist Press, 1967) 13.
32. Boorse, “Health as a Theoretical Concept,” 545.
33. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats: An Ecological Theme
in Hindu Medicine (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987) 24.
34. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 24.
35. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 24–25.
36. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 9.
180
notes to chapter two

37. Vaidya Bhagwan Dash and Vaidya Lalitesh Kashyap, Basic Principles of
Ayurveda (New Delhi: Concept Publishing Co., 1980) 234; cited in Dash and
Junius, A Handbook of Ayurveda, 34.
38. Boorse, “Health as a Theoretical Concept,” 542–73.
39. Mervyn Susser, “Ethical Components in the Deﬁnition of Health,” in
Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 95.
40. Birgit Heyn, Ayurveda, The Indian Art of Natural Medicine and Life Ex-
tension (Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press, 1990) 43.
41. Heyn, Ayurveda, The Indian Art of Natural Medicine, 47.
42. Francis Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 169.
43. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 120.
44. Daniel C. Tabor, “Ripe and Unripe: Concepts of Health and Sickness in
Ayurvedic Medicine,” Social Science and Medicine 15B (1981) 442.
45. Tabor, “Ripe and Unripe,” 446.
46. Tabor, “Ripe and Unripe,” 447; Lad, Ayurveda, the Science of Self-
Healing, 79.
47. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Will to Power [1901], trans. Walter Kaufmann
and R. J. Hollingdale (New York: Vintage Books, 1967) 29.
48. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, 177.
49. Leder, The Absent Body,160.
50. Leder, The Absent Body, 79.
51. Leon R. Kass, “Regarding the End of Medicine and the Pursuit of
Health,” in Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 17.
52. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 25.
53. American Heritage Dictionary, Appendix: “Indo-European Roots” (Bos-
ton: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1981) 1520, s. v. ‘kailo-.’
54. Sobel, Ways of Health, 17.
55. Kass, “Regarding the End of Medicine and the Pursuit of Health,” in
Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 17.
56. C. G. Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul, trans. W. S. Dell and Cary F.
Baynes (New York and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1933) 202.
57. Sanford, Healing and Wholeness, 16.
58. American Heritage Dictionary, Appendix: “Indo-European Roots,”
1545, s. v. ‘tag-.’
59. Leder, The Absent Body, 83.
60. Leder, The Absent Body, 71.
61. Leder, The Absent Body, 84, 86–87.
62. G. W. F. Hegel, Philosophy of Nature, trans. Michael John Perry (New
York: Humanities Press, 1970) Vol. 3:193; cited in Leder, The Absent Body, 88.
63. Leder, The Absent Body, 91.
64. Eliot Deutsch, Creative Being, The Crafting of Person and World (Hon-
olulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1992) 33.
65. Deutsch, Creative Being, 235–36 n1. See Herbert Fingarette, Self-
Deception (New York: Humanities Press, 1969).
66. Deutsch, Creative Being, 236 n2.
67. Rudolf Virchow, cited in Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy, 5–6.
68. Wang Yang-ming, Instructions for Practical Living and other Neo-
notes to chapter two
181

Confucian Writings, trans. and ed. Wing-tsit Chan (New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 1963) 273; cited in Leder, The Absent Body, 164.
69. Leder, The Absent Body, 161–73.
70. René Descartes, The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, 2 volumes,
trans. John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch, 2 vols. (Lon-
don and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984, 1985): Meditations on
First Philosophy, 2:33.
71. Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy, 235.
72. Carter, Descartes’ Medical Philosophy, 236.
73. Gerald James Larson, “Life Science (Åyurveda) Old and New: In Search
of New Agendas for Healing.” Paper presented at University of Hawaii Center
for South Asian Studies 10th Spring Symposium: Health and Healing in Medical
Systems of South Asia (Honolulu, April 12, 1993).
74. Zimmermann, The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats, 20.
75. Chopra, Perfect Health, 309–310.
76. Claude Bernard, cited in Chopra, Creating Health (Boston: Houghton
Mifﬂin, 1987, 1990) 181.
77. Chopra, Creating Health, 83.
78. Deepak Chopra, Ageless Body, Timeless Mind (New York: Harmony
Books, 1993) 318.
79. Walter Kaufmann, Nietzsche: Philosopher, Psychologist, Antichrist (Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1968) 130.
80. Deutsch, Creative Being, 155.
81. Deutsch, Creative Being, 32.
82. Plato, Symposium, 208e-209b. In Collected Dialogues of Plato, ed. Edith
Hamilton and Huntington Cairns (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1961).
83. Erik H. Erikson, Childhood and Society (New York: W. W Norton, 1950,
1963) 266–67.
84. Maslow and Mittelmann, “The Meaning of ‘Healthy,’” in Concepts of
Health, ed. Caplan et al., 49.
85. Tillich, “The Meaning of Health,” 4.
86. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, 177.
87. Ingmar Pörn, “An Equilibrium Model of Health,” in Health, Disease, and
Causal Explanation in Medicine, ed. L. Nordenfelt and B. I. B. Lindahl (Dor-
drecht and Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Co., 1984) 5.
88. Wilhelm Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, Explorations in Indian
Thought (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1991) 249.
89. Sure´svara’s Sambandhav¯artikka (the introduction to his commentary on
Ía˙nkara’s BÓrhad¯araÓnyakopaniÓsad-bh¯aÓsya) verse 28; cited in Halbfass, Tradition
and Reﬂection, 251.
90. Deutsch, Creative Being, 40, 34.
91. Engelhardt, “The Concepts of Health and Disease” in Concepts of Health
and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 42.
92. Cromwell Crawford, “Åyurveda: The Science of Long Life in Contempo-
rary Perspective,” in Eastern and Western Approaches to Healing, ed. Anees A.
Sheikh and Katherina S. Sheikh (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1989) 30.
182
notes to chapter two

93. Kenneth Zysk, Asceticism and Healing in Ancient India: Medicine and the
Buddhist Monastery (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991) 6–
7. See also Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya, Science and Society in Ancient India
(Calcutta: Research India Publications, 1977).
94. See, for example, Caraka-saÓmhit¯a Vol. 1 (S¯utra-sth¯ana), chapters 5–7.
95. Chopra, Perfect Health, 201.
96. Chopra, Perfect Health, 199–211.
97. David L. Wheeler, “A Physician-Anthropologist Examines What Ails
America’s Medical System,” Chronicle of Higher Education 39 (39), June 2,
1993, A6–7. Konner’s book is Medicine at the Crossroads: The Crisis in health-
care (Pantheon).
98. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Will to Power, 520.
99. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, 346.
CHAPTER 3: CLASSICAL YOGA AS A RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTIC
1. American Heritage Dictionary, Appendix: “Indo-European Roots” (Bos-
ton: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1981) 1550, s. v. ‘yuj.’
2. Sir Monier Monier-Williams, A Sanskrit-English Dictionary (London: Ox-
ford University Press, 1899, 1974) 856, s. v. ‘yoga.’
3. Surendranath Dasgupta, A History of Indian Philosophy, 5 vols. (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1952–1955) 1:226.
4. Oxford English Dictionary [OED] 2nd edition, 20 vols. Prepared by J. A.
Simpson and E. S. C. Weiner (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989) 17:568, s. v.
‘religion’; American Heritage Dictionary, 1526, s. v. ‘leig.’
5. Mircea Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, trans. Willard R. Trask
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press [Bollingen Series Vol. 56] 1958, 1973) 5.
6. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 5.
7. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 4
8. Kashi Nath Upadhyaya, Early Buddhism and the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a (Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1971, 1983) 124.
9. Upadhyaya, Early Buddhism and the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a, 122.
10. Upadhyaya, Early Buddhism and the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a, 122–23.
11. Dasgupta, History of Indian Philosophy, 2: 443.
12. Buddhacarita, 12.17ff; Saund¯armanda 15–17; Majjima-nik¯aya, 1.164ff,
cited in Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 162.
13. M¯aha-sattipaÓtÓth¯ana-suttanta (Pondichery: All India Press, 1985) 5.
14. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 210.
15. Georg Feuerstein, Encyclopedic Dictionary of Yoga (New York: Paragon,
1990) 150.
16. Main texts of KuÓnÓdalin¯ı Yoga are the ÓSaÓt-cakra-nir¯upaÓna (describing the
cakras), the P¯aduka-pañcaka, “The Fivefold Footstool,” and the GorakÓsa
SaÓmhit¯a.
17. The HaÓtha Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a (fourteenth century c.e.) was written by
Sv¯atm¯ar¯ama Yog¯ındra, who named as his g¯urus the circa 10th-century T¯antric
adept Matsyendra, and his disciple GorakÓsa, author of the GorakÓsa-saÓmhit¯a.
notes to chapter three
183

18. HaÓtha-yoga-saÓmhit¯a 4.104; Gheranda-saÓmhit¯a 1.1; Íiva-saÓmhit¯a 5.181.
19. Íri Aurobindo, The Synthesis of Yoga (Pondicherry: Íri Aurobindo Ash-
ram, 1971).
20. R. Ravindra, “Is Religion Psychotherapy?” Religious Studies 14 (Spring
1978) 396.
21. Ravindra, “Is Religion Psychotherapy?” 14:393.
22. Frank Podgorski, “S¯aÓmkhya-Yoga Meditation: Psycho-Spiritual Trans-
valuation,” Journal of Dharma 2 (April 1977) 158.
23. I. K. Taimni, The Science of Yoga: The Yoga-Sutras of Patanjali in Sanskrit
with transliteration in Roman, translation in English and commentary (Madras,
London, Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House, 1961) 120.
24. Swami Adidevananda, Yoga as a Therapeutic Fact (Mysore: University of
Mysore: Prasaranga, 1966) 52.
25. Swami Ramakrishnananda, “Yoga,” Brahmavadin 1895–1914, vol. 2:
Yoga (Bangalore: Swami Vivekananda Seva Samithi, 1984) 11.
26. Dasgupta, History of Indian Philosophy, 1:266.
27. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, Explorations in Indian Thought (Al-
bany: State University of New York Press, 1991) 252.
28. B. K. S. Iyengar, Light on the Yoga S¯utras of Patañjali : P¯atañjala Yoga
Prad¯ıpik¯a (London and San Francisco, CA: Harper Collins 1993) 110–11.
29. Swami Adidevananda, Yoga as a Therapeutic Fact, 31.
30. Swami Adidevananda, Yoga as a Therapeutic Fact, 15.
31. Dasgupta, History of Indian Philosophy, 1:75.
32. S. Cromwell Crawford, The Evolution of Hindu Ethical Ideals (Calcutta:
Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay, 1974) 152.
33. Larry Dossey, Space, Time, and Medicine (Boulder, CO, and London:
Shambhala, 1982) 49–50.
34. Dhirendra Mohan Datta, The Philosophy of Mah¯atma Gandhi (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1953, 1972) 98.
35. HaÓtha Yoga’s six kriy¯as or cleansing actions involve washing and stimula-
tion (with air, water, or strips of fabric) of various passages of the body (HaÓtha
Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a, 2.21–37). For detailed information about the kriy¯as and their
variations, see Swami Kuvalayananda and S. L. Vinekar, Yoga Therapy: Its Basic
Principles and Methods (New Delhi: India Ministry of Health, 1963) 56–74.
36. Íivananda Yoga Ved¯anta Center, The Íivananda Companion to Yoga
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983) 80.
37. R. S. Khare, “Food with Saints: An Aspect of Hindu Gastrosemantics” in
The Eternal Food, Gastronomic Ideas of Hindus and Buddhists, ed. R. S. Khare
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992) 29.
38. R. S. Khare, “Food with Saints,” 34.
39. S. Cromwell Crawford, The Evolution of Hindu Ethical Ideals, 147.
40. Swami Adidevananda, Yoga as a Therapeutic Fact, 37.
41. The HaÓtha Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a, Book One, is a major textual source on ¯asana.
42. B. K. S. Iyengar, The Tree of Yoga (Boston: Shambhala, 1989) 55.
43. Iyengar, Tree of Yoga, 54–55.
44. Iyengar, Tree of Yoga, 56.
45. Iyengar, Tree of Yoga, 8, 50–60.
184
notes to chapter three

46. Swami Vivekananda, Complete Works, 8 vols. (Calcutta: Advaita Ash-
rama, 1847, 1986) 1:137–39.
47. Iyengar, Light on the Yoga S¯utras, 150.
48. Eliot Deutsch, Creative Being: The Crafting of Person and World (Hon-
olulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1992) 58–69.
49. Vasant Lad, Åyurveda, The Science of Self-Healing (Santa Fe, NM: Lotus
Press, 1985) 113.
50. Lad, Åyurveda, The Science of Self-Healing, 115–25.
51. B. K. S. Iyengar, Light on Yoga (New York: Schocken, 1978) 288–306.
52. “Åsana or Posture,” Brahmavadin (1984) 2:250.
53. Book Two of the HaÓtha Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a gives instructions for pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama,
and Book Three describes the mudr¯as or ‘seals,’ techniques for harnessing and
utilizing pr¯aÓna. Book Four treats sam¯adhi, showing that HaÓtha Yoga, like classi-
cal Yoga, aims for liberation, though HaÓtha is more oriented to body and health.
54. Swami Vivekananda, “R¯aja-Yoga” in Complete Works, 1:267.
55. Vivekananda, Complete Works, 1:147.
56. Vivekananda, Complete Works, 1:148.
57. Vivekananda, Complete Works, 1:149–51.
58. OED, 16:251, s. v. ‘spirit.’
59. Vivekananda, Complete Works, 1:143–44.
60. Hirendra Nath Sinha, “Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama,” Brahmavadin (1984) 2:299.
61. Iyengar, Light on the Yoga S¯utras, 152.
62. T. V. K. Desikachar, Religiousness in Yoga, Lectures in Theory and Prac-
tice, ed. Mary Louise Skelton and John Ross Carter (Washington, D. C.: Univer-
sity Press of America, 1980) 163–72.
63. I. K. Taimni, The Science of Yoga, 261.
64. Desikachar, Religiousness in Yoga, 135–36.
65. See also Baba Hari Dass, Ashtanga Yoga Primer (Santa Cruz, CA: Sri
Rama Publishing, 1981) 8–9.
66. Desikachar, Religiousness in Yoga, 139–43.
67. Sinha,”Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama,” Brahmavadin (1984) 2:294.
68. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 58.
69. Desikachar, Religiousness in Yoga, 152.
70. Sinha, “Praty¯ah¯ara or the Gathering of the Senses,” Brahmavadin (1984)
2:357.
71. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 98–99, 124.
72. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 70.
73. Iyengar, Tree of Yoga, 8, 65.
74. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 77.
75. Iyengar, Tree of Yoga, 8–9.
76. Sinha, “Dhy¯ana or Meditation,” Brahmavadin 2:373.
77. Sinha, “Dhy¯ana or Meditation,” Brahmavadin 2:368.
78. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 72–73.
79. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 78.
80. Iyengar, Light on the Yoga-S¯utras, 170.
81. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 80, 82.
82. OED, 18:382 s. v. ‘trance.’
notes to chapter three
185

83. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 78–79.
84. Mircea Eliade, Shamanism, Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, Willard Trask,
trans. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press [Bollingen Series Vol. 76], 1964)
5, 107, 417.
85. Sinha, “Sam¯adhi or Hyper-Conscious State of Existence,” Brahmavadin
(1984) 2:392.
86. Dasgupta, History of Indian Philosophy, 1: 271.
87. Sinha, “Sam¯adhi,” Brahmavadin (1984) 2:413.
88. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 91.
89. S. N. Dasgupta, Yoga Philosophy in Relation to Other Systems of Indian
Thought (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1930, 1974) 341.
90. Dasgupta, Yoga as Philosophy and as Religion (Delhi: Motilal Banarsi-
dass, 1924) 150–53.
91. Dasgupta, Yoga as Philosophy and Religion, 117.
92. A. Wezler, “On the Quadruple Division of the Yoga´sastra, the Catur-
vy¯uhatva of the Cikit¯a´s¯astra and the Four Noble Truths of the Buddha,” Indolog-
ica Taurensia 12 (1984) 304.
93. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, 250.
94. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, 250.
95. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, 256.
96. Halbfass, Tradition and Reﬂection, 248.
97. American Heritage Dictionary, Appendix: “Indo-European Roots,”
1520, s. v. ‘kailo-.’
98. OED, 14:420, s. v. ‘salvation.’
99. American Heritage Dictionary, Appendix: “Indo-European Roots,”
1537, s. v. ‘sak-.’
100. OED, 14:338–39, s. v. ‘sacred.’
101. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution
and Taboo (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1966) 35.
102. V. S. Apte, English-Sanskrit Dictionary (New Delhi: Publications India,
reprint 1989) 199, s. v. ‘free.’
CHAPTER 4: TANTRA AND AESTHETIC THERAPEUTICS
1. Mircea Eliade, Yoga,Immortality and Freedom, trans. Willard R. Trask (Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press [Bollingen Series Vol. 56], 1958, 1973) 230.
2. Sir John Woodroffe, Shakti and Shakta (Madras and London, 1929) 7;
cited in Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophies of India, ed. Joseph Campbell (New
York: Pantheon Press [Bollingen Series Vol. 26, 1951) 570.
3. Manoranjan Basu, Fundamentals of the Philosophy of Tantras (Calcutta:
Mira Basu Publishers, 1986), 72.
4. S. C. Banerji, Brief History of Tantra Literature (Calcutta: Naya Prokash,
1988) 32; Basu, Fundamentals of the Philosophy of Tantras, 622.
5. M. P. Pandit, Lights on the Tantra (Madras: Ganesh and Co., 1977) 9.
6. Sudhir Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors: An Inquiry into India and
Its Healing Traditions (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1982, 1991)
166–68.
186
notes to chapter four

7. Kamalakar Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradition (Varanasi: Ardd-
hanar¯ı´svara Publications, 1981) 3–7.
8. Sir John Woodroffe (Arthur Avalon), Introduction to Tantra Shastra (Ma-
dras: Ganesh and Co., 1913, 1952) 21.
9. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 244–45.
10. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 209–11.
11. Pragna R. Shah, Tantra, its Therapeutic Aspect (Calcutta: Punthi Pustak,
1987), 40.
12. Louis Renou, L’Inde Classique, 568, cited in Eliade, Yoga, Immortality
and Freedom, 219.
13. See, for example, Ír¯ı-Cakra, its Yantra, Mantra, and Tantra, by S. K. Ram-
achandra Rao (Bangalore: Kalpatharu Research Academy, 1982).
14. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 225–26.
15. John Thomas Casey, Drawing of Ír¯a Yantra, and interview by author.
Honolulu, HI, March 1994.
16. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, 154.
17. Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradition, 62.
18. Shah, Tantra, its Therapeutic Aspect, 15.
19. Sir John Woodroffe, Introduction to Tantra Shastra, 112–13.
20. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 259.
21. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 270–71.
22. Kul¯arÓnava Tantra 10:6, cited in Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradi-
tion, 65–66.
23. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 267–68.
24. Banerji, Brief History of Tantra Literature, 18.
25. Kul¯arÓnava Tantra 10:5; cited in Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradi-
tion, 65–66, 69.
26. Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradition, 68–71.
27. Tantratattva (Principles of Tantra): The Tantratattva of Ír¯ıyukta Íiva
Chandra Vidyar¯aÓnava Bhattac¯arya Mahodaya, 2 vols., ed. Arthur Avalon (Sir
John Woodroffe). (Madras: Ganesh and Co., 1914, 1960) 544; Zimmer, Philoso-
phies of India, 572–73.
28. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, 153.
29. Pandit, Lights on the Tantras, 6.
30. The Yoga-UpaniÓsads, trans. T. R. Sr¯ınivasa Ayya˙ngar (Madras: Adyar Li-
brary, Vasanta Press, 1938).
31. Surendranath Dasgupta, A History of Indian Philosophy, 5 vols. (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922–55) 1:228–29.
32. Lalan Prasad Singh, Tantra, Its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis (Delhi: Con-
cept Publishing Co., 1976) 137.
33. Mishra, Significance of the T¯antric Tradition, 47–48.
34. Shah, Tantra, its Therapeutic Aspect, 3, 30.
35. Basu, Fundamentals of the Philosophy of Tantras, 80.
36. Arthur Avalon (Sir John Woodroffe) The Serpent Power (ÓSaÓt-cakra-nir¯u-
¯apaÓna and P¯aduk¯a-pañcaka) (Madras: Ganesh and Co., 1918, 1964) 222.
37. Shah, Tantra, its Therapeutic Aspect, 80.
38. Tantraloka 2; cited in Singh, Tantra, Its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis, 65.
notes to chapter four
187

39. See also Harish Johari, Chakras, Energy Centers of Transformation
(Rochester, VT: Destiny Books, 1987).
40. Woodroffe, The Serpent Power, 228.
41. Sir John Woodroffe (Arthur Avalon), The Garland of Letters (VarÓna-
m¯al¯a), Studies in the Mantra ´s¯astra (Madras: Ganesh and Co.,1922, 1994) 232.
42. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 212.
43. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, 172.
44. Woodroffe, The Garland of Letters (VarÓnam¯al¯a), 218–19, 232; Wood-
roffe, Introduction to Tantra Shastra, 81–82.
45. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 215.
46. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 212–13.
47. The Sanskrit alphabet consists of the forty-nine primordial b¯ıjas or seed-
sounds, arranged in a logical matrix. The matrix of the Sanskrit alphabet presents
a set of pure and basic sounds, systematically arranged according to factors such
as the point in the mouth where the sound is articulated (e.g., the guttural ka is
articulated in the throat, and the labial ma, at the lips).
48. Banerji, Brief History of Tantra Literature, 116.
49. Woodroffe, Introduction to Tantra Shastra, 107.
50. Singh, Tantra, its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis, 79.
51. Woodroffe, The Garland of Letters (VarÓnam¯al¯a), 233.
52. Basu, Fundamentals of the Philosophy of Tantras, 622–23.
53. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 215.
54. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 215.
55. Singh, Tantra, its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis, 96.
56. Vakyapad¯ıya 1:5,14; cited by Harold Coward, “The Meaning and Power
of Mantras in BhartÓrhari’s Vakyapad¯ıya,” in Understanding Mantras, ed. Harvey
P. Alper (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1989) 172–73.
57. Shah, Tantra, Its Therapeutic Value, 114–15.
58. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, 172–73. Om as a mantra’s open-
ing sound signiﬁes the aim of peaceful state, while Krau signiﬁes the goal of a psy-
chic state of active struggle.
59. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics, and Doctors, 174.
60. Harold Coward, “The Meaning and Power of Mantras in BhartÓrhari’s
Vakyapad¯ıya” in Understanding Mantras, ed. Alper, 173–74.
61. Oxford English Dictionary [OED] 2nd edition, 20 vols., prepared by J. A.
Simpson and E. S. C. Weiner. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989) s. v. ‘aesthetic.’
62. Avalon (Woodroffe) Great Liberation (Madras: Ganesh and Co., 1913,
1953) 65 n4.
63. Basu, Fundamentals of the Philosophy of Tantras, 82.
64. Eliade, Yoga, Immortality and Freedom, 206.
65. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, 166.
66. Shah, Tantra, its Therapeutic Aspect, 3.
67. Shah, Tantra, its Therapeutic Aspect, 51–54.
68. Vyaas Houston, “Sanskrit, Planetary Language?” in Devav¯an¯ı: Sanskrit,
Sacred Language, and Self Knowledge (Warwick, NY: American Sanskrit Insti-
tute, 1993) 10.
69. Shah, Tantra, its Therapeutic Aspect, 54.
188
notes to chapter four

70. N¯ada-bindupaniÓsad 43. The Yoga-UpaniÓsads, trans. T. R. Ír¯ınivasa
Ayya˙ngar, 178.
71. Yoga-´sikhopaniÓsad, 3:1–5. Yoga-UpaniÓsads, trans. Ayya˙ngar, 366–68.
72. Lewis Rowell, Music and Musical Thought in Early India (Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press, 1992) 10, 166–67.
73. The Stanzas on Vibration: The SpaÓnÓdak¯arik¯a with Four Commentaries,
trans. Mark S. G. Dyczkowski (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1992)105.
74. Harold G. Coward, “The Spiritual Power of Oral and Written Scripture,”
in Silence, the Word and the Sacred, ed. E. D. Blodgett and H. G. Coward (Water-
loo, Ontario, Canada: Wilfred Laurier Press, 1989) 113.
75. Harold G. Koenig, Is Religion Good for Your Health? The Effects of Re-
ligion on Mental and Physical Health (Binghamton, NY: The Haworth Pastoral
Press, 1997) 81–82.
76. James K. McNeley, Holy Wind in Navajo Philosophy (Tucson: University
of Arizona Press, 1981) 1.
77. Gary Witherspoon, Language and Art in the Navajo Universe (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1977) 61; cited in McNeley, Holy Wind in
Navajo Philosophy, 58.
78. Johnny Moses (Whisstemenee: Walking Medicine Robe), “Northwest
Coast Medicine Teachings: An Interview with Johnny Moses” by Timothy White.
Shaman’s Drum (Spring 1991) 36–43.
79. Johnny Moses, “Native Northwest Coast Song and Drum.” Lecture/pres-
entation, Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville, June 14, 1996.
80. Johnny Moses, SiSíWiss Medicine Teachings. First Unitarian Church of
Honolulu, Honolulu, Hawaii, May 1993.
81. Swami Prajñ¯an¯ananda, A Historical Study of Indian Music (1975) xxviii,
cited in Shah, Tantra: Its Therapeutic Aspect, 60–61.
82. William K. Powers, Sacred Language, The Nature of Supernatural Dis-
course in Lakota (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1986) 6, 46–47.
83. Powers, Sacred Language, 66–67.
84. Riley Lee, Lecture/performance on the shakuhachi ﬂute, East-West Cen-
ter, Honolulu, Hawaii, October 1993.
85. Vyaas Houston, “The Yoga of Learning Sanskrit,” in Devav¯an¯ı, 18.
86. Houston, “Sanskrit—Planetary Language?” in Devav¯an¯ı, 10.
87. Vyaas Houston, “Sanskrit as Spiritual Practice,” Yoga International
(May/June 1992) 30–35. In Devav¯an¯ı, 50.
88. Coward, “Spiritual Power of Oral and Written Scripture,” 126.
89. Coward, “Spiritual Power of Oral and Written Scripture,” 127.
90. Huston Smith, quoted in Chant, National Public Radio Program (Hon-
olulu: University of Hawaii Sinclair Library, audio cassete vol. 975) 1983.
91. Tokeya Inajin (Kevin Locke) and Jim Deerhawk, Dream Catcher [audio
cassette] (Redway, CA: Earthbeat, 1992) liner notes.
92. Kevin Locke (Tokeya Inajin) in The Spirit World [Series: The American
Indians] (Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books, 1992) 29.
93. Coward, “Scripture in Hinduism,” in SacredWord and SacredText: Scripture
in World Religions, ed. Harold Coward (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1988), 116.
notes to chapter four
189

CONCLUSION: COMMUNITY:
RELATIONALITY IN RELIGIOUS THERAPEUTICS
1. David Frawley and Vasant Lad, The Yoga of Herbs, An Åyurvedic Guide to
Herbal Medicine (Santa Fe, NM: Lotus Press, 1986) 21–22.
2. David J. Kalupahana, “Buddhism and Healing.” Paper presented at The
Center for South Asian Studies 10th Spring Symposium: Healing Systems of South
Asia. (Honolulu: University of Hawaii, April 12, 1993) 12.
3. Kalupahana, “Buddhism and Healing,” 13.
4. William R. LaFleur, “Saigy¯o and the Buddhist Value of Nature” in Nature
in Asian Traditions of Thought: Essays in Environmental Philosophy, ed. J. Baird
Callicott and Roger T. Ames (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1989)
183–209.
5. Kukai, K¯ob¯o Daishi Zensh¯u, ed. Mikky¯o Bunka Kenky¯uj¯o (Tokyo, 1964)
2:37; cited in LaFleur, “Saigy¯o and the Buddhist Value of Nature,” 186–87.
6. LaFleur, “Saigy¯o and the Buddhist Value of Nature,” 187.
7. Wallace H. Black Elk, Talks at Church of the Crossroads, Honolulu,
Hawaii, March, 1993.
8. Kalupahana, “Buddhism and Healing,” 15–16.
9. Kalupahana, “Buddhism and Healing,” 14.
10. Ch¯andogya UpaniÓsad 1:1.2,5.
11. M¯aÓnÓd¯ukya UpaniÓsad 1,12.
190
notes to conclusion

SOURCES
PRIMARY SOURCES
Atharvaveda
Bloomﬁeld, Maurice, trans. Hymns of the Atharva-veda. The Sacred Books of the
East, Vol. 42. Edited by F. Max Müller. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1897, 1964.
Whitney, William Dwight, trans. Atharva-veda SaÓmhit¯a, 2 vols. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1962.
Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a
Radhakrishnan, S. trans. The Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a. New York: Harper Colophon
Books, 1973.
Sargeant, Winthrop, trans. The Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a. Albany: State University of
New York Press: 1984.
Caraka-saÓmhit¯a 
Sharma, P. V. (Priyavat), ed. and trans. Caraka-SaÓmhit¯a: Agnive´sa’s Treatise
Reﬁned and Annotated by Caraka and Redacted by DÓrdhabala, Text with
English Translation, 4. vols. Varanasi, Chaukhamba Orientalia [Jaikrish-
nadas Åyurveda Series Vol. 36], 1994, 1995.
Sharma, Ram Karan and Vaidya Bhagwan Dash, trans. CarakasaÓmhit¯a of Ag-
nive´sa, Text with English Translation and Critical Exposition Based on
Cakrap¯aÓnidatta’s Åyurveda-D¯ıpik¯a, 3 vols. Varanasi: Chowkhamba San-
skrit Series, Vol. 94. 1976, 1977, 1988.
HaÓtha Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a of Sv¯atm¯ar¯ama Yog¯ındra
Sinh, Pancham, trans. The HaÓtha Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a. New Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal, 1975.
Mah¯anirv¯aÓna Tantra
Avalon, Arthur (Sir John Woodroffe), trans. The Great Liberation. Madras:
Ganesh and Co., 1913, 1953.
M¯ahasattipaÓ tÓ th¯ana-suttanta
Pondicherry: All India Press, 1985.
191

ÓRgveda 
Maurer, Walter H. Pinnacles of India’s Past, Selections from the ÓRgveda. Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Studies on South Asia, Vol. 2. Amsterdam and Phil-
adelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing Co., 1986.
S¯a Ómkhya-k¯arik¯a 
Mainkar, T. G., trans. The S¯a Ómkhyak¯arik¯a of Î´svarakÓrÓsÓna with the commen-
tary of GauÓsap¯ada. Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1964.
Larson, Gerald James, trans. S¯a Ómkhyak¯arik¯a of Î´svarakÓrÓsÓna. In Classical
S¯aÓmkhya, An Interpretation of Its History and Meaning, Appendix B.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1969, 1979.
ÓSaÓ tcakra-nir¯upaÓna and P¯aduk¯a-pañcaka 
Avalon, Arthur (Sir John Woodroffe), trans. The Serpent Power. Madras: Ga-
nesh and Co., 1918, 1964.
UpaniÓsads
Hume, Robert Ernest, trans. The Thirteen Principle Upanishads. London,
Madras: Oxford University Press, 1921, 1965.
Viveka-c¯ud¯amaÓni of Ía˙nkara
Swami Madhavananda, trans. Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1957.
Yoga-s¯utras
Fields, Gregory P., Yoga-s¯utras of Patañjali, translation from Sanskrit to En-
glish, in Religious Therapeutics: Body and Health in Yoga and ¯Ayurvedic
Medicine, Ph.D dissertation, University of Hawaii.
Iyengar, B. K. S., trans. Light on the Yoga S¯utras of Patañjali: P¯atañjala Yoga
Pr¯adipik¯a. London, San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1993.
Miller, Barbara Stoler, trans. Yoga: Discipline of Freedom, The Yoga S¯utra At-
tributed to Patañjali. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995.
Taimni, I. K., trans. The Science of Yoga: The Yoga-s¯utras of Patañjali in Sanskrit
with Transliteration in Roman,Translation in English and Commentary. Ma-
dras, London, and Wheaton, Illinois: Theosophical Publishing House, 1961.
Rukmani, T. S. Yogav¯artikka of Vijñ¯anabhiksu: Text with English Translation
and Critical Notes along with the Text and English Translation of the
P¯atañjala Yogas¯utras and Vy¯asabh¯aÓsya, 4 vols. New Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal, 1981, 1983, 1987, 1989.
Yoga-s¯utras, Yoga-bh¯aÓsya, and Tattva-v¯ai´s¯arad¯ı
Pras¯ada, R¯ama, trans. Patañjali’s Yoga-s¯utras, with the Commentary of Vy¯asa
and the Gloss of V¯achaspatimi´sra. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal,
1912, 1978.
Woods, James Haughton. The Yoga-system of Patañjali: The Yoga-s¯utras of
Patañjali, the Yoga-bh¯ashya Attributed to Veda-vy¯asa, and the Tattva-
vai´s¯arad¯ı of V¯achaspati-mi´sra. Harvard Oriental Series, Vol. 17. Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1927.
Yoga UpaniÓsads
Ayya˙ngar, T. R. Ír¯ıniv¯asa, trans. and Pandit S. SubrammaÓnya Í¯astr¯ı, ed. The
Yoga-UpaniÓsads. Madras: The Adyar Library, Vasanta Press, 1938.
192
sources

SECONDARY SOURCES
Reference Works
American Heritage Dictionary, Appendix: “Indo-European Roots.” Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin, 1981.
Apte, V. S. English-Sanskrit Dictionary. New Delhi: Publications India, reprint
1989.
MacDonnell, Arthur Anthony. A Practical Sanskrit Dictionary. Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press, 1924, 1990.
Monier-Williams, Monier. A Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1899, 1974.
Oxford English Dictionary [OED] 2nd edition, 20 vols. Prepared by J. A. Simp-
son and E. S. C. Weiner. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
Stedman’s Medical Dictionary, 25th edition. Edited by William R. Hensyl. Balti-
more, Maryland: Williams and Wilkins, 1990.
Whitney, William Dwight. The Roots, Verb-forms, and Primary Derivatives of
the Sanskrit Language. New Haven, Connecticut: American Oriental Society,
1945.
Books, Articles, Presentations, and Recordings
Adidevananda, Swami. Yoga as Therapeutic Fact, Special Lectures. Mysore: Uni-
versity of Mysore, Prasaranga, 1966.
Ames, Roger T. “The Meaning of Body in Classical Chinese Thought.” In Self as
Body in Asian Theory and Practice, ed. Kasulis et al., 157–77. First published
in International Philosophical Quarterly, 24:1 (March 1984), 39–54.
Aurobindo. The Synthesis of Yoga. Pondicherry: Íri Aurobindo Ashram, 1971.
Banerji, S. C. A Brief History of Tantra Literature. Calcutta: Naya Prokash,
1988.
Basu, Manoranjan. Fundamentals of the Philosophy of Tantras. Calcutta: Mira
Basu Publishers, 1986.
Bhatt¯acharya, Íiva Chandra Vidy¯arÓnava. Principles of Tantra (Tantratattva). Ed-
ited by Arthur Avalon (Sir John Woodroffe), 2 vols. Madras: Ganesh and Co.,
1914, 1960.
Bible: Holy Bible, King James Version. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan
Bible Publishers, 1989.
Black Elk, Wallace H. Lectures at Church of the Crossroads. Honolulu, Hawaii,
March 1993.
Boorse, Christopher, “Health as a Theoretical Concept.” Philosophy of Science
44 (1977): 542–573.
Brahmavadin 1895–1914, Vol. 2: Yoga. Bangalore: Swami Vivekananda Seva Sa-
mithi, 1984.
Brody, Howard and David S. Sobel, “A Systems View of Health and Disease.” In
Ways of Health, ed. Sobel, 87–104.
Canguilhem, Georg. On the Normal and the Pathological, trans. Carolyn R. Faw-
cett. New York: Zone Books, 1989. First published as Le normal et la Pathol-
ogique by Presses Universitaires de France, 1966.
sources
193

Caplan, Arthur L., H. Tristam Engelhardt, and James J. McCartney, eds. Con-
cepts of Health and Disease: Interdisciplinary Perspectives. Reading, Massa-
chusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1981.
Carter, Richard B. Descartes’ Medical Philosophy: The Organic Solution to the
Mind-Body Problem. Baltimore, Maryland, and London: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1983.
Casey, John Thomas. Drawing of Ír¯ı Yantra, and interview by author. Honolulu,
Hawaii: March 1994.
Chattopadhyaya, Debiprasad. Science and Society in Ancient India. Calcutta: Re-
search India Publications, 1977.
Chopra, Deepak. Ageless Body,Timeless Mind. New York: Harmony Books, 1993.
———. Creating Health. How to Wake Up the Body’s Intelligence. Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin, 1987, 1990.
———. Perfect Health: The Complete Mind/Body Guide. New York: Harmony
Books, 1991.
———. Quantum Healing: Exploring the Frontiers of Mind/Body Medicine. New
York: Bantam Books, 1989.
Coward, Harold. “The Meaning and Power of Mantras in BhartÓrhari’s V¯akya-
pad¯ıya.” In Understanding Mantras, edited by Harvey P. Alper. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1989.
———. “Scripture in Hinduism.” In Sacred Word and Sacred Text, Scripture in
World Religions, edited by Harold Coward, 105–29. Maryknoll, New York:
Orbis Books, 1988.
———. “The Spiritual Power of Oral and Written Scripture.” In Silence, the Word
and the Sacred, edited by E. D. Blodgett and H. G. Coward, 111–37. Water-
loo, Ontario, Canada: Wilfred Laurier University Press for the Calgary Insti-
tute for the Humanities, 1989.
Crawford, S. Cromwell. “Åyurveda: The Science of Long Life in Contemporary
Perspective.” In Eastern and Western Approaches to Healing, ed. Sheikh and
Sheikh, 3–32.
———. The Evolution of Hindu Ethical Ideals. Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopad-
hyay, 1974.
Dasgupta, Surendranath. A History of Indian Philosophy, 5 vols. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1922–55.
———. The Study of Patañjali. Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press, 1920.
———. Yoga as Philosophy and as Religion. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1924.
———. Yoga Philosophy in Relation to other Systems of Indian Thought. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1930, 1974.
Dash, Vaidya Bhagwan, and Acarya Manfred M. Junius, A Handbook of Ayur-
veda. New Delhi: Concept Publishing Co., 1983.
Dass, Baba Hari. Ashtanga Yoga Primer. Santa Cruz, California: Sri Rama Pub-
lishing, 1981.
Datta, Dhirendra Mohan. The Philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi. Madison: Uni-
versity of Wisconsin Press, 1953, 1972.
Descartes, René. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, 2 vols. Translated by
John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1985.
194
sources

Desikachar, T. K. V. Religiousness in Yoga: Lectures on Theory and Practice. Ed-
ited by Mary Louise Skelton and John Ross Carter. Washington D. C.: Univer-
sity Press of America, 1969.
Deutsch, Eliot, Advaita Ved¯anta, A Philosophical Reconstruction. Honolulu: An
East-West Center Book, University of Hawaii Press, 1969, 1980.
———. Creative Being, The Crafting of Person and World. Honolulu: University
of Hawaii Press, 1992.
Dissanayake, Wimal. Introduction to Part Two: “The Body in Indian Theory and
Practice.” In Self as Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 39–44.
Dossey, Larry. Space, Time and Medicine. Boulder, Colorado, and London:
Shambhala, 1982.
Douglas, Mary. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and
Taboo. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1966.
Dubos, René, “Hippocrates in Modern Dress.” In Ways of Health, ed. Sobel,
205–20.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G.,trans. The Stanzas on Vibration: The SpaÓnÓdak¯arik¯a and
Four Commentaries. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992.
Eisenberg, David M. M. D., Ronald C. Kessler, Cindy Foster, Frances E. Norlock,
David R. Calkins, and Thomas L. Delbanco. “Unconventional Medicine in the
United States: Prevalence, Costs, and Patterns of Use.” New England Journal
of Medicine, 328 (Jan. 28, 1993) 246–52.
Eliade, Mircea. Shamanism, Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, trans. Willard R.
Trask. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press [Bollingen Series Vol.
76] 1964.
———. Yoga, Immortality and Freedom. trans. Willard R. Trask. Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University Press [Bollingen Series Vol. 56] 1958, 1973.
Engelhardt, H. Tristam, “The Concepts of Health and Disease.” In Concepts of
Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 31–45.
Erickson, Erik H. Childhood and Society. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.,
1950, 1963.
Feuerstein, Georg. Encyclopedic Dictionary of Yoga. New York: Paragon House,
1990.
Filliozat, J. The Classical Doctrine of Indian Medicine. New Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal, 1964.
Frawley, David and Vasant Lad. The Yoga of Herbs, An Åyurvedic Guide to Her-
bal Medicine. Santa Fe, New Mexico: Lotus Press, 1986.
Halbfass, Wilhelm. Tradition and Reﬂection: Explorations in Indian Thought.
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1991.
Heyn, Birgit. Åyurveda, The Indian Art of Natural Medicine and Life Extension.
Rochester, Vermont: Healing Arts Press, 1990. First published as Die Sanfte
Kraft der Indischen Naturheilkunde: Åyurveda by Scherz Verlag, 1983.
Hoffmann, Yoel. Japanese Death Poems, Written by Zen Monks and Haiku Poets
on the Verge of Death. Rutland, Vermont, and Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle Co,
1986.
Houston, Vyaas. Devav¯aÓni: Sanskrit, Sacred Language, and Self Knowledge. War-
wick, New York: American Sanskrit Institute, 1993.
———. “Sanskrit as Spiritual Practice.” Yoga International (May/June 1992) 29–35.
sources
195

Inajin, Tokeya (Kevin Locke) and Jim Deer Hawk. Dream Catcher (audio cas-
sette) Redway, California: Earthbeat, 1992, recording and liner notes.
Iyengar, B. K. S. Light on Yoga. London: Unwin, 1976.
———. Light on the Yoga S¯utras of Patañjali: P¯atañjala Yoga Prad¯ıpik¯a. London
and San Francisco, California: Aquarian Press (HarperCollins), 1993.
———. The Tree of Yoga. Boston: Shambhala, 1989.
Janiger, Oscar M. D. and Philip Goldberg. “Daring to be Different.” Hippocrates
7 (6) June 1993, 42–48. Excerpted from their book, A Different Kind of Heal-
ing. New York: Putnam, 1993.
Johari, Harish. Chakras: Energy Centers of Transformation. Rochester, Vermont:
Destiny Books, 1987.
Johnstone, Albert, “The Bodily Nature of The Self or What Descartes Should
Have Conceded to Princess Elizabeth.” In Giving the Body Its Due, ed. Max-
ine Sheets-Johnstone, 16–47.
Jolly, Julius. Indian Medicine, trans. C. G. Kashikar, New Delhi: Concept Pub-
lishing Co., 1977.
Jung, C. G. Modern Man in Search of a Soul, trans. W. S. Dell and Cary F. Baynes.
New York and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1933.
Kakar, Sudhir. Shamans, Mystics and Doctors: An Inquiry into India and its
Healing Traditions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982, 1991.
Kalupahana, David J. “Buddhism and Healing.” Paper presented at the Univer-
sity of Hawaii,Center for South Asian Studies 10th Spring Symposism: Healing
Systems of South Asia. Honolulu April 12, 1993.
Kass, Leon R. “Regarding the End of Medicine and the Pursuit of Health.” In
Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 3–30.
Kasulis, Thomas P., Roger T. Ames, and Wimal Dissanayake, eds. Self as Body in
Asian Theory and Practice. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993.
Kaufmann, Walter, Nietzsche: Philosopher, Psychologist, Antichrist, 3rd edition.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1968.
Keswani, N. H. The Science of Medicine and Physiological Concepts in Ancient
and Medieval India. New Delhi: All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, 1974.
Khare, R. S. “Food with Saints: An Aspect of Hindu Gastrosemantics.” In The Eter-
nal Food, Gastronomic Ideas and Experiences of Hindus and Buddhists, edited
by R. S. Khare, 27–52. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992.
Koenig, Harold G. Is Religion Good forYour Health?The Effects of Religion on Men-
tal and Physical Health. Binghamton, New York: Haworth Pastoral Press, 1997.
Koller, John M. “Human Embodiment: Indian Perspectives.” In Self as Body, ed.
Kasulis et al., 45–58.
Kovács, Jozsef, “Concepts of Health and Disease.” Journal of Medicine and Phi-
losophy 14 (1989) 261–267.
Kuvalayananda, Swami and S. L. Vinekar. Yoga Therapy: Its Basic Principles and
Methods. New Delhi: Ministry of Health, 1963.
Lad, Vasant, Åyurveda: The Science of Self-Healing. Santa Fe, New Mexico:
Lotus Press, 1985.
———. Lectures on Åyurveda (audio cassette series, 6 vols.) Albuquerque, New
Mexico: The Åyurvedic Institute, no date.
LaFleur, William R. “Saigy¯o and the Buddhist Value of Nature,” in Nature in
196
sources

Asian Traditions of Thought, Essays in Environmental Philosophy. Edited by
J. Baird Callicott and Roger T. Ames, 183–209. Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1989.
Larson, Gerald James. Classical S¯aÓmkhya, An Interpretation of Its History and
Meaning. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1969, 1979.
———. “Life Sciences (Åyurveda) Old and New: In Search of New Agendas for
Healing.” Paper presented at the University of Hawaii Center for South Asian
Studies 10th Spring Symposium: Healing Systems of South Asia. Honolulu,
April 12, 1993.
———. “Åyurveda and the Hindu Philosophical Systems.” In Self as Body in
Asian Theory and Practice, ed. Kasulis et al., 103–21. First published in Phi-
losophy East and West 37 (3) (July 1987).
Leder, Drew. The Absent Body. Chicago and London: University of Chicago
Press, 1990.
Lee, Riley. Lecture and Performance on the shakuhachi ﬂute. East-West Center.
Honolulu, Hawaii, October 1993.
Levin, David Michael and George F. Soloman. “The Discursive Formation of the
Body in the History of Medicine.” Journal of Medicine and Philosophy 15
(1990) 515–37.
Locke, Kevin (Tokeya Inajin). Interviewed in The Spirit World [Series: The Amer-
ican Indians]. Alexandria, Virginia: Time-Life Books, 1992.
Maslow, Abraham and Bela Mittelmann. “The Meaning of ‘Healthy’ (‘Normal’)
and of ‘Sick’ (‘Abnormal’).” In Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan, et
al., 47–56.
McNeley, James K. Holy Wind in Navajo Philosophy. Tucson: University of Ari-
zona Press, 1981.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Phenomenology of Perception, trans. Colin Smith. Lon-
don: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1962.
Mishra, Kamalakar. Significance of The Tantric Tradition. Varanasi: Arddhana-
risvara Publications, 1981.
Morais, Vamberto. “The Contribution of Yoga to Modern Life.” In The Nature
of Religious Man, edited by D. B. Fry, 119–41. London: Octagon Press, 1982.
Moses, Johnny (Whisstemenee: Walking Medicine Robe). SiSíWiss Medicine
Teachings, First Unitarian Church of Honolulu. Honolulu, Hawaii, May 1993.
———. “Northwest Coast Medicine Teachings: An Interview with Johnny
Moses,” by Timothy White. Shaman’s Drum (Spring 1991) 36–43. See http://
johnnymoses.com
———. “Native Northwest Coast Song and Drum,” Lecture/presentation at
Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville, Illinois, June 14, 1996.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Gay Science [1882], trans. Walter Kaufmann. New
York: Random House, 1974.
———. The Will to Power [1901], trans. Walter Kaufmann and R. J. Hollingdale.
New York: Vintage Books, 1967.
———. Thus Spake Zarathustra [1892], trans. R. J. Hollingdale. Baltimore,
Maryland: Penguin Books, 1977.
Numbers, Ronald L. and Darrel W. Amundsen. Caring and Curing: Health and
Medicine in the Western Religious Traditions. New York: Macmillan, 1986.
sources
197

Obenchain, Diane B. “Spiritual Quests of Twentieth-Century Women: A Theory
of Self-Discovery and a Japanese Case Study.” In Self as Person in Asian The-
ory and Practice, edited by Roger T. Ames, Thomas P. Kasulis, and Wimal Dis-
sanayake, 125–168. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993.
Organ, Troy Wilson. The Self in Indian Philosophy. London and the Hague:
Mouton & Co., 1964.
Pandit, M. P. Lights on the Tantra. Madras: Ganesh and Co., 1977.
Paramananda, Swami. Spiritual Healing. Cohassett, Maine: Vedanta Centre Pub-
lishers, 1974, 1985.
Plato, Collected Dialogues of Plato, edited by Edith Hamilton and Huntington
Cairns. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1961.
Podgorski, Frank. “S¯aÓmkhya-Yoga Meditation: Psycho-Spiritual Transvalua-
tion.” Journal of Dharma 2 (April 1978) 152–63.
Pörn, Ingmar. “An Equilibrium Model of Health,” Health, Disease, and Causal
Explanation in Medicine, edited by L. Nordenfelt and B. I. B. Lindahl, 3–13.
Dordrecht and Boston: D. Reidel, 1984.
Powers, William K. Sacred Language: The Nature of Supernatural Discourse in
Lakota. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1986.
Ramakrishnananda, Swami. Lecture: “Yoga,” Brahmavadin 1895–1914, vol. 2:
Yoga (1984) 1–12.
Rao, S. K. Ramachandra. Ír¯ı Cakra: Its Yantra, Mantra, and Tantra. Bangalore:
Kalpatharu Research Academy, 1982.
Ravindra, R. “Is Religion Psychotherapy?” Religious Studies 14 (Spring 1978)
389–97.
Rowell, Lewis. Music and Musical Thought in Early India. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1992.
Sanford, John A. Healing and Wholeness. New York: Paulist Press, 1967.
Shah, Pragna R. Tantra: Its Therapeutic Aspect. Calcutta: Punthi Pustak, 1987.
Sheets-Johnstone, Maxine, ed. Giving the Body Its Due, 132–58. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1992.
———. “The Materialization of the Body: A History of Western Medicine, A His-
tory in Process.” In Giving the Body Its Due, 132–58.
Sheikh, Anees A. and Katherina S. Sheikh. Eastern and Western Approaches to
Healing: Ancient Wisdom and Modern Knowledge. New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 1989.
Singh, Lalan Prasad. Tantra, Its Mystic and Scientiﬁc Basis. Delhi: Concept Pub-
lishing Co., 1976.
Sinha, Hirendra Nath. “Dhy¯ana,” “Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama,” “Praty¯ah¯ara,” “Sam¯adhi.” In
Brahmavadin 1895–1914, Vol. 2, Yoga, 1984.
Íivananda Yoga Vedanta Center. The Íivananda Companion to Yoga. New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1983.
Smith, Huston, quoted in “Chant,” National Public Radio Program, 1983. Hon-
olulu: University of Hawaii Sinclair Library, audio cassette Vol. 975, 1983.
Sobel, David S. Ways of Health, Holistic Approaches to Ancient and Contempo-
rary Medicine. New York and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979.
Sontag, Susan, Illness as Metaphor. New York: Vintage Books, Random House,
1977, 1979.
198
sources

Staal, Frits. “Indian Bodies.” In Self as Body, ed. Kasulis et al., 59–102.
Sullivan, Lawrence E. Healing and Restoring: Health and Medicine in the World’s
Religious Traditions. New York: Macmillan, 1989.
———. “Healing.” In The Encyclopedia of Religion, 16 vols. Edited by Mircea
Eliade, 6:226–34. New York: Macmillan, 1987.
Susser, Mervyn. “Ethical Components in the Deﬁnition of Health.” In Concepts
of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 93–105.
Tabor, Daniel C. “Ripe and Unripe: Concepts of Health and Sickness in Ayur-
vedic Medicine, Social Science and Medicine 15B (1981): 429–55.
Tillich, Paul. “The Meaning of Health.” In Religion and Medicine: Essays on
Meaning, Values, and Health, edited by David Belgum, 3–12. Ames: The Iowa
State University Press, 1967.
Upadhyaya, Kashi Nath. Early Buddhism and the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1971, 1983.
Veith, Ilza, trans. Huang Ti Nei Ching Su Wên: The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of
Internal Medicine. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1949, 1972.
Virchow, Rudolph, “Three Selections from Rudolph Virchow,” trans. S. G. M.
Engelhardt. In Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 187–96.
Vivekananda, Swami. Complete Works, 8 vols. Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama,
1947, 1986.
Watson, Burton, trans. The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu. New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 1968.
Wezler, A. “On the Quadruple Division of the Yoga´s¯astra, the Caturvy¯uhatva of
the Cikit¯a´s¯astra and the ‘Four Noble Truths’ of the Buddha.” Indologica Tau-
rinensia 12 (1984), 290–337.
Wheeler, David L. “A Physician-Anthropologist Examines What Ails America’s
Medical System,” Chronicle of Higher Education 39 (39) June 2, 1993, A6–7.
Whitbeck, Caroline. “A Theory of Health.” In Concepts of Health and Disease,
ed. Caplan et al., 611–26.
Woodroffe, Sir John (Arthur Avalon). The Garland of Letters (VarÓnam¯al¯a): Stud-
ies in the Mantra´s¯astra. Madras: Ganesh and Co., 1922, 1994.
———. Introduction to Tantra Shastra. Madras: Ganesh and Co., 1913, 1952.
World Health Organization, “Constitution of the World Health Organization.”
In Concepts of Health and Disease, ed. Caplan et al., 83–84.
Zimmer, Heinrich. Philosophies of India. New York: Pantheon Press [Bollingen
Series Vol. 26] 1951.
Zimmermann, Francis. The Jungle and the Aroma of Meats: An Ecological
Theme in Hindu Medicine. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987.
First published as La Jungle et le Fumet des Viandes by Editions du Seuil,
1982.
Zysk, Kenneth. Asceticism and Healing in Ancient India: Medicine in the Bud-
dhist Monastery. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.
———. “Mantra in Åyurveda” in Understanding Mantras, edited by Harvey P.
Alper. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1989.
sources
199

This page intentionally left blank.

SUBJECT INDEX
201
Adaptation, 54–56, 76–77
Aesthetic therapeutics
meaning of term, 140
in Tantra,  153–57
Aesthetic(s), 7–8, 153, 157
Afﬂictions. See Sanskrit terms index
Kle´sa-s
Alcohol and drugs, 63, 109. See also
Smoking
Alleviation therapy, 61
Ambiguity, 48–49, 55, 61, 62
American Indian Traditions, 9, 70
community in, 169, 170
curing songs, 157,  160–61
Lakota,  161–62, 165, 170,  171–
72
Navajo, 1, 157, 160
Samish,  160–61
SiSí Wiss,  160–61
American Sanskrit Institute, 155
Anatomy, 18–19, 44. See also
Physiology
Anglo-European worldview, 4–5, 6,
12, 13, 22, 158
Animals
and dualism, 14
human being as preeminent animal,
24–25
in food chain, 60
in reincarnation, 22
Art, 75, 153, 157. See also Aesthetic(s)
Awareness, 62–63, 66–69, 116
¯Ayurveda
and yoga, 36–37, 42
concepts of body, 36–44
concepts of person, 7, 40, 42–44
determinants of health, 7, 9, 46–47,
47–78, 50, 82, 134
eight branches of medicine (table), 37
four branches of medical knowledge
(table), 46
meaning of term, 36, 51
medical therapeutics, 7, 167
philosophical roots, 37, 42
religious therapeutics, 78–82
therapies, 56, 61
Behavioral medicine, 20
Body
alienation from, 66
Anglo-European views of, 11–12,
13, 17–21
as achievement concept, 13, 116
as instrument of sacred music,  161–
62
as repository of spiritual and healing
knowledge and practices, 161,
173
concepts and models
as an instance of creation, 28
as causal network, 20
as communicative ﬁeld, 20
as conscious, 22, 72
as container, 12–13
as discursive formation, 19–20
as enlightenable, 7, 153
as instrument of enlightenment, 7,
153

Body (continued)
as instrument of liberation, 28,
157
as karmic process, 22
as machine, 12, 14, 18, 70
as prison, 12
as self, 23
as temple, 12
as vehicle for congruous junctions,
44
anatomical, 19
biochemical, 19
Cartesian, 14–17, 173
felt, 16
ﬁeld model, 20, 27, 173
ﬁve sheaths model, 25, 173
for-us, 17
lived, 65
objective, 16–17
of breath, 115,  119–20
of experienced meaning, 20
of food, 170
of intelligence, 48
perceived, 17
physiological, 19
psychoneuroimmunological, 20
psychosomatic, 19
quantum mechanical, 48, 72
rational, 19
seen, 16
subjective, 16
synergic, 20
tactile-kinesthetic, 16
three bodies (gross, subtle, cau-
sal/karmic), 27,  109–11
tripod, 43
volitional, 19
Hindu views of, 8
in ¯Ayurveda, 36–44
in Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a, 26–27
in classical Yoga, 27–29
in T¯antric yogas, 140–53
in Tantra, 29–36,  143–44
in UpaniÓsads, 25–26
in Vedas, 23–25
in Western medicine, 17–21
Sanskrit terms for, 22
soteriological role of, 6–7,  112–14,
116, 121, 139, 164
Tantra’s valuing of,  139–40
Yoga’s disvaluing of,  139–40
Body politic, 15, 55, 70
Body/mind, 8, 13, 22. See also
Dualism
Body/mind vs. Self, 5
Breath, 23, 35, 91, 104. See also San-
skrit terms index Pr¯ana 
alternate nostril breathing,  119–20
and music, 158
as vehicle of spiritual and healing
knowledge, 161
ﬁve vital forces (table),  120
in chant, 163–64
of plants, 170
Breath disciplines (pr¯an¯ay¯ama). See
Sanskrit terms index Yoga
Breath, music, and healing, 160–61
Buddhism, 22–23, 91
and community,  169–70
and development of Indian medi-
cine, 79
Chinese,  169–70
Ethics, 106
Four noble truths, 133
in ¯Ayurveda, 42
Japanese,  169–70
Mah¯ay¯ana, 152
music, 162
T¯antric, 149
Tibetan
overtone chant, 164
sand-paintings, 157
Zen, 52, 162
C¯arvaka, 22–23
Caraka’s Analysis of the Human Body,
44
Caste, 31
Causation of disease. See Etiology
Chain of being, 40, 44
Change, 51, 76
Chant. See also Music; Song; Sound
Gregorian, 157
Sanskrit,  163–64
202
subject index

Tibetan Buddhist overtone chant,
164
Chinese medical philosophy, 19, 41
Chinese philosophy, 12–13, 18
Neo-Confucianism, 70
community in, 169
Taoism, 52, 141
Yin/Yang, 41
Clothing, 75
Communication, 8, 168, 172
and body, 173
Community, 8, 9, 69, 108,  167–74
Consciousness
cultivation of, 7,  122–23
as bodily activity, 22
Consciousness and Materiality, 5–6,
13, 28, 42, 139. See also San-
skrit terms index PrakÓrti and
PuruÓsa
Cortisol, 159
Creativity, 68, 72–73
Culture, 8, 69, 74
Cultural health, 68–69
Dance, 7–8,  155–56, 157
as a religious therapeutic, 153
Death, 60, 66–67,  102–3, 107
healthy, 51–52
Deity, image as object of meditation,
123. See also God
Democracy, 69
Devan¯agari script, 151
Development, human, 50–52
Diagnosis, 17, 46, 58, 59
Diet, 41, 53, 56, 80, 106. See also
Food; Digestion
unethical, 107
Digestion, 41, 43, 59, 60, 61, 81, 154,
169. See also Diet; Food
Disease, 45, 72, 103, 121, 136. See
also Sanskrit terms index
Sam¯adhi; Vy¯adhi
as pragmatic concept, 49
Diseases, disorders
acute and chronic, 61
asthma, 116
anxiety, 159
cancer, 107, 159
depression, 104, 159
diabetes, 116
digestive problems, 159
heart disease, 65, 77, 107, 159
hypertension, 107, 116, 159
infection, 107, 159
malnutrition, 171
obesity, 116
schizophrenia, 77
smallpox, 55
Disequilibrium, 103. See also
Equilibrium
Dreams, dream consciousness, 27, 59,
98
Drum, 162, 165, 166
Dualism, 5–6, 13, 14, 20, 22–23, 24,
26, 28, 32, 33, 34, 64, 93, 115,
139–40, 173
and etiology, 159
and music, 159
Ecology, 39, 71–72, 168. See also
Environment
Education, 69
Embodied life, 5, 78, 83, 167, 173
Endurance, 57–58,  113–14
Enjoyment, 75, 78
Environment, 18, 39, 52, 53, 54, 63,
74. See also Ecology
Epinephrine and nor-epinephrine, 159
Equilibrium, 46, 52–54, 60, 62, 76,
82,  113–14, 116
in ¯Ayurveda, 103, 114. See also San-
skrit terms index DoÓsa–s
psychological, 114
Ethics, 15, 55, 79, 92, 115
and health in Yoga,  105–12. See
also Sanskrit terms index Niy-
ama; Yama
Buddhist, 79, 106
Christian health-ethics, 12
Hindu, 106
in Descartes, 55
in sexuality, 145
Jain, 106
non-injury,  106–7
subject index
203

Etiology, 18, 28–29, 39, 46, 53
and dualism, 159
Exercise, 106
Fasting, 61, 111
the Feminine
Yoga’s disvaluing of, 8,  139–40
Tantra’s valuing of, 8, 30,  139–40,
145
Flute, 160, 162, 165
Food, 41, 44, 115, 142, 169, 171. See
also Diet; Digestion
sattvic, rajasic, tamasic,  109–10
Food chain, 40, 44, 170
Four Aims of Life, 4, 38, 79
Freedom, 7, 9, 21, 24, 73, 77–78, 131,
134,  136–37
Gender, 31, 145. See also the Feminine
Generativity, 73–74
God, 12, 54, 70, 85, 90, 96, 100, 111,
152. See also Sanskrit terms
index I´svara
Good, in Yoga,  105–6
Grandmother Earth, 170. See also
Mother Earth
the Great health (Nietzsche), 82
the Great Vow (Indian ethics), 106
Greco-Latin science, 40
Greek Medicine. See Medicine,
Western
Habituation therapy, 56
Healing, 2, 5, 6, 18, 27, 64, 105,
116–17,  136–37, 171
religious, 168
with mantra, 155
Health, 3, 6–8, 21, 29, 45, 47–50, 64,
131, 133
¯Ayurvedic determinants of, 7, 9, 46–
47, 47–78
biological and ecological, 50–58
medical and psychological, 58–69
metaphysical and religious, 75–78
sociocultural and aesthetic, 69–75
as a positive state, 8, 45, 69
as a regulative concept, 49
as an ethical obligation, 107
as equilibrium, 76
as natural tendency, 172
as wholeness, 105
cultural, 68–69
descriptive concept of, 49
determinants of,  172–73
medical and spiritual, 21,  136–37
normative concept of, 49–50
psychological, 111, 141. See also
Psychology
soteriological role of, 6–7,  111–12
spiritual, 1, 21, 137
systems-theory of, 54
Herbal medicine, 38–39, 61. See also
Plants: medicinal
Holism, 4, 63–65,  134–36, 139, 173
Holy Wind (Navajo), 160
Homeostasis, 58
Hózhó (Navajo: ‘well-being,’ etc.), 160
Hsiao-yao-yu (Chinese: ‘free and easy
wandering’), 141
Huang Ti Nei Ching Su Wên (Chinese
medical text), 41
Human potential, 7, 22, 25
Humors, 17–18, 44, 60. See also San-
skrit terms index DoÓsa–s
Hygiene, 40–41, 80, 103, 106
Iconography, 31, 142
Ignorance, 101, 105. See also Sanskrit
terms index Kle´sa-s
Illness, 65, 66, 103,  122–23,  130–31,
136–37
as generating karma, 108
metaphysical, 68, 94, 100, 105
Immune function, 20, 107, 159
Immunity, 56–58, 137
and music, 159
Immunocompetence, 20
Indigenous American traditions. See
American Indian traditions
Individuation, 64
Indus Valley civilization, 31
Inspiration, 160
Integration, 31, 63, 65–66,  122–23,
128, 130–31,  134–35, 137
204
subject index

Integrity, 65, 108
Jainism, 23, 42
ethics, 106
Ka´sm¯ıra Íaivism, 34,  157–58
Knowledge
Anglo-European vs. Indian orienta-
tions to, 3–4
empirical self-knowledge, 21, 80
holistic, 173
in Yoga, 96–98, 98–99
discriminative, higher, liberative,
84, 97, 98–100,  105–6, 123,
130, 132, 154, 158
ordinary means (perception, infer-
ence, authority), 97–99
scientiﬁc, 4–5, 40. See also Medi-
cine, Western
Land and body, 39–40, 56, 71, 173
Language
and body, 173
Hindu view of, 166
meditative power of, 164
sacred, 158
Learning, 68–69
Liberation, 34, 78, 86, 132,  136–37.
See also Sanskrit terms index
Kaivalya
as healing, 5, 6, 7, 9, 29, 94, 105, 111,
130,  131–37, 153, 158, 159
Life
in Descartes, 55
in ¯Ayurveda, 36, 40, 50–52
Longevity, 36, 41, 50–52, 72
Love, 75, 172
in Tantra, 145
Mauja (Suﬁsm: ‘free and joyous
activity’), 141
Medicine
afﬁnity with Tantra, 154
etymological relation with medita-
tion, 45
Medicine, Western. See also Philoso-
phy of medicine
ancient (Greek), 17–18, 41
classical, 18–19
contemporary, 19–21, 40, 45, 47,
49–50, 53, 54, 81, 168
Meditation, 2, 9, 45, 88,  112–16,
124–25, 135. See also Sanskrit
terms index Yoga: dh¯araÓn¯a;
dhy¯ana; sam¯adhi
and b¯ıja-mantras, 151
and sound, 158
on cakras, 146
on Yantra, 143
Mental clarity, 59, 66–69, 81. See also
Psychological health
Metabolism, 61, 116
Microcosm and macrocosm, 18, 35–
36, 63, 72, 117, 125, 142, 150,
151, 156,  158–59
in music,  164–65
Mind-body problem, 5, 22–23. See
also Dualism
Mindfulness, 91
Mi¯ta¯kuye Oyas’in¸ (Lakota: ‘All my
Relatives’),  171–72
Morality, 63, 65, 78, 171. See also
Sanskrit terms index Niyama;
Yama
Mother Earth, 162. See also Grand-
mother Earth
Mother Goddess, 31
Music, 7–8, 9, 168
as a religious therapeutic, 153, 157
as manifestation of Íakti, 156
Music, breath, and healing,  160–61
Music, sacred,  155–57
body as instrument of,  161–62
therapeutic elements of, 159
Musical instruments, 158,  161–62.
See also Drum; Flute; Rattle
Mysticism, 30, 31, 33, 143, 150
Native American traditions. See Amer-
ican Indian traditions
Natural history, 40
Nature, 8, 14, 30, 39, 75, 161,  165–
66, 168, 171, 172
relationality with,  169–70
subject index
205

Nature (continued)
Yoga’s disvaluing of,  139–40
Tantra’s valuing of,  139–40, 166,
168
Neo-Confucianism. See Chinese
philosophy
New Testament, 2, 12
Ni¬ch’i (Navajo: ‘Holy Wind’), 160
Non-injury, 92,  106–7
Non-susceptibility, 56–58. See also
Immunity
Normality, 49, 58–61
Ny¯aya, 42
One-pointedness, 86, 104,  122–23,
126, 135, 143. See also Sanskrit
terms index Ek¯agrat¯a
and Om, 152
in chant, 164
in Sanskrit, 155
Oral tradition, 158,  160–61, 173
Organs of action, 101
Overpopulation, 74
Pain, 59, 61–63, 130
Pairs of opposites, 111, 112, 114
Particularity, 34
Pathogenicity, 44, 53,  135–36
Person, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 18, 21, 23. See
also Body
psychophysical, 5–6
as psychosomatic process, 13
as agent of ritual and sacriﬁce, 24
as tripod, 43
ﬁeld model, 173
ﬁve-sheaths model, 25
Person and body
Indian views, 21–27
Personhood, 7
as achievement, 13, 68
Pharmacology, 5, 40, 53, 63,  168–69
Phenomenology, 14, 62, 65–66
Philosophy of medicine. See Medicine,
Western
Chinese, 19, 41
classical Western, 18–19
contemporary, 19–21, 81
Descartes’, 14–15
Greek, 17–19
Physiology, 40, 44
esoteric physiology of Tantra, 24,
92,  148–49
Plants
as material for musical instruments,
165
Buddhahood of, 170
in food chain, 60
in Lakota philosophy, 170
in reincarnation, 22
medicinal, 24, 38–39, 61, 87,  168–
69. See also Herbal medicine 
and mantra, 169
Polarism
in Chinese philosophy, 13
in Tantra, 145
Postures. See Sanskrit terms index
Yoga: ¯asana
Prevention, 40–41, 46, 52–54, 55–56,
67, 76, 79–82, 107, 116
Prayer, 2, 4, 9, 39, 168
Print-dominated culture, 158. See also
Oral tradition
Process metaphysics, 13
Prognosis, 39, 71–72
Psychology, psychological health, 63,
64, 67–68, 74, 77–78,  103–4,
112, 141, 155. See also Mental
clarity
Psychosomatic medicine, 19–20
Puriﬁcation,  108–9, 111, 121, 135
of mind, 104
with mantra, 152
Purity, 36, 79, 102, 106, 109–11,
135–36, 142
Rattle, 162, 165
Recreation, 46, 75, 81, 174
Regimen Sanitarius Salernum (medi-
eval European medical text), 17
Reincarnation, 22
Relationality, 8, 69–72,  167–74
Yoga’s disvaluing of,  139–40
Tantra’s valuing of, 139–40
Relaxation, 57–58, 114
206
subject index

Religion and medicine, 2–6, 45, 78,
131, 137
Religious therapeutics
dimensions of (table), 1–2
model of, 6–7,  172–73
model, with eight branches (table),
8, 167
purposes of model, 2
Renunciation, t¯antric, 36
S¯aÓmkhya, 5–6, 26, 30, 37, 40, 42, 44,
89, 91
ﬁve elements, 146, 147,  154–55
in ¯Ayurveda, 42–44
Sacred, 8, 100, 135, 158, 168
as compatible with materiality, 166
as non-identical to ‘spiritual,’ 166
Salvation
etymological relation to health and
wholeness, 135
Sand-paintings, 157
Sanskrit, 156, 188n47
script, 151
Sanskrit chant
healing elements in,  163–64
Savior, 2, 3
School of Salernum, 17
Scripture, 168
oral experience of, 158
study of, 111
Seasons, 54, 80–81
Self, 5, 22–23, 26, 28, 43, 49. See also
Sanskrit terms index ¯Atman;
puruÓsa
as not subject to sickness, 137, 168
Self-deception, 68, 77
Self-education, 111
Self-identity, 6, 7, 9, 73, 75, 103, 130,
131, 133, 134,  136–37, 142,
171, 172
Self-preservation, 54–55
Senses (vision, taste, smell, hearing,
and touch), 101
meditative withdrawal of,  121–22
Sensuality, 75, 108
in Tantra, 31, 143
Sexuality, 36, 59, 108
in Tantra, 140,  143–45
Yoga’s disvaluing of,  139–40
Shakuhachi (Japanese ﬂute), 162
Shamanism, 126
S¯ı™¯ılh (Samish: to sing, pray, cry), 161
Sleep, 41, 59, 80–81, 106
Smoking, 12, 53
as unethical, 107
Social reform, 171
Social welfare, 15,  171–72
Soil, in food chain, 60, 63
Song
as extension of body,  161–62
for healing,  160–61
Soteriology, 3
Sound, 93, 142,  149–53,  155–56,
165–66
as non-material being,  165–66
in Vedas, 146
Speech, 4, 156, 168
and breath, 160
as extension of body,  161–62
Spirit,  117–18
Storytelling, 161. See also Oral
tradition
Strength, 57–58, 59, 60
Stress, stress-related disorders, 58, 81,
107, 115, 116, 159
Sublimation, 36
Suﬁsm, 141
Surgery, 5
in ¯Ayurveda, 37, 38
Symbol, 159
mantra as, 150
sexual, 144
Tantra, 7, 26, 36, 82, 139
aesthetic therapeutics,  153–57
as valuing nature,  139–40, 166, 168
body in, 7, 29–36
practice of,  140–43
therapeutic elements of,  154–55
Taoism. See Chinese philosophy
Text
dominance in Anglo-European tra-
ditions, 158
vs. oral tradition, 161
subject index
207

Thematization of dysfunctional areas
of the body, 65
Therapeutic, 3
Therpeutic paradigms (tables),
¯Ayurvedic, 37
classical Yoga, 84
model of Religious Therapeutics, 8
Yoga-bh¯aÓsya, 132
Yoga-s¯utras, 134
‘Third eye,’ 151
Time, 80–81. See also Seasons
as source of stress, 107
six phases of the day (table), 81
Tobacco use. See Smoking
Trance, 126
hypnotic, 126
shamanic, 126
Yogic sam¯adhi, 125–31. See also
Sanskrit terms index Sam¯adhi
Transmigration, 22
Tree of Yoga (B.K.S. Iyengar), 115,
124
Tzu-jan (Chinese: ‘spontaneity’), 141
Unconscious
materiality as, 33
Unity,  122–23, 143, 145, 154, 165,
172
of body and mind, 5
VaiÓse´sika, 40, 42, 43
Value theory,  105–6
Ved¯anta, 3, 25, 26, 27, 30, 33, 34, 42,
89, 93, 141
as disvaluing nature, 166
Vedic tradition, 23–25, 35, 37
Vibration, 110, 151, 155, 156, 163,
164, 166
in drumming, 162
Vitality, 57–58, 73, 74, 81
Whole, wholeness, 3, 6, 9, 19, 63–66,
78, 131,  134–36, 137
Wholeness and holiness, 94,  134–36
Wind, 35, 165
‘Holy Wind,’ 160
Wind-instruments, 158, 160, 162, 165
Women
and dualism, 14
in Tantra, 145. See also the
Feminine
Word
Divine, 164, 166
World Health Organization, 47, 49
Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine, 41
Yin/Yang. See Chinese philosophy
Yoga
body in, 27–29
history of
Proto-yoga, 92
Pre-classical, 92
Epic, 92–93
Classical, 92–93
Post-classical, 92–93
Modern, 93–94
in the Vedas, 87, 92–93
in the UpaniÓsads, 89–90, 92–93
in the Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a, 89–91, 92–93
meanings of, 85–87
meditation,  121–31. See also San-
skrit terms index Yoga:
dh¯aran¯a; dhy¯ana; sam¯adhi
metaphysics and epistemology, 94–99
physical practices,  112–21, 109,
184n35. See also Sanskrit terms
index Yoga
soteriology, 99–106
traditions of
Bhakti, 75, 89, 90, 93, 112
Buddhist, 91
Classical/P¯atañjala/R¯aja/AÓsÓt¯a˙nga,
25, 26, 86, 92–93, 139
Dhy¯ana, 90
HaÓtha, 35, 92, 93, 115, 183n17,
185n53
Jain, 91–92
Jñ¯ana, 90, 93
Karma, 75, 89, 90, 93, 111
KuÓnÓdalin¯ı, 92–93,  146–49,
183n16
208
subject index

Laya, 93, 147
Mantra, 93,  149–53, 155
non-Hindu, 91–92
P¯urna (Integral), 93–94
ÓSaÓda˙nga, 88
T¯antric, 90, 93,  140–53
Yoga, Classical. See also Sanskrit
terms index Yoga
as a religious therapeutic, 94–131
as a religious therapeutic (table), 84
Yoga-bh¯asya, therapeutic paradigm
(table), 132
Yoga-s¯utras, therapeutic paradigm
(table), 134
Yoking, 85–86, 135
Zen. See Buddhism
subject index
209

This page intentionally left blank.

Abh¯ava (analytic absence), 71
Abhy¯asa (persistent effort), 98, 106, 147
¯Adhibhautika (sociality), 71
Adhik¯ara (qualiﬁcation), 22
Agni (ﬁre), 61, 169
AhaÓmkara (ego), 101, 147
Ahi ˙ms¯a (non-injury), 92. See under
Yama–s
¯Ama (product of incomplete diges-
tion), 60–61
¯Amaya (sickness), 109
Ananta (the inﬁnite), 114
Antar¯a˙nga and bahir¯a˙nga (inner and
outer limbs of Yoga), 123
Antar¯ay¯aÓh (obstacles),  103–4
nine obstacles (list), 103
Anuloma Viloma (alternate nostril
breathing),  119–20
Anun¯asika (nasalizing script-mark),
151
Anusv¯ara (nasalizing script-mark), 151
¯Arogya (health), 65, 109, 133
¯Asana-s (postures). See under Yoga
¯Atman (Self), 21
in UpaniÓsads, 25–26, 171
in Ved¯anta, 3
in Vedas, 23, 88
¯Atma-pratyabhijña (self-knowledge),
34
Aum. See Om
Avidy¯a (the afﬂiction of ignorance).
See under kle´sa-s
as a cognitive disease, 101
Bandha (‘lock’ of energy), 148
Bhavaroga (disease of rebirth and suf-
fering), 110
Bhavavy¯adhi (ills of existence), 154
Bhoga (enjoyment), 145, 146
Bhukti vs. mukti (worldly enjoyment
vs. liberation), 146
B¯ıja-s, B¯ıja-mantra-s (seed sounds),
150–53, 188n47
and cakras, 148
Bindu (drop, dot)
in Íri Yantra, 143
Brahman (the One that is All)
in ¯Ayurveda, 63
in S¯aÓmkhya, 28
inTantra,29,32–33,88,150,156,161
in UpaniÓsads, 25, 88, 171
in Ved¯anta, 32
in Vedas, 24
Buddhi (intelligence; faculty of dis-
criminative knowing), 88, 95, 97,
99–100,  101–2,  108–9, 147
as ﬁrst evolute of prakÓrti, 99–100
Cakra-s (‘wheels’; centers of energy), 92,
142,144, 146–49, 150–51,187n13
seven cakras (table), 148
Candrabindu (‘dot in a moon’
[= anun¯asika]), 151
Citta (thirteen-part instrument of cog-
nition: ahaÓmkara, buddhi, manas,
ﬁve senses, and ﬁve organs of ac-
tion),  101–2
211
SANSKRIT TERMS

Citta-vÓrtti (mind-waves; mental pro-
cesses), 121, 130. See also VÓrtti–s
Citta-vÓrtti-nirodha (suppression of
mental processes), 118. See also
Nirodha
DehaÓh (body), 22
Dh¯araÓn¯a. See under Yoga
Dharma (as morality), 24, 79
Dharma-megha-sam¯adhi (dharma-
cloud-sam¯adhi), 127, 130
Dharmakaya (body of the Dharma
[Buddhism]), 170
Dh¯atu-s, seven (seven types of biologi-
cal tissue), 42–43, 58, 63
Dh¯atu-s, three [=tri-dh¯atu] (three con-
stituents of the person), 42–43,
52–53, 59–60, 103
(ﬁgure), 43
Dhy¯ana. See under Yoga
DoÓsa-s, three [=tri-doÓsa] (three bioen-
ergetic principles; ‘humors’), 42–
43, 46, 52–53, 57, 59–62, 63,
80–81, 114 
(ﬁgure), 43
v¯ata, 52, 57, 59–60, 80–81
pitta, 52, 57, 59–60, 80–81
kapha, 52, 57, 59–60, 80–81
and times of day (table), 81
DraÓsÓtÓr (experiencer; ‘seer’), 99–100
DrasÓtuh svar¯upe’vast¯anam (the seer’s
establishment in Self-nature),
99–100
DuÓhkha (suffering or mental distress),
104, 134
Dvandva-s (pairs of opposites), 112,
114
Ek¯agrat¯a (one-pointedness, one-
pointed concentration), 104, 122,
124, 129, 135
Ek¯agrat¯a parin¯ama. See parin¯ama-s
G¯uru (‘weighty’, worthy of respect:
teacher), 140, 150, 173
female, 145
GuÓna-s (three energy forces; ‘strands’),
42–43, 57, 95, 96,  101–2, 105,
109–10, 132, 140 and dh¯atu-s/
doÓsa-s (table), 43
sattva (purity, awareness), 42–43,
95,  101–2, 109, 132, 140
rajas (activity), 42–43, 95, 109, 140
tamas (stability, inertia) 42–43, 95,
109, 140
Jad¯a (unconscious)
prakÓrti as, 33
Japa (repetition of mantra), 152
J¯ıva (person; soul), 23, 34
J¯ıvanmukta (liberated embodied per-
son), 31, 130
Jñ¯ana (higher knowing), 105. See also
Viveka–jñ¯ana
Kaivalya (liberation: independence),
83, 86, 95–96, 106, 132, 168
Karma (principle that all actions are
both causes and effects), 27, 71,
100, 104,  110–11, 126
in relation to illness, 108
Khy¯ati (discriminative knowledge), 96.
See also viveka–khy¯ati, puruÓsa–
khy¯ati
Kle´sa-s (afﬂictions), 99–105, 130
as metaphysical illness, 100
(list), 101
avidy¯a (ignorance), 96, 97, 101, 132
asmit¯a (egoism; ‘I-am-ness’),  101–2,
103, 112
r¯aga (attraction), 101, 102
dveÓsa (repulsion), 101, 102
abhinive´sa (aversion to death), 101,
102–3
Kriy¯a
(physical cleansing actions), 109,
184n55
(spontaneous activity), 141
Kumbhaka (suspension of breath),
118–19, 148
puraka (breath suspension after in-
halation),  118–19
recaka (breath suspension after exha-
lation),  118–19
212
sanskrit terms

KuÓnÓdala (coil), 147
KuÓnÓdalin¯ı (cosmic energy [=´sakti] in
human form), 92,  153–54
kalavat¯ı (k. as digestive), 154
kriyavat¯ı (k. as physical), 154
varÓnamayi (k. as the Sanskrit
sounds),  154–55
vedamay¯ı (k. in cakras),  154–55
L¯ıl¯a (Brahman’s spontaneous creative
sporting), 32, 141, 147
Mah¯abh¯uta-s, ﬁve (proto-elements
[space, air, ﬁre, water, earth]), 42–
43, 127, 147
and dh¯atu-s/doÓsa-s (ﬁgure), 43
Maithuna (ritual intercourse), 31,
144
as a support for pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama and
dh¯aran¯a, 144
Mak¯ara-s (ﬁve forbidden items), 144
Manas (mind), 43, 88, 99, 101
Mantra-s (sacred sounds), 11, 38, 39,
93, 110, 123,  141–42, 149, 163,
187n13
Mantra-japa (mantra-repetition), 152
Mantra-´sastra (science of mantra), 158
Mantray¯ana (mantra as vehicle of sal-
vation), 149
ManuÓsya (human being), 21
MatÓrka (‘mother’; ‘source’),  150–51
matÓrka varÓna (sound as source of
being), 151
M¯ay¯a (power by which Brahman ap-
pears as the world), 33
MokÓsa (liberation), 24, 37–38, 79, 83,
132, 136
MokÓsa-´sastra (science of liberation),
37–38, 78, 79
Mudr¯a
(‘seal’; ritual gestures),  141–42, 149,
156, 185n53
(parched grain), as a mak¯ara, 144
N¯ada (suprasensuous sound), 156
N¯ada-´sakti (primordial sound-energy),
161
Nad¯ı–s (energy-channels of the body),
119, 146,  148–49, 155
iÓd¯a and pi˙ngal¯a, 35–36, 149, 155
suÓsumÓn¯a, 26, 146, 149
Nirodha (suppression of mental pro-
cesses), 97–98, 118, 129
Nirodha parin¯ama. See parin¯ama-s
Nirodha sam¯adhi (trance without
mental activity), 127,  128–29
Nirv¯aÓna (freedom from rebirth and
suffering), 169, 171
Ni´sk¯ama karma (action without de-
sire; non-attached action), 89–90
Niyama (moral commitments)
´sauca (purity), 109–11, 115, 152
saÓmtosa (contentment),  109–10
tapas (self-discipline; exertion), 111
svadh¯aya (self-education), 111, 152
¯I´svara-praÓnidh¯ana (devotion to God),
100,  111–12
Ny¯asa (ritual projection), 142
Ojas (life-force; vital ﬂuid), 57–58, 60
Om (sacred sound of ultimate reality),
88, 110, 149, 151, 156, 158
Omk¯ara (the primordial sound Om),
151
Para-Íakti (Ultimate Energy in Tan-
tra), 147
Param Íiva (Ultimate Being in Tantra),
33, 142, 147, 149
Param-¯atman (Ultimate Self), 48
Parin¯ama-s (three transformations in
seedless sam¯adhi), 129–30
Parip¯aka (maturation of seed-desires),
146
Prajñ¯a (higher, liberative knowledge),
84, 98, 105, 123
Prajñ¯a-p¯aramit¯a (perfection of wis-
dom) [Buddhism], 152
Pr¯aÓna (breath; vital energy; life force),
26, 35, 87, 92, 104, 109, 115–
16,  117–21, 139, 149
and ap¯ana, 35–36,  120–21, 144
Pr¯aÓnamaya ko´sa (body of breath), 25,
115, 119–20
sanskrit terms
213

Pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama. See under Yoga
PrakÓrti (materiality, one of two con-
stituents of being), 125, 140. See
also prakÓrti and puruÓsa
PrakÓrti and PuruÓsa (materiality and
consciousness: the two constitu-
ents of being), 6, 28–29, 32–33,
85–86, 95–96, 99–102, 105, 112,
116, 130, 134,  136–37, 144, 171
in Tantra, 32–33
PraÓnava (the primordial sound Om),
152
Pras¯adaÓna (puriﬁcation), 104
Praty¯ah¯ara. See under Yoga
Pratyaya-eka-t¯anat¯a (the mind ﬂowing
as one),  124–25
Preya vs. ´sreya (pleasure vs. the higher
good), 102
PuruÓsa (consciousness, one of two
constituents of being; the true
Self), 7, 23, 25, 97, 98. See also
PrakÓrti and puruÓsa
PuruÓsa and PrakÓrti. See PrakÓriti and
puruÓsa
PuruÓsa-khy¯ati (discernment of Self),
96–97
PuruÓs¯artha-s (Four Aims of Life), 4,
38, 79
R¯aga
(the afﬂiction of attraction). See
under Kle´sa-s
(musical framework), 157
Rajas. See under GuÓnas-s
Rasa (juice, essence), 42, 60, 63, 149
Roga (illness), 65, 76
Íabda-brahman (Brahman as sound),
150,  155–57
dhvani vs. varÓna (primal unvoiced vs.
human-voiced sound), 150
madhyama-´sabda (middle sound:
sounds of Sanskrit alphabet),
156
para-´sabda (ultimate sound), 156
pa´syanti-´sabda (visualizing sound),
156
vaikhara-´sabda (manifest sound:
speech)155, 156
S¯adhana (discipline or practice), 113,
159
t¯antric, 30, 34–36, 142
Íakti (cosmic energy in its dynamic as-
pect), 31, 33, 82, 142,  143–44,
147, 150, 155, 161. See also Íiva/
Íakti
Íaktip¯ata (inﬂux of spiritual energy),
140
Sam¯adhi (meditative trance) 86, 90,
92, 98–100, 104, 112, 119,  122–
24,  125–31, 135, 185n53
and integration, 128. See also
sam¯adhi and vy¯adhi
eight stages (table), 127
sab¯ıja (with seed) and nirb¯ıja (with-
out seed),  127–30
samprajñ¯ata (cognitive) and
asamprajñ¯ata (supracognitive or
nirodha sam¯adhi),  127–30
in Tantra, 149
Sam¯adhi and vy¯adhi (illness)
polarity of,  122–23,  130–31, 135
Sam¯adhi, samprajñ¯ata [= four samap-
¯atti-s] four stages (table), 129
Íamana (alleviation therapy), 61
Samap¯atti-s, four (coalescences of
mind with object). See Sam¯adhi:
samprajn¯ata
in eight stages of sam¯adhi (table),
127
SaÓmdhi (euphonious sound-
combination), 163
SaÓms¯ara (cycle of rebirth and suffer-
ing), 22, 77, 83, 110, 132
SaÓmsk¯ara-s (mental impressions of ex-
perience), 27, 100, 105, 127, 128,
132
t¯antric,  146–47
SaÓmyama (absorbed meditative con-
centration), 123, 146
SaÓmyoga (conjunction of experiencer
and experienced), 94, 96
Samyogavahin (body as vehicle for
congruous junctions), 44
Fields: Religious Therapeutics
page 214
214
sanskrit terms

Íariram (body), 22, 43
S¯atmya (habituation therapy), 56
SattipaÓtÓth¯ana (mindfulness), 91
Sattva (purity, awareness; one of the
three guÓnas). See under GuÓna-s
and buddhi, 95, 109
Íiva (cosmic energy in its conscious as-
pect). See Íiva/Íakti
Íiva/Íakti (two principles of Being:
conscious and dynamic aspects),
31–32, 33, 144, 145, 147, 149,
154, 155
Íreya vs. preya (the higher good vs.
pleasure), 102
SÓrÓsÓtri (creation), 28
SÓrÓsÓtri-r¯upa(creativematrix)[=´sakti],
31
Sukha (health or mental ease), 169
Sv¯adhy¯aya (self-education). See under
Niyama-s
Svasthat¯a (abiding in oneself), 3
Sv¯asthya (abiding in oneself), 3, 77,
133, 153
Tamas. See under GuÓna-s
Tanm¯atras (subtle elements), 127
and cakras, 148
Tarka (reasoning), 88
in sam¯adhi, 127
Tri-dh¯atu. See Dh¯atu-s
Tri-doÓsa. See DoÓsa-s
Ujana s¯adhana (against the current),
144
Vair¯agya (dispassion, non-
attachment), 98, 106
VarÓna-s (Sanskrit sounds), 155
V¯ayu-s (air; vital breaths or forces),
120
ﬁve vital forces (table), 120
VikÓsepas (symptoms of distraction)
(list), 104
VikÓsipta (alternating focused and dis-
tracted state of mind), 126
Viveka (discrimination),  104–5
Viveka-jñ¯ana (higher knowledge
gained by discriminative know-
ing), 106
Viveka-khy¯ati(discriminativeknowing),
104–6, 132–33. Seealsokhy¯ati
VÓrtti-s (mental processes; ‘turnings of
mind), 97–98,  104–5, 114, 118,
121, 130, 132, 160, 163
(list), 97
pram¯ana (right knowing by percep-
tion, inference, or authority), 97–
99
viparyaya (wrong knowing), 97–99
vikalpa (conceptualization), 97–98
nidr¯a (sleep), 97–98
smÓrti (memory), 97–98
Vy¯adheÓh muc (free from illness), 136
Vy¯adhi (illness), 136. See also Sam¯adhi
and Vy¯adhi
Yama-s (moral relf-restraints),  106–9,
115
ahi ˙ms¯a (non-injury), 92,  106–7
satya (truth),  107–8
asteya (non-stealing), 108
brahmacarya (restraint of sensuality),
108
aparigraha (non-acqusitiveness), 109
Yantra-s (mystical diagrams),  141–43,
187n13
Íri Yantra (the Great Yantra),  142–
43, 187n13
Íri Yantra (ﬁgure),  143
Yoga (discipline of psychophysical
and spiritual integration for
liberation)
Classical/P¯atañjala/AÓsÓt¯a˙nga/R¯aj¯a,
86. See also subject index Yoga
eight limbs of Classical Yoga (table),
84
yama (moral self-restraints). See
Yama-s
niyama (moral commitments). See
Niyama-s
¯asana (postures), 88, 90, 92,  113–
17, 156, 173, 184n41
pr¯aÓn¯ay¯ama (breath disciplines), 88,
90, 91–93, 109, 111, 113, 115,
Fields: Religious Therapeutics
page 215
sanskrit terms
215

116,  117–21, 144, 156, 173
praty¯ah¯ara (withdrawal of the
senses), 88, 113,  121–22
dh¯araÓn¯a (meditative concentration),
88,  123–24, 125, 135, 144
dhy¯ana (meditation), 88, 124–25, 135
Sam¯adhi (meditative trance). See
Sam¯adhi
Yuga-s (4 eras), 140
Yuj (to yoke), 85–86
Fields: Religious Therapeutics
page 216
216
sanskrit terms

INDEX OF NAMES
217
Adidevananda, Swami, 99,  103–4
Agnive´sa, xiii, 46
Ames, Roger T., 13
Apte, V. S., xiii
Arjuna, 26, 89
Aurobindo, Íri, 93–94
Avalon, Arthur (Sir John Woodroffe),
142, 149, 154
Banerji, S. C., 31, 145
Basu, Manoranjam, 154
Bernard, Claude, 54, 72
BhartÓrhari, 152
Black Elk, Wallace H., 170
Boorse, Christopher, 49–50
Brahm¯a, 37
Brody, Howard and David S. Sobel, 54
Buddha, the, 91, 171
CakrapaÓnidatta, 46, xiii
Canguilhem, Georg, 50
Caraka, 38, 44, 46
Carter, Richard B., 14–15
Casey, John Thomas, 143
Chattopadhyaya, Debiprasad, 78–79
Chopra, Deepak, 47–48, 72–73
Chuang Tzu, 52
Coward, Harold G., 158, 164
Crawford, S. Cromwell, 43–44, 78,
112
Darwin, Charles, 54–55
Dasgupta, Surendranath, 90, 100
Dash, Vaidya Bhagwan and Acarya
Manfred M. Junius, 54
Descartes, René, 12, 13, 14–17, 55,
69, 70
Desikachar, T.K.V.,  120–21
Deutsch, Eliot, 12, 13, 68, 73, 77, 116
Dissanayake, Wimal, 27
Dossey, Larry, 107
Douglas, Mary, 136
DÓrÓdhabala, xiii, 46
Dubos, René, 54
Eliade, Mircea, 31, 34–35, 85–86,
123, 126, 128, 142, 144, 154
Elizabeth, Princess of Bohemia, 16
Engelhardt, H. Tristam, 49, 77
Erikson, Erik H., 74
Fields, Gregory P., xiii
Filliozat, Jean, 38
Fingarette, Herbert, 68
Frawley, David and Vasant Lad, 169
Gandhi, Mohandas K., 108
GorakÓsa, 183n17
Halbfass, Wilhelm, 3, 7, 12, 21, 76–
77, 101, 133
Haribhadra, 91–92
Harvey, William, 18
Hegel, G.W.F., 21, 66
Heidegger, Martin, 65
Heyn, Birgit, 60

Hippocrates, 17
Hitler, Adolf, 55
Houston, Vyaas, 155, 163
¯I´svara, 110, 112, 114, 156
Iyengar, B.K.S.,  102–3,  114–15, 116,
118, 124, 126
Jesus, 1, 2
Johnstone, Albert A., 16
Jung, Carl G., 64, 77–78
Kakar, Sudhir, 31, 36, 141, 143, 145,
152, 154
Kalupahana, David J.,  169–70
Kandarpa (KÓrÓsÓna), 145
Kass, Leon, 64
Kaufmann, Walter, 73
Khare, R. S.,  109–10
Koenig, Harold G., 159
Koller, John M., 22, 27
Konner, Melvin, 81–82
Kovács, Jozsef, 55
KÓrÓsÓna, 26, 89, 90, 145
K¯ukai, 170
Kuvalayananda, Swami and S. C. Vin-
ekar, 184n35
Lad, Vasant, 53, 116
LaFleur, William R., 170
Lamarck, Chevalier de, 54
Larson, Gerald James, 38, 42, 46, 71
Leder, Drew, 14, 62, 65–66
Lee, Riley, 162
Levin, David Michael and George F.
Solomon, 19
Levy-Bruhl, Lucien, 161
Locke, Kevin (Tokeya Inajin), 165
MacDonnell, Arthur Anthony, xiv
Maslow, Abraham and Bela Mittlel-
mann, 55, 75
Matsyendra, 183n17
McNeley, James K., 160
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 16–17
Mishra, Kamalakar, 34, 145, 146
Monier Williams, Sir Monier, xiv
Moses, Johnny (Whisstemenee: Walk-
ing Medicine Robe),  160–61
NaÓte´svara (ÓSiva), 155
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 11–12, 49, 61,
63, 73
Obenchain, Diane B., 30
Organ, Troy Wilson, 23
P¯aÓnini, 85
P¯arvat¯ı (Íakti), 32, 140
Pandit, M. P., 141
Pasteur, Louis, 18
Patañjali, xiii, 83, 86
Plato, 11–12, 13, 41, 74
Pörn, Ingmar, 76
Powers, William,  161–62
Prajñ¯an¯ananda, Swami, 161
Pras¯ada, R¯ama, xiii
R¯aj¯anaka R¯ama,  157–58
Ramakrishna, Íri, 145
Ramakrishnananda, Swami, 100
Rudra (Íiva), 153
Íakti, 154. See also Sanskrit terms
index Íakti
Saigy¯o, 170
Sanford, John A., 55
Ía˙nkara, 3, 27, 77, 153
Sarasvat¯ı, 152
Shah, Pragna R., 142,  154–55
Sharma, P. V., xiii, 56, 57
Sharma, Ram Karam and Vaidya
Bhagwan Dash, xiii, 56
Sheets-Johnstone, Maxine, 14, 17, 19,
21
Singh, Lalan Prasad, 151
Íiva, 32, 154. See also Sanskrit terms
index Íiva
Smith, Wilfred Cantwell, 30
Sontag, Susan, 47
Íubhadra, 91
Sure´svara, 3, 77
Su´sruta, 38
Sv¯atm¯ar¯ama Yog¯ındra, 183n17
218
index of names

Tabor, Daniel C., 61
Taimni, I. K.,  119–20
Tillich, Paul, 2, 48, 75–76
Upadhyaya, K. N., 89–90
Vacaspati Mi´sra, 83
Vagbhata, 38
Vesalius, Andreas, 18
Virchow, Rudolph, 51, 69
Vivekananda, Swami, 115, 117, 118
Vy¯asa, 83
Wang Yang-Ming, 70
Wezler, A., 133
Whitbeck, Caroline, 48
Whitney, William Dwight, xiv
Woodroffe, Sir John (Arthur Avalon),
142, 149, 154
Yogeshwari, 145
Zimmermann, Francis, 39–40, 44, 56,
60, 71–72
Zysk, Kenneth, 3–4, 78–79
index of names
219

This page intentionally left blank.

SANSKRIT TEXTS
221
¯Agamas, 30
AÓsÓtas¯aha´srika-prajñ¯a-p¯aramit¯a, 152
Bhagavadg¯ıt¯a, 20, 26–27, 75, 88, 89–
91, 93,  109–10,  111–12, 145,
173
BÓrhattrayi (Great Trio of ¯Ayurvedic
texts)
AÓsÓt¯a˙nga-hÓrdaya-saÓmhit¯a of Vagb-
hata, 38
Caraka-saÓmhit¯a of Agnive´sa, 38. See
also Caraka–saÓmhit¯a of Agnive´sa
Su´sruta-saÓmhit¯a of Su´sruta, 38, 42
Caraka-saÓmhit¯a of Agnive´sa, xiii, 8,
37, 41–44, 46, 51–52, 56–60,
62–63, 67, 72, 73–76, 78, 80
commentary: ¯Ayurveda-d¯ıpik¯a of
CakrapaÓnidatta, xiii, 8, 41, 46,
52–54, 56
DohakoÓsa, 35
DÓ rÓsti-samucc¯aya of Haribhadra, 91–
92
GheraÓnÓda SaÓmhit¯a of GheraÓnÓda, 139,
184n18
GorakÓsa SaÓmhit¯a of GorakÓsa,
183n17
HaÓtha-yoga-prad¯ıpik¯a of Sv¯atm¯ar¯ama
Yog¯ındra, 92, 105, 120, 184n35,
185n53
Jñ¯an¯arÓnava of Íubhadra, 91
Mah¯abh¯arata, 22, 92–93
M¯aha-sattipaÓtÓth¯ana-suttanta, 91
Sambandhav¯artikka of Sure´svara
(commentary on the BÓrhadar-
¯aÓnyakopaniÓsad-bh¯aÓsya of
Ía˙nkara, 77
S¯aÓmkhya-k¯arik¯a of ¯I´svarakÓrÓsÓna, 28, 95,
133
commentary: S¯aÓmkhya-k¯arik¯a-
bh¯aÓsya of GauÓdap¯ada, 133
Íarada Tilaka, 155
ÓSaÓt-cakra-nir¯upaÓna, xiii, 9,  147–49,
153
Íiva-sa Ómhit¯a, 184n18
SpanÓdak¯arik¯a, 157
commentary: SpandavivÓrti of
R¯aj¯anaka R¯ama,  157–58
Tantra-tattva, 145, 187n27
Tantras
K¯am¯akhy¯a Tantra, 140
Kul¯arÓnava Tantra, 140, 145, 187n22
Mah¯anirv¯aÓna Tantra, xiii, 9, 32, 140,
152, 154
Ratnas¯ara Tantra, 35
ViÓsva-s¯ara Tantra, 150
Yogin¯ı Tantra, 145
UpaniÓsads, 23, 25–26, 88–89, 92, 93,
102, 110, 171, 173

BÓrhad¯araÓnyaka Up., 23, 35, 66, 145
Ch¯andogya Up., 25, 35, 66–67, 145,
168–69, 169, 174
KaÓtha Up., 26, 88, 102
M¯aÓnÓd ¯ukya Up., 25, 174
Maitri Up., 23, 25–26, 27, 88
MuÓnÓdaka Up., 25
Ívet¯a´svatara Up., 25, 88, 89
Taittir¯ıya Up., 25, 145, 158, 163
Vakyapad¯ıya of BhartÓrhari, 152
Vedas, 22, 23, 87, 92,  149–50
Aitreya ¯AraÓnyaka, 24
Atharvaveda, 24, 35, 38–39, 87,
117
Br¯ahm¯aÓnas, 24, 149
ÓRgveda, 23–24, 87,  149–50, 153
Yajur-veda, 149
Viveka-c¯udamaÓni of Ía˙nkara, 27,
109–10
Yoga UpaniÓsads, 93, 146
N¯adabind¯upaniÓsad, 156
Yoga-´sikhopaniÓsad, 156
Yoga-tattvopaniÓsad, 93
Yoga-bindu of Haribhadra, 91–92
Yoga-s¯utras of Patañjali, xiii, 4, 9, 28,
83, 86, 89–90, 93, 95–105, 108,
110,  113–14, 117, 119,  121–24,
126–30,  132–35, 146, 152, 158
commentary: Tattva-vai´sarad¯ı of
V¯acaspati Mi´sra, xiii, 4, 9, 83, 85,
95, 97, 98,  102–3, 104, 106,
108, 119, 123, 124, 130, 146,
158
commentary: Yoga-bh¯aÓsya of Vy¯asa,
xiii, 9, 28, 83, 84, 88, 95, 99,
100,  101–2, 103, 106, 107, 108,
109, 111, 120, 122, 126, 128,
131–32, 152
Yogin¯ı HÓrdaya, 31
222
sanskrit texts