Sri Devi Khadga Mala Stotram  
Significance, Process and Meaning  
Sri Devi Khadga Mala Stotram is a very special composition of praying to the Goddess 
Shakti, the Divine Mother in a unique and 
complete way. Unique in the sense each of the 
names uttered is for a significant cause, with 
meaning description and encapsulated with 
divine energy and utmost devotion. Word 
'Khadga' means Sword, 'Mala' means Garland, 
Stotram means a hymn or song of praise. So the 
Khadgamala Stotram is a hymn sung in the 
praise of Divine Mother, which is said to bestow 
a protective garland of mystical weapons from 
the Devi from all sorts of Calamities upon those who recite it. The Devi Khadga Mala 
Stotram takes us mentally through the Sri Chakra; i.e. the mystical geometric 
representation of the Supreme Goddess, describing the significance and meaning for each 
form given.  
It is advisable to Keep offering Kumkum (red colored Vermillion) at Divine 
mother' s  feet or on the Sri chakra Yantra as you recite each name of the Divine 
Mother. You may also offer flowers, Akshitas too. 
Om Asya Sri Suddha Sakti málá mahá mantrasya, Upasthendriya 
adhisthayi Varunaditya Rishih, Daivi Gayatri Chandah 
Satvika Kakára bhattaraka pithasthita, Sri mat Kámesveranka nilaiaya 
Sri mat Kámesvari devatá, Aim Bijam, Klim Saktihi, Souh kilakam 
Sri Devi prityarthe Khadga siddthyarthe jape viniyogah 
 
Dhyanam: 
Tadrisam Khadgam apnoti, Yena hasta sthitena vai 
Astadasa Mahadvipa, Samrad bhokta bhavisyati 
Hrimkrasana Garbhitanala Sikham, Souh Klim kalam bibhratim dhautam 
trinetrojvalam. 
 
Meaning: I meditate on the Goddess Sri Devi glowing with red, yellow, and blue flames 
of passion fanning the erotic sentiment of Kameshwara, in the meddle of a triangle 
called Hrim, whose three points are the light of Hari(Vishnu), Hara(Shiva) & Virinchi 
(Brahma), the three gurus; Sri Devi is wearing the full moon on her crown ( Souh ), 
Her body is full of desire for union ( Klim ) with Kameshwara (Lord Shiva).

Vande pustaka pasam ankusadharam, Sragbhushitam ujvalam 
Tvam Gourim Tripuram Paratparakalam, Sri Chakra Sancharineem. 
 
Meaning: One who is adorned with a sari made from golden threads; One who  is fair 
as pure  milk and the pleasant as moonlight; one who  has three eyes,  in Her four 
hands she is holding a book, a noose, a goad, and a garland of letters; She is a 
personification of all that is pure beauty, aesthetic, harmonius, joyful, vibrant; she 
moves in Sri Chakra, a mandala consisting of all the deities worshipping their consorts 
named here after. 
 
Om Aim Hrim Srim Aim Klim Souh - OM (in the name of God), may you grant us 
benediction of knowledge, power and grace. 
 
Om Namah Tripura Sundari 
Hridayadevi - Compassionate heart 
Sirodevi - princely diadem 
Sikhadevi - Long flowing hair 
Kavacha Devi - protective hands 
Netra Devi - graceful look  
Astra Devi - protective weapons 
Kameswari - Controller of lust  
Bhagamalini - Garland of Suns 
Nityaklinne - Oozing wet 
Bherunde - Terrific 
Vahnivasini - Residing in fire 
Mahavajreswari - Jewel in lotus 
Sivaduti - Llarbinger of joy 
Twarite - Speed 
Kulasundari - beautiful lotus on a lake 
Nitya - Eternal 
Nilapatake - Blue flag with red tip 
Vijaye - Dominat 
Sarvamangale - All auspicious 
Jvalamalini - Flames 
Chitre - Kaleidoscope 
Mahanitye - Eternal Truth 
Paramesvara - Goddess of God 
Parameswari - Friendly 
Mitresamayi - Sexy 
Sasthisamayi - Erect

Uddisamayi - Stroking 
Charyanathamayi – Happiness 
 
Below given are the Names of the Saints who have worshipped the 
Divine Mother and thus attained liberation. 
 
Lopamudramayi - Lopamudra - She offered herself for worship 
Agastyamayi - Agastya - he drank the water of the oceans, drying them up 
Kalatapanamayi - Kalatana - he set time on fire 
Dharmacharyamayi - Dharmacharya - he preached the nature of good and evil 
Muktakesisvaramayi - Muktakaleisvara - not worrying about his appearace he 
let the hair flow loose 
Dipakalanathamayi - Depakalanada - he gazed on eternal light 
Visnudevamayi - Vishnudeva - he expanded himself, took up the whole of space 
Prabhakara devamayi - Prabhaharadeva - he became a star called the sun 
Tejodevamayi - Tejodeva - he became the light witch was speeding over all space 
creating space itself 
Manojadevamayi - Manojadeva - he was desire 
Kalyanadevamayi - Kalyanadeva - he was ever auspicious 
Vasudevamayi - Vasudeva - the world grew out of his memory 
Ratnadevamayi - Ratnadeva - concentrated like jewels 
Sri Ramanandamayi - Sri Ramananda - he enjoyed the Goddess Sri Rama 
Blissfully 
 
1. Following are the Gods of the nine enclosures of Sri Chakra / the first 
enclosure. 
Anima Siddhe, Laghima Siddhe, Garima Siddhe, Mahima Siddhe, Isitva Siddhe, 
Vasitva Siddhe, Prakamya Siddhe, Bhukti Siddhe, Iccha Siddhe, Prapti Siddhe, 
Sarvakama Siddhe, Brahmi, Mahesvari, Koumari, Vaisnavi, Varahi, Mahendri, 
Chamunde, Mahalaksmi, Sarva Samksobhini, Sarva Vidravini, Sarva karsini, Sarva 
Vasamkari, Sarvonmadini, Sarva Mahankuse, Sarva Khecari, Sarva Bije, Sarva Yone, 
Sarva Trikhande. Trilokya mohana chakra swamini Prakata yogini 
 
The passions called : lust, anger, possessiveness, obsession, pride, jealousy, good, and 
evil. The procedure to control these passions and obtain the powers of: agitating 
all(Negativities), liquefying all (orgasmic ally), attracting all, controlling all, 
maddening all, directing all, moving in all space, be the information of all, be the 
source of all (womb), be tri-fold division of all (the known, the knowing, and the will 
know). The wheel of the three worlds of waking, dreaming and sleeping, expressing 
Herself openly without inhibitions.

2. Follow are the sixteen attractive powers identified with the sixteen days of the 
lunar calendar: 
 
 According to the Hindu art of love, the erotic zone moves up from feet to head in the 
bright half of the lunar month and comes down to the dark half of the lunar month; the 
expression of the love through the various power of the mind described bellow: - the 
Gods of the second enclosure. 
  
Kamakarshini - Attractive powers of lust 
Buddhyakarshini - Attractive powers of discrimination  
Ahamkarakarshini - Attractive powers of ego 
Sabdhakarshini - Attractive powers of sound 
Sparsakarshini - Attractive powers of touch  
Rupakarhsini - Attractive powers of form 
Rasakarshini - Attractive powers of taste  
Gandhakarshini - Attractive powers of odor  
Chittakarshini - Attractive powers of mind  
Dharyakarshini - Attractive powers of valor  
Smrityikarshini - Attractive powers of memory 
Namakarshini - Attractive powers of name  
Bijakarshini  - Attractive powers of semen  
Atmakarshini - Attractive powers of self 
Amrtakarshini - Attractive powers of immortality  
Sarirakarshini - Attractive powers of morality  
Sarvasa paripuraka chakra swamini Gupta Yogini - The wheel which fulfills 
all directions and all desires, the secret Yogini. 
 
3. Following are the eight forms of erotic sentiments: - the third enclosure. 
 
Ananga Kusume - The sentiment of flowering 
Ananga Mekhale - The sentiment of girdling 
Ananga Madane - The sentiment of love 
Ananga Madananture - The sentiment of lust 
Ananga Redhe - The sentiment of outlining 
Ananga Vegini - The sentiment of the desire of sex 
Ananga Kusume - The sentiment of the insistence on sex 
Ananga Malini - The sentiment of orgy 
Sarva sanksoghana sadhaka chakra swamini Gupta tara Yogini - The wheel 
that agitates everyone, the esoteric yogini. 
 
4. Follow the descriptions of the fourteen worlds of the fourth enclosure.

Sarva Samksobhini - Agitating all 
Sarva Vidravini - Liquefying all 
Sarva Karshini - Attracting all  
Sarva Hladini - Pleasing all 
Sarva Sammohini - Deluding all 
Sarva Stambhini - Obstructing all 
Sarva Jrumbhini - Expanding all 
Sarva Vasamkari - Controlling all 
Sarva Ranjani - Enjoying all 
Sarvonmadini - Maddening all 
Sarvarthasadhini - all prosperous 
Sarva Sampattipurani - All full filling riches 
Sarva Mantra Mayi - All mantras 
Sarva Dvandva Ksayamkari - Eliminating all dualities 
Sarva Soubhagya Dayaka Cakra Swamini 
Sampradaya Yogini - The wheel of all kinds of union, traditional Yogini. 
 
5. Follow the Gods of the fifth Chakra. 
 
Sarva Siddhiprade - Giver of all achievements 
Sarva Sampatprade  - Giver of all wealth 
Sarva Priyamkari  - Giver of all that one like to have 
Sarva Mangalakarini - Harbinger of all auspiciousness  
Sarva Kamaprade - Fulfiller of all desires 
Sarva Duhkha Vimochani - Eliminator of all misery 
Sarva Mrityu Prasamani - Eliminator of all accidental deaths  
Sarva Vighna Nivarini - Eliminator of all obstacles 
Sarvanga Sundari - Beautiful in every part of Her body 
Sarva Soubhagya Dayini Sarvartha Sadhaka Chakra Swamini Kulottirna 
Yogini - The wheel which turns you on to the right  path, gives you all wealth, full fills 
all desirers, and makes liberation possible, the Yogini that has graduated out if all 
classifications. 
 
6. Follow the Gods of the sixth Enclosure. 
 
Sarvaghne - Omniscient 
Sarva Sakte - Omnipotent 
Sarvaisvarya pradayini - Omni expressive 
Sarva Jnanamayi - Providing the bliss of omniscience 
Sarva Vyadhivinasini - Eliminating all maladies

Sarvadharasvarupe - The support of all 
Sarva Papahare - The eliminator of notions of all sins. 
Sarva Anandamayi - All happiness 
Sarva Raksa Swaroopini - All protecting 
Sarvepsita Phalaprade - Provider of all desired fruits (Boons). 
Sarva Raksakara Chakra Swamini, Nigarbha Yogini - The wheel of all 
protection, the Yogini protecting the child in the womb. 
 
7. Following are the eight forms of Saraswati, Goddess of knowledge, Gods of 
the seventh Enclosure.:  
 
Vasini - Existing 
Kameshwari - Expression 
Modini - Pleasure 
Vimale - Pure 
Arune - Passion 
Jayini - Victory 
Sarvesvari - Owner 
Kaulini - Enjoying all 
Sarvarogahara Chakra Swamini Rahasya Yogini - The wheel which eliminates 
disease, the secret Yogini. 
 
8. Follow are the powerful weapons of the Divine Mother 
 
Baanini - The five flowered arrows of Manmatha (God of love, Kaamdev) 
representing the five  senses of sound (music), touch (feel ), form (beauty), taste 
(sweetness), smell (fragrance). 
Chapini - The sugar cane bow (the mind which likes sweet things of life). 
Pasini - The attractive power of love. 
Ankusini - The repulsive power to controling evil. 
Maha Kameshwari - The thrust of God expressing the desire to see Himself in many 
forms 
Maha Vajreshwari - The ability to obtain the cosmos in seed form 
Maha Bhagamalini - The ability to express the cosmos out of the seed 
Sarva Siddhiprada Chakra Swamini Ati Rahasya Yogini -  The wheel of 
realizations, the most secret Yogini. 
 
9.1 Follow is the central hub of the wheel of Sri Devi, the Supreme Goddess: - in 
ninth enclosure. 
 
Sri Sri Maha Bhattarike, Sarvananda Maya Chakra Swamini

Paratpara Rahasya Yogini - The Goddess Sri Devi is present in the whole cosmos. 
The wheel of all bliss, the transcendental secret Yogini. 
 
9.2 Follow are the nine Goddesses controlling the nine wheels above. 
 
Tripure - Three states of Waking, Dreaming and Sleeping. 
Tripureshi - The controller of these three states 
Tripurasundari - The beautiful one among all these three states 
Tripura Vasini - The one who lives in all these three states 
Tripura Sriyah - The riches of all these three states 
Tripuramalini - The sequences of all these states experienced by all people 
Tripura Siddhe - The achievements possible in all these three states 
Tripurambe - The experience of the cosmos in Her three states unifying all the 
experiences of all life 
Maha Maheswari - The great cosmic controller 
Maha Maha Raghni - The great cosmic empress 
Maha Maha Shakte - The great cosmic power 
Maha Maha Gupte - The great cosmic secret 
Maha Maha Jnapte - The great cosmic memory 
Maha Mahannande - The great cosmic bliss 
Maha Maha Skandhe - The great cosmic support 
Maha Mahasaye - The great cosmic expression 
Maha Maha Sri Chakra Nagara Samraghni - The great transcendental 
conscious empress of the wheel of Sri Chakra. 
 Namaste Namaste Namaste Namah - We bow to You, we bow to You, We bow to 
You in the three states of waking, dreaming, and sleeping states O Divine Mother! 
 
 
Reference from: www.songsnmnp.blogspot.com, www.srividya.org, www.mantra.lilasakura.com