A PROJECT ON PHALA-JYOUTISHA-DEEPIKA

Kalpatharu R ch Academy Publication
KALPATHARU RESEARCH ACADEMY = pelnard mesent y Publicatio

BANGALORE Chief Editor: Daivajna K.N. Somayaji

The Kalpatharu Research Academy established in 1981,
was inaugurated by the then Minister for Tourism and Civil
Aviation, Government of India. This is an_ institution
dedicated to the cause of preservation of heritage of India, Its
broad aim is to promote Research-Oriented scholarship in
the different branches of knowledge related to the Vedas and
Sanskrit. Encouragement is meant to be given through the
Academy to the study of the Vedic literature alongwith
traditional angas such as Jyoutisha, Kalpa, Nirukta and
Vyakarana. It also promotes work in related disciplines,
Manuscriptology, Etymology, Linguistic Sciences,
Lexicology and Literary Criticism. Generally, the Academy *
will help spread and promote education, culture, science, art
and learning in all its branches. It will be broad-based and
multi- disciplinary in approach.

JYOUTISHA-SIDDHANTA-SARA

(TH& ESSENTIALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY)

VYVS-VLNVHGGIS-VHSILNOAP

\

In order to further its main objective to encourage studies in
the field of Veda and Vedanga, various Research Projects
have been taken up and also major Research work on
Rigveda and Agama-Kosha in several volumes. A reference
library is being built up to assist the research work by the
scholars engaged by the Academy and also workers in the
field of Vedic studies. It is the intention of the Academy to
develop as a national centre for higher learning in Vedas and
facilitate the founding of a Sanskrit and Vedic University in
India.

OVH “YH VINVY

BY

This publication is the Forty-Seventh of its achievements in RAMA R. RAO
this field. ;

KALPATHARU RESEARCH ACADEMY
Post Box No. 1857, Bangalore 560 018
Phone: 624847

JYOUTISHA-SIDDHANTA-SARA (Essentials of Hindu Astrology) by
Mrs. Rama R. Rao, M.A., D.M.P., and Published by Daivajna
K. N. Somayaji, Director and Chief Editor of Kalpatharu Research
Academy, Post Box No. 1857, Bangalore 560 018,

Phone: 624847.

Published with the generous financial assistance from the Director
General, National Archives of India, Government of India, New Delhi.

© First Edition: 1994 Kalpatharu Research Academy

Price: Rs. Twenty Five only (subsidized)

reach all sections of society, and hence are sold at highly subsidized
prices. An appeal is hereby made to book-sellers to adhere to the
prices indicated in each volume by the publishers, and not enhance
them on any account.

The Publications of Kalpatharu Research Academy are meant to

UBS PUBLISHERS DISTRIBUTORS LTD.,
10, First Main Road, Gandhi Nagar,
P.B. No. 9713, Bangalore 560 009.
Phones: 2263901 , 2263902, 2263903, 2263904.

Branches: New Delhi - Bombay - Bangalore - Madras -
Calcutta - Patna - Kanpur - London.

| Printed by:
P. S. VENKATESH BABU at Omkar Offset Printers
Ist Main, N.T. Pet, Bangalore-560 002., Ph: 609026, 608186

JYOUTISHA-SIDDHANTA-SARA

(THE ESSENTIALS OF HINDU ASTROLOGY)

INTRODUCTION

Curiosity to know one’s future is both natural and universal; and
therefore any method which attempts to unravel the mystery of
the future has an attraction for the human mind. Astrology,
palmistry, numerology and various extrasensory processes which
claim to predict the future have a popular appeal. But of these
only astrology has a scientific basis. It is entirely dependent on
the science of astronomy which by supplying the data pertaining
to the stars and planets forms the foundation upon which the
superstructure of astrology is constructed.

Out of the millions of people who are fascinated by astrology or
accept the verdict of astrologers in blind faith, only a few have a
serious desire to study and understand its principles. In my
opinion, an elementary knowledge of astronomy and a historical
perspective are indispensable for a beginner. Since Hindu
astrology is deeply rooted in Indian philosophical concepts like
karma and rebirth and in Hindu religious ideas like propitiation of
deities, prayers, chanting of mantras and slokas, observance of
fasts and performance of rituals, a background of the
philosophical systems would help the student to understand
astrology better. | was impressed by the philosophical
interpretation of astrology offered by Sri B. S. Gopalakrishna of
Madikeri and | felt tempted to include it in the book for the sheer
novelty of it.

After going through the authoritative texts like Brihat Jataka of
Varahamihira, Brihat Parasara Horashastra, Mantreswara's
Phaladeepika, Kalyana Varma’s Saravali etc. one is confronted
with an overwhelming mass of information on various aspects of
astrology, some corroborative, some conflicting and some
confusing. The conclusion one arrives at is that the variables one
has to tackle are far too many and the interpretations far too
numerous and the task of integrating the diverse material is too
complex. Any off-hand interpretation or simplification is bound to
fail. The subject requires deep study and one has to develop an
insight and intuition to become a successful astrologer. | have
tried to present in this book the essentials of Hindu Astrology with
as objective an approach as possible.

| thank my guru Sri Padmanabha Aithal for initiating me into this
subject and Sri D. V. Chari, retired Executive Engineer, TTD,
Tirupati and Sri B. Raghavendra Rao of Bangalore for their
guidance. | am grateful to Sri Daivajna Somayaji of the
Kalpatharu Research Academy but for whose encouragement |
would never have written this book. | acknowledge the
co-operation of the printers, Sri Venkatesh Babu of the Omkar
Offset Printers, Bangalore.

Bangalore Rama R. Rao

PREFACE

Kalpatharu Research Academy of Bangalore, is presenting to the
world of scholars another publication of value,
Jyoutisha-Siddhanta-Sara (The Essentials of Hindu Astrology).
The book provides not only an introduction to the science of
astrology but explains the most important and basic concepts of
the subject. It is theoretical in orientation but has a practical
import.

The Academy has already brought out numerous publications,
many of them in series of several volumes, on indological
themes. That the publications have been uniformly well received
is a matter for gratification for the Academy, whose mission is to
help spread the essential values of Indian culture by bringing out
authentic and popular books bearing on the different aspects of
Indian culture.

The Academy has focussed its attention on the Vedic tradition
which has branched out into religious, spiritual and intellectual
dimensions. Astrology is one of the six ‘Angas’ of the Vedic
tradition (Vedanga), and has been studied since antiquity; and an
elaborate science has developed on this basis.

Besides the predictive aspects, astrology has what are Strictly
academic involvements, and they need to be highlighted for the
benefit of intellectuals as well as practitioners. The present
publication is an effort in this direction.

The Academy is grateful to Smt. Rama R. Rao, who has prepared
this useful manual. It also places on record the help provided by
the Director General, National Archives of India, Government of
India, New Delhi, enabling us to undertake this project.

Grateful thanks are also due to Shri Venkatesh Babu and Shri
Nagendra of the Omkar Offset Printers, who have printed the
book neatly and promptly.

Bangalore Daivajna K. N. Somayaji
11-4-1994 Chief Editor and Director
Chandra-Ugadhi KALPATHARU RESEARCH ACADEMY

CONTENTS

CHAPTER [wis cccssescesccnsscccssecsersssecsseceessecesrsees 1
The beginnings of astrology in the ancient world

The development of astrology in India

The present status of astrology in India

The sidereal astrology and tropical astrology

The epochs: Western and Indian

The philosophical foundations for Hindu astrology

CHAPTER TD cnc ceccsscccsssrcsercserscssscnessensssceseesenes 20
Areas of astrology: Jataka, Varshaphala, Prasna,

Muhurta and Samhita.

Definitions: Zodiac, Rasi, Hora, Dina, Vara, Paksha,

Masa, Samvathsara, Ayana, Panchanga, Thithi, Yoga,
Karana.

Classification of Rasis, Shadvarga, Sapthavarga,

Dasavarga, Shodasavarga.

CHAPTER TID wiecceesssssscscssesecssscecsecesssssssssceensseneees 48
Description of Rasis and Grahas.

CHAPTER [Voice esscsssssccssssccsnessssssssessesssssesensees 87
Description of Nakshatras and Bhavas

CHAPTER VV wicicccssscscsserssessssscescessssssersesssenseasees 119
Dasa systems : Vimshottari, Ashtottari,

Construction of a horoscope. Interpretation of a

horoscope, Tathwa theory, Grahasamayam

Shadbala: Sthanabala, Dikbala, Kaalabala, Chestabala,
Naisargikabala, Drigbala. Avasthas. Benefic, Malefic

and Neutral planets. Yogas.. A philosophical

interpretation of planetary aspects. '

CHAPTER -1

The Beginnings of Astrology in the ancient world

Man’s interest in stars and planets can be traced back to at least
6000 years when he abandoned his nomadic existence and opted
to settle down at a suitable place and cultivate the land. The
earliest and the most ancient of these settlements were centered
round fertile river valleys. The Egyptians chose the Nile valley,
the Sumerians the land between the rivers Tigris and Euphrates in
Mesopotamia (now in southern Iraq) the Chinese the Hwang Ho
Valley, and the Indians the Indus Valley. All these four eastern
civilizations developed advanced techniques of agriculture and
became prosperous. The merchants and sailors went from one
settlement to the other, and established trade and communication
which led to the spread of knowledge and culture.

Since agriculture and farming were their main occupation, they
were interested in finding out the right time for sowing and
harvesting. They studied the seasonal variations and the arrival of
monsoons. They not only noticed a cyclical rhythm in nature but
also discovered its correspondence with star-patterns in the sky.
They observed the beneficial effect of the waxing moon on their
crops as also the damage done to them by the scorching sun. They
saw the eclipses and the comets, the meteors and the shooting stars
with a sense of awe and foreboding. They began to keep records
of these natural events and marked the time of their recurrence.
The Egyptians noted the time of the floods on the river Nile and
found they recurred once in 365 days. This marked the birth of a
solar calendar, and the concept of an year consisting of 365 days.
They also divided their year into three seasons marked by distinct
climatic conditions. The time was approximately 3000 B.C. ~

In Mesopviaimia sound 2000 B.C., there lived two distinct groups
of people, the Assyrians in the north, who were a semetic nomadic
tribe from Southern Arabia and the Sumerians in the South who
came from the East and had an oriental appearance. Gradually the
_ Assyrians or the Akkadians moved to the south and joined the
Sumerians and the area became known as Summer-Akkad. After
a few centuries, however, the Akkadians, being more aggressive,
took possession of the land and made Babylon their capital
around 1750 B.C.

While the Babylonians made rapid progress in agricultural
technique and astrology, similar advances were taking place in
China and India. They were using a vertical stick, known as the
gnomon, to calculate the distances between the Sun, Moon, and
the planets by measuring the length and direction of the shadow it
cast on earth. By a systematic study of the planetary
configurations and the arrival of monsoons and other weather
conditions, they were able to predict the proper time for planting
and harvesting. Although this knowledge was common to all the
four ancient civilizations, the earhest records of astrological
details were those made by the Babylonians. During the eighth
century B.C. they made use of clay tablets to record astronomical
and astrological data by pressing leaves with symbolic shapes and
signs into the clay tablets. They lay buried for centuries until
archaeologists discovered them in the nineteenth century. They
throw light on their knowledge of astronomy and their way of

life. They divided their year into four parts marked by the four

major solar events. The Spring equinox, Autumn equinox, the
Winter solstice and the Summer solstice. The months were
determined by the phases of the moon and the days by the sighting

of the moon and its setting and not by the rising and setting of the

sun, aS it is done now.

During the sixth century B.C., Greek intellectuals like Herodotus,
the philosopher and Pythagoras, the mathematician, went to
Babylonian and returned with valuable information about the
equinoctical and solstical points, lunar measurements, the
constellations of the zodiac and the construction of individual
horoscopes. After the Greeks conquered Babylonia and
established their empire there in the fourth century B.C. they had
full access to the astronomical knowledge of the Babylonians
which they combined with their own theories. It was during this
period that the stars and planets became defined and distinct
qualities and characteristics were attributed to each of them.
Astrology branched off as a separate system leaving astronomy to
continue with its calculations and measurements and mundane
predictions of seasons, eclipses and so on.

The Development of Astrology in India

The origins of Indian civilization go back traditionally to the
Vedas containing inspired utterances of sages in the form of
hymns to natural forces and celestial beings, which were orally
transmitted from one generation to the next. There are hymns
which describe the six seasons or Ritus. They conceptualized time
as a wheel having twelve parts, representing the twelve months in
an year and they developed a solilunar calendar. The Vedic period
has been approximately dated as 8000 B.C. This was followed by
the period pertaining to the Brahmanas wherein the Vedic hymns
were adapted to the performance of yajnas and yagas (sacrificial
rituals). Detailed instructions were worked out for these
fire-rituals including the auspicious time when they should be

undertaken. This entailed a study of the positions of the Sun,
Moon, the planets and the star constellations. A work known as
Vedanga Jyotisha is ascribed to this period, which deals with a
minute study of the phases of the moon and the constellations.

During the epic period, which may be dated about 4,000 B.C.
there are numerous references to astrological calculations and
predictions in literary works like the Ramayana, Bhagavata and
Bharata. {t has been mentioned in Valmiki Ramayana that the sage
Vasishta, who was the royal priest or astrologer advised king
Dasaratha, who was childless, to perform the putrakamesti-yajna
to beget a son and also fixed the auspicious time for the same.
That Rama’s nakshatra or the stellar constellation and the day of
his birth according to the lunar calendar has been recorded 1s well
known as his birthday is celebrated even to this day. Similarly, in
Bhagavata, the birth of Krishna is described in detail, giving the
day of his birth and the star constellation. In Mahabharata, the
astrological dates of the war between Kauravas and Pandavas has
been mentioned.

The earliest historical records of ancient India, however, are those
found in the ruins of the Indus Valley civilization, which was
contemporaneous with those of Egypt and Sumer and dated
around 3000 B.C. The archaeological excavations carried out
during the early part of this century at Harappa and Mohenjodaro
reveal their remarkable skills in metal-crafts, art and architecture
as well as in town-planning. They bear testimony to the
advanced techniques of drainage and irrigation systems developed
by them. But because of their peace-loving nature, they were
conquered by the nomadic tribes of Afghanistan who extended
their territory to the Gangetic valley.

It is well known that when the Buddha was born, in the 6th
Century B.C. the court astrologer named Asita cast the baby’s
horoscope and predicted that the prince would either become a
great emperor or a renunciant. As it turned out, he became the
Buddha, who considered astrology to be an _ unprofitable
preoccupation. It confirms that astrology was well-developed
even before the Buddha’s time. The Buddha, however, laid stress
on personal effort and discipline as the essential tools for spiritual
progress towards the ultimate goal of liberation. Astrology which
believes in predestination as against individual effort, was
condemned by him. As Buddhism spread far and wide, interest in
astrology began to diminish. During the reign of Asoka, about the
3rd century B.C., Indians made remarkable contributions in the
fields of religion, art, literature and sciences but astrology seems
to have been ignored.

This was, however, short-lived. About a century later it was
resumed, because a recent study of the Buddhist stupas at Sanchi,
including the great stupa built by Sunga kings around the 2nd
century B.C., suggests that the inner and outer balustrades might
have been designed to serve as a luni-solar calendar. The
north-south axis of the stupa has been shifted by about 15 so as to
align the east-west entrances to it to face the moon-rise and the
sunset on the Buddha purnima day, the day Buddha attained
nirvana (in 544 B.C.) which is auspicious to Buddhists all over the
world.

By about the Ist century B.C., the city of Ujjain became the centre
from which the longitudes both east and west were recorded.
Astrologers congregated there to discuss, exchange and assimilate
astrological ideas from the West with those developed in India.
The Greek astronomer Hipparchus formulated, around 150 B.C.,

his theories after a careful and scientific study of the movements
of the planets. Ptolemy, who lived in Alexandria, perfected the
system initiated by Hipparchus and wrote his astronomical
encyclopedia ‘Almagest’ around A.D. 140. Between B.C. 150 and
“A.D. 150, there was a tremendous interest in horoscopic astrology
throughout the West. People all over the world began to be
interested in the concept of individual horoscope. Astrology
re-entered India during the reign of the Saka and Suhana rulers,
around the Ist century B.C. Greek astrology and mythology made
an impact on India astrology, resulting in the planets and. zodiacal
signs assuming the characteristics and forms of the Greek deities.
The names were also retranslated from Greek to Sanskrit.

The crystallization of the Siddhantic calendar, based on the five
Siddhantas or the five astronomical treatises occurred around
A.D. 400. They are: the Poulisha Siddhanta (written by Pulisa) 2.
Romaka (written by Romakacharya) 3. Vasushela 4. Surya
Siddhanta and 5. Paithamaha (written by Pithamaha). It was a
soli-lunar calendar which incorporated the lunar calculations of
the Babylonians, the zodiacal signs of the Greeks and gave the
uniquely Indian lunar measurements known as the tithi and
nakshatra. The Sth and 6th centuries saw some well-known Indian
astrologers, the earliest of whom was Aryabhata (AD 476-523). A
major contribution of India to the advancement of astronomical
measurements was the system of numbers that we use today, the
decimal notation in which the position of each digit showed its
value, increasing ten times in each place from right to left, while
the empty positions were filled by zeros. This numerical system
spread from India to the West, to the Muslim world and reached
Europe by about AD 1,100.

Parasara, who also belonged to the 5th century AD, wrote the first
major astrological treatise called the Hora Sastra. But it was his

student Varahamihira (AD 505-587) who became the most
famous astrologer of ancient times. Like Ptolemy who
systematized the knowledge gathered by Hipparchus,
Varahamihira summarized all the astronomical and astrological
ktowledge available at the time in a series of definitive works
which include Daivajna-Vallabha,  Brihat-samhita and
Bihat-J ataka, the last of which is regarded as an authoritative text
even today. It describes the zodiacal signs, the planets, the star
constellations and elaborates on a variety of techniques to
delineate character and forecast events. Many later astrologers
were influenced by his methodology, such as Kalyana varma who
wrpte his treatise ‘Saravali’ in the 6th century A.D. and
Manthreswar who wrote ‘Phaladeepika’ in the 16th century A.D.
Thé latter work contains new information and more sophisticated
teclniques for prediction.

The Siddhantic calendar remained in official use until the
Mulims invaded India and established their rule. Throughout
het reign from about AD 1200 to 1757, the Hejira calendar,
whth is entirely lunar, was used for administrative as well as civil
purjoses. The Hindus, nevertheless, retained their own calendar
for \e in religious observances. But they were at a disadvantage
having abandoned their observatories which were destroyed by
the Muslim armies, to obtain accurate astronomical data. They
majaged to rely on ancient texts or on direct observations for their
calqilations, which led to differences and disparities between
varbus calendars. Astrologers living in different regions
devloped their own soli-lunar calendars based on their historical
ang cultural traditions which gave rise to a plethora of calendars,
ea having its own era and beginning of the year and naming of
th¢dmonths.

When the British came in 1757, the Christian Gregorian calendar
replaced the Muslim calendar for all official purposes. The
Gregorian calendar takes 365 1/4 days as one year, as that is the
time the earth takes to revolve round the Sun. The fraction is taken
care of by introducing a leap year once in four years. Although
this calendar was used for civil and administrative purposes, i
regional calendars continued to be consulted for observitg
festivals and for performing religious rituals. This applied rot
only to different sections of Hindus but also to Muslims who
retained their Hejira calendar, to the Buddhists, Jains ahd
Christians.

The Present Status of Astrology in India

When India attained independence in 1947, Pandit Jawahallal
Nehru, the then Prime Minister, was distressed by this chastic
condition and sought to bring about some uniformity at least inthe
observance of major festivals for purposes of declaring holidays.
He appointed the Calendar Reforms Committee in 1952 to sdve
the Hindu Calendar problem. The aim of the Committee wai to
investigate.

1) whether to uphold the Christian Gregorian calendar, whi{h
was the international calendar, as the official calendar of
India, now that British have left.

2) whether a unified religious calendar could be arrived at,
which could be followed by all the practising Hindu
communities throughout the country which would facilit¢e
the declaration of holidays for festivals to be uniformly
celebrated all over the country.

The report of the Calendar Reforms Committee was al
n

1955 in which it recommended the retention of the Grego

calendar as the official calendar of India since it was being
followed by the rest of the world.

Regarding the more complex issue of a common Hindu calendar,
it realised that there were regional differences in the calculation of
the first degree of the actual constellation Aries, which inevitably
led to the festivals falling on different days in different parts of the
country. Though the people were not perturbed by these
inconsistencies, the Committee was faced with a dilemma. They
finally resolved it by recommending to the Government the
publication of an yearly official Indian Ephemeris and nautical
almanac which would indicate the accurate positions of the Sun,
the Moon, the planets and other heavenly bodies. The almanac
would also give the tithi and nakshatra and other relevant
information for the fixing of muhurtams. In fact, it would serve as
a unified Hindu soli-lunar calendar known as the National
Calendar. The Calendar Reforms Committee further
recommended the implementation of the National Calendar on 21
March 1956. Lahiri’s Ayanamsas of 23° 15’ would be followed
and the seasons would be divided into six-Grishma (Summer),
Varsha (rains), Sharat (Autumn), Hemantha (Winter), Sishira
(Dewy) and Vasanta (Spring).

As it was impossible to enforce uniformity on the diverse
religious denominations which existed in India, the government
contented itself in supplying the correct astronomical information
to the people every year by the publication of the National
Calendar, Jeaving the preparation of the regional calendars to the
traditional astrologers of different parts. The Indian Ephemeris
give the position of planets at Sunrise unlike the Western
Ephemeris which list the planets at either noon or midnight
because the day starts with the sunrise for the Hindus and not at
midnight. The central point of reference is the observatory at

9

Ujjain. The time is given in ghatis and vighatis as in the traditional
system. Indian astrology has retained its unique tradition which
goes back to the Vedic period.

The Sidereal Astrology and the Tropical Astrology.

Astrologers in the west follow the tropical astrology whereas the
astrologers in India adhere to the sidereal astrology. The tropical
astrology centers round four cardinal events occurring during
every solar year, the two equinoxes and the two solstices. The
vernal or spring equinox which falls on the 21st or 22nd March
marks the commencement of the solar year. The autumn equinox
falls on the 21st or 22nd of September; the winter solstice occurs
on the 21st of December and the summer solstice occurs on the
21st of June. Although it is the earth which is revolving round the
sun, for observers on the earth, the sun ‘appears’ to be moving
along the zodiacal belt consisting of twelve star constellations, in
a sequential order to complete one solar year. During this period,
the earth shifts its axis twice, once to the south and then to the
north. From December 21, the sun ‘appears’ to move northward
and reaches the northern-most position on the 21st of June, when
he starts his southward motion and reaches his southern-most
point on the 21st of December. These two days are known as the
winter solstice (Dec 21)and the summer solstice (June 21). The
former has the shortest day and the latter the longest.

During his journey northward and southward, the sun crosses the
imaginary celestial equator twice, once on the 21st of March and
again on the 21st of september, respectively. These two days are
known as the Vernal equinox and the Autumn equinox. Equinox
means the day and night being of equal duration. The sun is
supposed to be at the starting point of Aries, which is the first sign
of the zodiac, on the vernal equinox or the 21st of March. But

10

because the earth’s orbit is elliptical instead of circular, the Sun
does not return to the same point on the zodiac after the
completion of one revolution. He misses it by about 50.23 seconds
every year. This is known as the retrograde motion of the equinox
or the precession of the equinox through the zodiacal belt.

There is no agreement among astrologers, both western and
Indian, as to the year in which the 1° of Aries coincided with the
vernal equinox i.e., March 21. According to the Greek astronomer
Hipparchus, it was AD 280. Lahiri, who was the official
astrologer for the Govt. of India and the Secretary to the Calendar
Reform Committee took the year as AD 285 and the Precession to
be 50.27 seconds per year and compiled his ephemeris
accordingly. Cyril Pagan, who advocated the use of Sidereal
zodiac in the West believed the starting year to be AD 213
whereas the Indian astrologer K.S. Krishnamurti considers AD
291 as the year and 50.23 seconds as the precession per year. Due
to such differences of opinion, the ephimeris, giving the position
of the Sun and the planets, prepared by different astrologers do not
tally with each other.

The chief difference between the Tropical or Sayana zodiac and
the sidereal or Nirayana zodiac is that the former symbolically
fixes the 21st of March as the starting point of Aries, (although it
has been several centuries since the Sun was actually at that point
on that particular date), whereas the latter consider the day the Sun
is actually at 1° of Aries as the commencement of their new year,
although the date varies from year to year. The difference between
the actual 0° of Aries and the symbolic 0° of Aries (the tropical
Zodiac’s 21st of March) is called the Ayanamsa, which is one of
the most important factors in Hindu Astrology.

11

The epochs-Western and Indian

The retrograding Precession of the Equinoxes has given rise, in
Western astrology, to the concept of the planetary ages of Man:
the age of Aries, age of Pisces, age of Aquarius and so on. If the
rate of annual precession is taken as 50-23 seconds, it would take
about 71.67 years for the equinoctial point to advance by 1° or 60
minutes. A Zodiacal sign comprises 30° and so it would take
approximately 2,150 years (71.67 x 30) for the equinoctial point
to enter the next sign. If we assume that the 0° Aries coincided
with the vernal equinox in the year A.D. 285, the age of Pisces
would come to an end in the year A.D. 2435 (2150 + 285) and the
age of Aquarius would commence then.

In Hindu astrology, the concept of epochs is quite different and is
not related to the precession of the equinoxes. The epochs are
known as Yugas and they are four in number. The calculation of
their duration is based on the time it takes for all the planets to
return to their original positions. Every planet which goes round
the Sun has a different speed and an orbit with a different tilt. The
distance between the planets and the sun also varies. Mercury is
the smallest planet and is closest to the Sun. It comes to within 28
million miles of the Sun at one end of its elliptical orbit and pushes
out to 43 million miles at the other end. It takes nearly 88 days to
complete a revolution. Venus, which is the closest planet to the
earth and second closest to the Sun takes 224.7 days to go round
the Sun. As it is nearer to the Sun than the earth, it completes a
revolution 141 days earlier than the earth. In so doing, it often
overtakes the earth on its shorter orbit and appears, as it moves
ahead and turns round the bend, to slow down, stop and then go
backwards. This is known as ‘Vakra gathi’ in Hindu astrology and
during that period it is supposed to exercise a contrary effect. Next

comes the earth which is about 82 million miles from the Sun and
take 365.25 days to circle the Sun. Mars which is farther away
from the Sun than the earth (141 million miles) requires 687 days
to revolve round the Sun. Jupiter is about 482 million miles from
the Sun and takes 4332.58 days or 11.9 years to complete one
revolution. Saturn is the farthest of the five planets known from
ancient times and visible to the naked eye. It is 888 million miles
away from the Sun and takes 29.5 years to go round the Sun.

There are three more planets which are invisible to the naked eye
whose influence, however, is recognised by modern astrologers.
Uranus, which William Herschel first identified in 1781 °is 900
million miles beyond Saturn, and Neptune which was located
through a telescope in 1846 is 2800 million miles away from the
Sun; Pluto the ninth planet was discovered as late as in 1930 and
orbits between 4,600 and 2,700 million miles from the Sun.

The least common multiple (LCM) of the sidereal periods of the
seven planets (Moon is also considered to be planet in Hindu
Astrology) which revolve round the Sun is known as the ‘Kalpa’
in Hindu Astrology. This comes to 4,320,000000 sidereal years.
A sidereal period is the time a planet takes to go round the Sun.

Mercury 87.9693 days
Venus 224.7008 days
Earth 365.2564 days
Mars 686.9795 days
Jupiter 4332. 5848 days
Saturn 10759.2200 days
Moon 27.2791 days.

It means that for all the planets to return to 0° of Aries at the
horizon of Srilanka, which is on the equator with a longitude of

18

76E from greenwich, it will take 4,320,000,000 years. A Kalpa
consists of 1,000 Chaturyugas. A Chaturyuga or Maha Yuga
comprises 4,320,000 sidereal years of which

Krita yuga consist of 4,32,000 x 4 = 1.728,000 years
Treta yuga consists of —  4,32,000 x 3 = 1,296,000 years
Dwapara yuga consists of 4,32,000 x 2 = 8,64,000 years and
Kali yuga consists of 4,32,000 x 1 = 4,32,000 years.

Kali yuga is said to have begun in 3102 B.C.,when there was a
conjunction of all the planets in the sign of Virgo. There is also a
belief that the death of lord Krishna marked the beginning of Kali
yuga.

The Philosophical foundation for Hindu astrology

There is no single doctrine known as Hinduism; it has no single
scripture like the Bible for Christians and Quran for
Mohammedans; there is no founder or prophet to whom the
origins of Hinduism can be traced. It has evolved over the
millinea, assimilating various philosophies and view points,
meaning different things to different people, catering to the
spiritual, religious and intellectual needs of a variety of
individuals of diverse social and cultural backgrounds. There are
atheists as well as polytheists among Hindus, liberals as well as
fanatics. But, by and large, one can identify three main strands of
thought which have woven themselves into what is known as
Hinduism today. They are the Vedic, Sankhyan and tantrik.

The Vedanta view is that there is one supreme energy which forms
the essence of all things and which permeates all aspecis of the
universe, It is immaterial and impersonal, unborn and undying. It
is referred to as Brahman, which is infinite and eternal. Brahman

14

can never be apprehended by our senses but can only be

experienced.

Nature is an aspect of the Brahman which manifests itself as the
ever-changing world that we see around us. It is continually
renewing itself and evolving according to its own immutable

laws.

There are individual souls which break away from the Brahman
and become disparate entities. They are called Jeevas. They attach
themselves to Nature and acquire physical forms and
characteristics. With their sense-organs, (Jnanendriyas) they
experience pleasure and pain and engage in intentional acts
through their organs of action (Karmendriyas). They get
entangled in the illusory world called Maya. The jeeva’s sense of
individuality or separateness is known as Avidya or ignorance of
its true nature.

The experiences of the jeeva during its lifetime are carried over to
the next birth in the form of traces or impressions called Vasanas.
The intentional acts performed by the jeeva also leave their
residues which are known as anusayas. The vasanas and anusayas
together determine the tendencies or predispositions of the jeeva
at the moment of its next incarnation. These propensities of the
jeeva are referred to as Samskara. This samskara shapes or
influences the attitudes and actions of the jeeva during its entire

lifespan,

Ihe concept of Karma forms an integral part of Hinduism. It is
based on the law of cause and effect in accordance with the
maxi “as aman soweth so shall he reap’. The intentional acts
performed by the jeeva produce a karma which has to be worked

15

out sooner or later Good actions lead to rewards of happiness and
prosperity while bad actions lead to punishment or suffering. The
accumulated karmas acquired during one or more life-times may
fall into one of three groups: 1) those that are determined at birth
to be worked out in the present incarnation, which are called the
Prarabda Karma. 2) those residues that remain latent, i.e., those
karmas that are not yet mature or ready for fruition in this life,
which are known as Sanchita Karma, and 3) the karmas performed
during the present lifetime the consequences of which would have
to be worked out in future births, which are referred to as
Sanchiyamana karma or Agami karma.

When a person dies, his soul which is enveloped in a subtle body-
(sukshma Sarira) leaves the gross body carrying within itself in
seed form (bija rupa) the sum-total of good and bad karma. It
obtains another suitable body and is placed in circumstances
which provide the necessary opportunities for it to work out its
past karma. The jeeva passes through cycles of birth and death
until it gets rid of all its karma and is eligible for emancipation.
The purified jeeva is then reabsorbed into the universal soul that
is Brahman. This is called liberation or Moksha.

Astrology gives an indication of our past karma by pointing to the
favourable and unfavourable placement and influence of the
planets. We do not remember the past deeds we committed in our
previous lives which determine the quality of our present
existence. The horoscope gives a clue to the future which is a
reflection of the past. This does not mean that we are bound by
fate or destiny in the absolute sense. We have the free will to
choose our reactions to the events of our lives. Vedanta exhorts us
to use discrimination (viveka) between the eternal and the

16

transient and advocates detachment to worldly pleasures both here
and hereafter.

Sankhya is a dualistic system of thought. It posits two main
principles Purusha and Prakriti as being responsible for the entire
creation. Purusha represents the light of consciousness which is
devoid of form and attributes (nirguna), is unchanging and
inactive. Prakriti is nature which is active and everchanging. They
are complementary to each other and are interdependent. They are
likened to a lame man and blind man, respectively. If they have to
go anywhere, the lameman has to be carried by the blind man and
be directed by him. They have to function together.

Nature is endowed with three qualities called gunas; Satthwa,
Rajas and Tamas. Satthwa-guna is characterized by clarity,
brightness, goodness and light; Rajas denotes action, energy,
movement and force, Tamas stands for inertia, darkness or
clouding and obstruction. Everything in the world has these three
qualities in varying proportions. Nature utilizes five basic tools
called Tatthwas for creating the world. They are the primordial
elements of earth (prithvi), water (jala), fire (agni), air (vayu) and
space (akasa).

At the beginning of creation there was perfect equilibrium
between the three gunas. Then rose kama or desire which is the
seed of all creation. Brahma, the creator, willed that he become
many (Nasadiya sukta and Upanishad). This caused a slight
disturbance in the equipoise of the three gunas which is compared
to the initial rustle on the surface of the still waters of the ocean
indicating the beginning of a wave. This stage is called Mahat,
signifying the emergence of dynamic consciousness, which 1s
sometimes equated with Buddhi, the universal and impersonal
level of consciousness. The next stage of evolution is the

17

emergence of ahamkara or 1-ness which is the individuated or
personal consciousness, the precursor of the ego. Manas or the
mind is the next to appear. Mind is the means through which the
individuated consciousness transacts with the external world. As
evolution progresses, the manas diversities itself into numerous
indriyas or sense-organs. It is through the indriyas that the
external world is apprehended in all its variety.

The concepts of the three gunas and the five tatthwas have been
incorporated into Hindu astrology. The rasis, the signs of the
zodiac, as well as the grahas or planets have been invested with
one of the three gunas and associated with one of the five tatthwas.

The tantrik ideology is an extension of the Sankhyan philosophy
wherein a correspondence is believed to exist between the
external universe, the Macrocosm (Brahmanda) and the forces
within the individual who is the microcosm (Pindanda). The gross
world outside is replicated in the individual in a suble form. The
former is called the Sthula and latter the Sukshma.

If it is believed that whatever happens in the present is determined
by the past events, what is the role of the stars and planets in
shaping our destiny? If the theory of karma alone is sufficient to
explain man’s predicament in his present life, the role of the inert
planets moving millions of miles away from the earth, would
seem both far-fetched and irrelevant to man’s desfiny. But viewed
in the light of the dynamic forces unleashed by the huge planets
whirling around us in space at great speed, whose influence is
bound to produce similar but subtle forces within each one of us,
astrology may not seem so absurd or bizarre. Moreover, even if
the cause of human fortunes, good and bad, is attributed to karma,
the manner in which they fructify, the ‘how’ and ‘when’ would
remain unexplained. It is here that astrology attempts to play its

18

role. Just as there is an order in the external world, in the
movement of planets, there is an order in the unfoldment of one’s
destiny. Nothing can happen in a haphazard way in this orderly
universe. It is this regularity and pattern that astrology studies, on
the basis of which it predicts the sequence of events.

19

CHAPTER - II

Astrology concerns itself with stars and planets, their actual and
relative positions at a given time, their influence on human beings,
on weather conditions, on crops and the prediction of natural
events such as eclipses and so on. It makes use of concepts like
‘Rasi’ or the signs the zodiac, the ‘Grahas’ or planets and their
characteristics, the ‘Nakshatras’ or the star constellations, the
nodes and their influence and the strength and weakness of their
placement in the horoscope.

There are five areas in which Hindu astorlogy operates:

1. Jataka (Natal) : This relates to the preparation of a horoscope
for an individual at the time of his birth for purposes of
interpretation of his character and personality and the prediction
of important events in his life.

2. Varshaphala : This confines itself to the prediction of events
for a particular year.

3. Prasna (Horary) : This pertains to the prediction of events in
the immediate future by drawing up a chart of the moment. The
planets, which are eight in number, are supposed to move around
the earth in a fixed order, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Mercury, Venus,
Saturn, Moon and Rahu at a distance of 45° from each other and
take 24 hours to complete a rotation. The Sun is taken to be at the
first point of Aries every day at sunrise and the horizon is
considered to be their ecliptic, which is divided into 12 equal
parts, the sign Taurus representing the east, Leo the south, Scorpio
the west and Aquarius.the north. The position and direction of the
planets are noted down at the moment the query is asked and
predictions made.

20

4. Muhurtas : This refers to the calculation of auspicious times
for important events to take place.

5. Samhita (Mundane) : This deals with the prediction of
weather conditions, eclipses, appearance of comets, the
occurrence of calamities etc. It studies the horoscope of a country
as a whole and attempts to predict events like war or epidemics,
famine, drought, floods and so on.

The Zodiac is defined as a belt of the celestial sphere extending 8
or 9 degrees on each side of the ecliptic within which the apparent
motion of the Sun, Moon and principal planets take place. The
ecliptic which covers 360° is the great circle of the celestial sphere
which is the apparent orbit of the sun. The principal planets called
Grahas are the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and
Saturn. The Sanskrit word graha means a rotating body. The
contemporary astrologers take cognisance of Neptune, Uranus
and Pluto also. In addition to the visible planets, the two Nodes
Rahu and Ketu known as Chaya Grahas are also taken into
account. The nodes are not physical bodies having a shape and
mass but are the points of intersection between the orbits of the
Sun and the Moon. Rahu, the dragon’s head is called the
ascending node (when the Moon is moving northwards) and Ketu,
the dragon’s tail is called the descending node (when the moon is
moving southwards). Yet another concept which is peculiar to
Indian astrology is that of star-configurations or nakshatras
(asterisms).

The zodiac is divided into twelve equal parts, each spanning 30°
of the ecliptic. They are called the zodiacal signs, solar months or
Rasis, through one of which the Sun passes each month. They
represent the various parts of the celestial being called the
‘Kalapurusha’. The terms Rasi, Kshetra, Griha, Ri, Bham,
Bhavana are all synonymous. They are :

21

Western Sanskrit Part of the Symbols Planetary
body of Kala- ruler
purusha

1. Aries Mesha Head Mars

2. Taurus Vrishabha Face Venus
3. Gemini Mithuna Breast Mercury
4. Cancer Kataka Heart Moon

5. Leo Simha Belly Sun

6. Virgo Kanya Navel Mercury
7. Libra Thula Abdomen Venus
8. Scorpio Vrischika_ Genital Organs Mars

9. Sagittarius Dhanus —_ Two thighs Jupiter
10. Capricorn Makara Two knees Saturn
11. Aquarius Kumbha — Two ankles , Saturn
12. Pisces Meena Two feet Jupiter

i

The sign Mesha resembles the shape of a ram; Vrishabha looks
like a bull; Mithuna is in the form of a man carrying a mace and a
women Carrying a veena, both seated on one seat; Karkataka is
like a crab and Simha, a lion; Kanya appears like a woman
carrying a lamp and going on a raft; Thula is of the shape of a
‘merchant holding a balance ; Vrischika is like a scorpion; Dhanus
is horse-shaped below the waist with a torso of a man above,
holding a bow; Makara resembles a crocodile with the face of a
deer; Kumbha looks like a man carrying a pot on his shoulders and
Meena is a double fish in a circular fashion, the head of one facing
the tail of the other.

There are 27 star-constellations or nakshatras spread over 360° of
the zodiac, each nakshatra occupying 13°20’. These are:

22,

1. Aswini, 2. Bharani, 3. Krittika, 4. Rohini, 5. Mrigashira,

6. Aridra, 7. Punarvasu, 8. Pushyami, 9, Aslesha, 10. Makha,

11. Pubba, 12. Uttara, 13. Hasta, 14. Chitta, 15. Swathi,

16. Vishakha, 17. Anuradha, 18. Jyeshta, 19. Moola,

20. Poorvashada, 21. Uttarashada, 22. Sravana, 23. Dhanishta,
24. Shatabhisha, 25. Purvabhadra, 26. Uttarabhadra, 27. Revathi.
Each of these is divided into four padas or quarters, each pada
comprising 3°20’. Every Rasi would, therefore, contain 9 padas or
21% nakshatras.

The most basic and universal unit of time is the day or Dina which
extends to 24 hours i.e. a day and night, multiples of which give
weeks, months and years.:A day can be divided into hours,
minutes and seconds. The word hour is derived from the Latin
Hora which is a modification of the greek Oura. There are seven
horas ruled by the seven planets in the order of Sun, Venus,
Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars. A day comprises three
full cycles of seven horas plus three horas of the next cycle. For
example, Sunday begins with the cycle Sun, Venus, Mercury etc,
and after completing three cycles, the three horas left would be
Sun, Venus and Mercury. The next day starts with the fourth hora
of the cycle, which is ruled by Moon and hence the day is called
Monday. Thus each day of the week is named after the planet
which rules the first hora of that day. Hora plays an important role

in day-to-day predictions.

A week, consisting of seven days, named after the seven planets,
is called Vara. According to the Western reckoning, a day starts
at 12 o’clock midnight but according to the Hindu calendar, a day
always starts from sunrise. Apart from the twelve solar months
mentioned above, there are twelve lunar months called Masas

23

which are named after the star constellation on the full-moon day
of each successive month. They are:

Month Star
1. Chaitra Chittra
2. Vaishakha Visakha
3. Jyeshta Jyeshta
4. * Ashada Poorvashada
5. Sravana Sravana
6. | Bhadrapada Poorvabhadra
7. Aswayuja Aswini
8. Kartika Krittika
9. Margashira Mrigashira
10. Pushya Pushyami
11. Magha Makha
12. Phalguna Uttara-Phalguni

Each month is divided into two parts: the brighter half and the
darker half. The brighter half called the Shukla paksha starts
after the new-moon day and extends to the full-moon day when
the Sun and Moon face each other. This is the period of the
waxing moon. The darker half is known as the Krishna paksha
which commences after the full-moon day and ends with the

new-moon day. This represents the waning moon.

An year known as Samvathsara, which is made up of twelve
months, has two sections, each consisting of six months. They are
called Ayanas. The period during which the sun seems to travel

24

northwards, from Makara rasi to Mithuna rasi is called
Uttarayana, whereas the period between Karkataka and Dhanus
is known as Dakshinayana when the sun appears to move
southwards. They are called declinations. An year is further
divided into six parts, each part consisting of two months, on the
basis of the six seasons called Ritus.

They are :

1. Chaitra and Vaisakha - Vasantha (spring)

2. Jyeshta and Ashada - Greeshma (Summer)

3. Sravana and Bhadrapada_ - Varsha (rainy season)
4. Aswayuja and Kartika - Sharat (autumn)

5. Margashira and Pushya = - Hemantha (winter)

6. Magha and Phalguna - Sishira (Dewy)

In Indian astrology, sixty years form a recurrent cycle and they all
have names. The following are the names with their
corresponding years according to the Christian Era :

1. Prabhava 1927 13. Pramadi 1939
2. Vibhava 1928 14. Vikrama 1940
3. Sukla 1929 15. Vishu 194]
4. Pramodoota 1930 16. Chitrabhanu 1942
5. Prajotpaththi 1931 17. Swabhanu 1943
6. Aangirasa 1932 18. Tharana 1944
7. Srimukha 1933 19. Parthiva 1945
8. Bhava 1934 20. Vyaya 1946
9. Yuva 1935 21. Sarvajitu 1947
10. Dhatu 1936 22.  Sarvadhari 1948
11. Iswara 1937 23. Virodhi 1949
12. Bahudhanya 1938 24. Vikriti 1950

25

25. Khara 1951 43. Soumya 1969
26. Nandana 1952 44. Sadharana 1970
27. Vyaya 1953 45. Virodhikritu 1971
28. Jaya 1954 46. Paridhavi 1972
29. Manmatha 1955 47. Pramadicha 1973
30. Durmukhi 1956 48. Ananda 1974
31. Hevilambi 1957 49. Rakshasa 1975
32. Vilambi 1958 50. Anala - 1976
33. Vikari 1959 51. Pingala 1977
34. Sharvari 1960 52. Kalayukti 1978
35. Plava 1961 53. Siddharthi 1979
36. Shubhakritu 1962 54. Roudri 1980
37. Shobhakritu 1963 55. Durmathi 1981
38. Krodhi 1964 56. Dundubhi 1982
39. Viswavasu 1965 57. Rudhirodgari 1983
40. Parabhava 1966 58. Rakthakshi 1984
41. Plavanga 1967 59. Krodana 1985
42. Keelaka 1968 60. Kshaya 1986

A solar day starts from sunrise and extends to the next sunrise on
the following day. A lunar day, known as the Thithi is calculated
from the longitudinal distance between the sun and the moon.
There are thirty thithis in a lunar month distributed over 360° of
the zodiac. Therefore, each thithi has a span of 12°. The first thithi
commences from the point of conjuction of the sun and the moon
(on new moon day) and extends till the moon moves 12° away
from the sun. The second day begins when the distance between
the sun and the moon is 12° and extends till the moon is 24° from
the sun. There are 14 Thithis in each half of the month-the Sukla
Paksha and the Krishna Paksha - and the other two days are the
Full Moon day, which is the 15th day and the New Moon day
which is the 30th or the last day of the month

26

One can calculate the thithi by dividing the longitudinal distance
between the sun and the moon by 12. For example, suppose the
moon’s position is in the 2nd Rasi, Vrishabha at 10° 34’ and the
sun is in the 3rd Rasi, Mithuna, at 3° 14’, the difference would be
(13-10-34)-(2-3-14)=11-7-20 or 337, degrees 20 minutes. (If the
moon’s Rasi is less then the sun’s, 12 Rasis should be added to the
moon’s). By dividing 337° 20’ by 12, we get 28 as the quotient
and 1° 20’ as the Remainder. The Thithi is the early portion of the
29th, which is Krishna Paksha Chaturdashi.

The Hindu Almanac is known as the ‘Panchanga’ which means
‘having five limbs’ They are Thithi, Vara (week day), Nakshatra,
Yoga and Karana. Generally Thithi and Vara are taken into
account for fixing Muhurthams i.e. the auspicious time for
important events like marriages, upanayanams, Grihapravesham
etc. Nakshatra is an important aspect of the horoscope and is used
for predictions. Thithi, vara, yoga and karana are rarely
considered for purpose of prediction or interpretation of a
horoscope. But thithi and yoga can become valuable tools if they
are properly evaluated. For instance, for every thithi (in which a
person is born) some rasis become useless. They are called
‘Dagdha’ or burnt rasis. They are:

Thithi Dagdha Rasis
1. Padyami Thula-Makara
2. Dwithiya Dhanus-Meena
3. Thrithiya Simha-Makara
4. — Chaturthi Vrishabha-Kumbha
5. Panchami Mithuna-Kanya
6. — Shashti Mesha-Makara
7.  Sapthami Kataka-Dhanus
8. Ashtami Mithuna-Kanya

27

9.

10.
11,
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

There are 27 Yogas mentioned for the 27 Nakshatras. There are:

Navami
Dasami
Ekadasi
Dwadasi
Thrayodasi
Chaturdasi

Full Moon
New Moon

Simha-Vrischika
Simha-Vrischika
Dhanus-Meena
Thula-Makara
Vrishabha-Simha
Meena-Mithuna-Kanya-
Dhanus

None

None

CHNDAKNRWHN SE

—_—_
me

eo
eM NanaYM Pe Yd

Yoga

Vishkambha
Preethi
Aayushman
Sowbhagya
Shobhana
Athiganda
Sukarma
Dhriti
Shoola
Ganda
Vriddhi
Dhruva
Vyaghata
Harshana
Vajra
Siddhi
Vyathipatha
Variyan
Parigha

28

Nakshatra

Pushyami
Aslesha
Makha
Pubba
Uttara

Hasta

Chittra

Swati
Vishakha
Anuradha
Jyesta

Moola
Poorvashada
Uttarashada
Shravana
Dhanista
Shathabhisha
Poorvabhadra
Uttarabhadra

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

Shiva
Siddha
Sadhya
Shubha
Shukla
Brahma
Indra
Vaidhriti

Revathi
Aswini
Bharani
Krittika
Rohini
Mrigashira
Aridra
Punarvasu

To find out the Yoga point one should add 3-3-20 to the sum
total of the longitude of the Sun and the Moon. Where 3 stands
for the 3 Rasis, 3-20 stands for 3 degrees 20 minutes. This is

done because the first Yoga commences with the Nakshatra

Pushyami located in the fourth Rasi at 3° 20’. In the examples

given above,

Sun’s position is
Moon’s position is

+

Total

2-3-14
1-10-34
3-3-20

6-17-08

Hence the birth Yoga point will be 17° 8’ Thula. This coincides
with the position of the Nakshatra Swati, whose ududasa lord is
Rahu, who therefore becomes the Birth Yogi. The yoga which
corresponds to the Nakshatra Swati is Dhriti. Every yoga is
associated with certain personality traits which are likely to be
found in the individual born under that particular yoga. They are

as follows:

1. Vishkambha

2. Prithi

3. Ayushman

He will win over others.
He is blessed with cattle and wealth.

He is loved by all, attracted by women.

Has good longevity and health.

10.
11.

13.
14.
15,
16.

20.

21.

22.
23.

Sowbhagyam 9

Shobhanam

Athigandam

Sukarman
Dhriti
Shoolam
Gandam

Vriddhi

. Dhruvam

Vyaghatham
Harshanam
Vajram

Siddhi

. Vyathipatham

. Variyan

Parigha

Shivam

Siddham

Sadhyam
Shubham

Blessed with happiness and comforts.
Lascivious, sex-minded.

Murderer or having that temperament.
Meets obstacles and accidents in life.

Does good and noble acts, wealthy.

Indulging in others’ money and women.

Angry and quarrelsome.

Has a bad character.

Improving day by day and intelligent.
Fixity of mind and wealthy.
Cruel-minded person.

Always merry and intelligent.
Wealthy and lascivious.

Will have several attainments and will
protect others.

Unreliable.
Bad character and lascivious.
Wealthy and quarrelsome.

Revered by kings, well versed in
sastras, cool and calm, and wealthy.

Good-natured, interested in religious
rites.

Good-mannered.

Wealthy, lustrous, fair and unhealthy.

30

24. Shubram

Wavering mind, good mannered,

talkative and impulsive.

25. Brahma

Highly secretive, having high

aspirations. Has capacity to judge

correctly.
26. Mahendram
27. Vaidhriti

The fifth ‘limb’ of the almanac is
‘performing’ or ‘doing’.

There are eleven Karanas each belonging to one half of a thithi as

could be seen from the following table:

Wealthy, learned and helpful.

Cunning, critical, wealthy and strong.

‘Karana’ which means

Thithi Sukla Paksha Karanam

1. Padyami  Kimsthugna-Bhava
2. Dwithiya Balava-Koulava

3. Thrithiya Thaithula-Kharaji
4. Chaturthi Vanaji-Bhadra

5. Panchami Bhava-Balava

6. Shashti Koulaba-Thrithula
7. Sapthami  Kharaji- Vanaji

8. Ashtami — Bhadra-Bhava

9. Navami — Balava-Koulava
10. Dasami —s- Thaithula-Kharaji
11. Ekadasi = Vanayji-Bhadra

12. Dwadasi Bhava-Balava
13. Thrayodasi Koulava-Thaithula
14. Chaturdasi Kharaji- Vanaji

31

Karanam

Balava-Koulava
Thaithula-Kharaji
Vanaji-Badra
Bhava-Balava
Koulava-Thrithula
Kharaji- Vanaji
Bhadra-Bhava
Balava-Koulava
Thaithula-Kharaji
Vanaji-Bhadra
Bhava-Balava
Koulava-Thrithula
Kharaji-Thrithula
Bhadra-Shakuni

Krishna Paksha

15. Poornima Bhadra - Bhava
30. Amavasya Chatushpada-Nagava

The eleven Karanas are :

1. Bhava 2. Balava 3. Koulava 4. Thaithula 5. Kharaji 6. Vanaji
7. Bhadra 8. Shakuni 9. Chatushpadam 10. Nagava
1]. Kimsthugnam.

These are classified into two categories - 1) Sthira Karanas and
2) Chara Karanas.

The Sthira Karanas are 1) Kimsthugna, which falls in the first half
of Sukla padyami, 2) Shakuni, which falls in the latter half of
Krishna-chaturdasi, 3) Chatushpada and 4) Nagava, both of which
belong to Amavasya. The remaining seven Karanas are known as
ihe Chara Karanas. Bhadra Karanam is also known as Visti, which
along with the Sthira Karanas are supposed to be unfavourable.

There are texts which describe the natural qualities of Karanas
which however are not applicable to ‘individual horoscopes. Any
undertaking initiated in one’s birth Karana is likely to become
successful.

The Rasis

The twelve rasis are divided into two groups, the odd or vishama
rasis and the even or sama rasis. The Vishama rasis are Mesha,
Mithuna, Simha, Thula, Dhanus and Kumbha which are
considered the male or Purusha rasis. The Sama rasis are
Vrishabha, Karkataka, Kanya, Vrischika, Makara and Meena
which are the female or Sthri rasis. The vishama rasis are malefic
whereas the sama rasis are benefic.

The rasis are. also classified into three groups sequentially; the
Chara or movable, Sthira or fixed, and Ubhaya which are both
movable and immovable.

32

"SURYA"

“TAT SAVITUR VARENYAM BHARGO DEVASYA
DHIMAHI DHIYO YO NAH PRACODAYAT"

Twelve Astrological Signs Around The Sun: (Indian System of Astrology-Jyotisha) Painting Ca. 1900 A.D.

“We meditate upon the excellent splendour of the Lord SAVITUR. May He activate our thoughts."

Chara: Sthira Ubhaya |
Mesha: Vrishabha Mithuna
Karkataka: Simha Kanya

Thula: Vrischika Dhanus
Makara: Kumbha Meena

There is yet another differentiation made on the basis of the four
directions. They are :

Eastern Mesha, Simha, and Dhanus
Southern Vrishabha, Kanya and Makara
Western Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha
Northern Karkataka, Vrischika and Meena.

The rasis are further classified into four types as follows :

1. Jala (water) Rasis : Karkataka, the latter half of Makara and
Meena:

2. Dwipada (human) Rasis : Mithuna, Kanya, Thula, the first
half of Dhanus and Kumbha.

3. Chatushpada (animal) Rasis : Mesha, Vrishabha, Simha,
latter half of Dhanus and the first half of Makara.

4. Badhupada (multilegged) Rasis : Vrischika, Karkataka and
Meena.

The rasis are also divided into the Day rasis and the Night rasis.
Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika, Kumbha and Meena are the day
rasis. With the exception of the Meena rasi, they rise with their
heads and are called Shirodaya or Shirshodaya rasis and are
powerful during the day. The two fish which represent the Meena

33

rasi rise together, i.e. with the head of one and the tail of the other.
The night rasis are Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithuna, Karkataka,
Dhanus and Makara, with the exception of Mithuna, they rise with
their feet and are known as Prishtodaya rasis. They are powerful
at night.

There is another classification on the basis of the elements which
the rasis represent, such as :

Element Rasis

Fire: Mesha, Simha and Dhanus
Earth: Vrishabha, Kanya and Makara
Air: Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha
Water: Karkataka, Vrischika and Meena

The rasis are also classified according to their caste as follows:

Brahmana: Meena, Karkataka and Vrischika
Kshatriya: Mesha, Simha and Dhanus
Vaisya: Vrishabha, Kanya and Makara
Sudra: Mithuna, Thula and Kumbha

There are other classifications like Dwara (Entrance), Bahya
(outside) and Garbha (Inside) rasis. They are

Dwara: Mesha, Karkataka, Thula, Makara
Bahya: Vrishabha, Simha, Vrischika, Kumbha
Garbha: Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanus, Meena

Similarly they are divided into Dhattt (mineral), Moola
(vegetable) and Jeeva (human) rasis :

Dhatu: Mesha, Karkataka, Thula, Makara
Moola: Vrishabha, Simha, Vrischika, Kumbha
Jeeva: Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanus, Meena

34

In addition to the classification of Rasis, on the basis of various
characteristics as mentioned above, each rasi 1s sub- divided into
several segments in order to gain a greater insight. This is known
as the Varga classification. There are four types of varga
classification. Shadvarga (6 kinds of divisions), Sapthavarga (7
kinds of division); Dasavarga (10 kinds of division) and Shodasa
varga (16 kinds of division)

Shadvarga : It denotes a six-fold division.
1. Rasi, consisting of 30° of the zodiac

2. Hora, in which a rasi is divided into 2 equal parts of 15°
each.

3. Drekkana, in which a rasi is divided into three equal parts
of 10° each.

4. Navamsa, where a rasi is divided into nine equal parts, each
consisting of 3° 20’ or one quarter of a nakshatra (nakshatra
pada)

5. Dwadasamsa, in which a sign is divided into twelve equal
parts of 2° 30’ each.

6. Thrimsamsa, where a rasi is divided into thirty equal parts
of 1° each.

In the division known as Hora, the first half of the Purusha rasis
are ruled by Surya and the second half by Chandra. Among the
sthree rasis, the first part is ruled by Chandra and the latter half by
Surya. In the Drekkana division, the first part, 0°-10° of every
rasi is governed by the ruler of the rasi, the second part, 10°-20° is
ruled by the lord of the fifth house and the third part, 20°-30° is
ruled by the lord of the ninth house. The three divisions are ruled

35

by Narada, Agasthya and Doorvasa respectively. In the Navamsa
division, each rasi, is sub-divided into nine parts. As there are nine
Nakshatra padas in each rasi the nine parts will correspond to the
nine padas of the Nakshatras contained in that particular rasi. The
following chakra will illustrate this point.

aera

12 . Meena 1. Mesha 2. Vrishabha 3. Mithuna
Poorvabhadra (4) Aswini (1-4) Krithika (2, 3, 4) Mrigashira
Uttarabhadra (1-4) Bharani (1-4) Rohini (1-4) Aridra (3, 4)

Revathi (1-4) Krithika (1) Mrigashira (1, 2) Punarvasu (1, 2, 3)

11. Kumbha
Dhanishta (3, 4)
Shatabhisha (1-4)
Poorvabhadra
(, 2, 3)

4. Karkataka
Punarvasu (4)
Pushyami (1-4)
Aslesha (1-4)

NAVAMSA

10. Makara 5. Simha
Uutarashada (2, 3, 4) Makha (1-4)
Shravana (1-4) Pubba (1-4)

Dhanishta (1, 2) Uttar (1)

9. Dhanus 8. Vrishchika 7. Thula 6. Kanya
Moola (1-4) Vishakha (4) Chitta (3, 4) Uttara (1, 2, 3)
Poorvashada (1-4) Anuradha (1-4) Swathi (1-4) Hasta (1-4)
Uuarashada (1) Jyeshta (1-4) Vishakha (1, 2, 3) Chittra (1, 2) |

While calculating the position of the nakshatra padas, those in
Mesha rasi, Simha rasi and Dhanus will commence from the first
rasi, namely Mesha. The counting of nakshatra padas contained in
the Vrishabha, Kanya and Makara rasis would commence from
the Makara rasi. Those nakshatra padas which are positioned in
the Mithuna. Thula and Kumbha rasis would start from the Thula
rasi and finally the counting of the nakshatra padas which are in
Karkataka, Vrischika and Meena rasi would begin from the
Karkataka rasi. In other words, those nakshatra padas situated in
the chara rasis would start from there itself, those in the sthira rasis
would start from the 9th rasi thereof and the nakshatra padas
positioned in the ubhaya (or dual) rasis would commence from the
Sth rasi thereof. For the chara rasis, the navamsas go by the
designation deva (divine), manushya (human) and rakshasa

36

(demonaic) in a successive and repetitive order; for the sthira
rasis, the order is manushya, rakshasa and deva; for the ubhaya
rasis, the order would be rakshasa, manushya and deva.

In the Dwadasamsa mode of division there are twelve parts in
each rasi consisting of 244° (2° 30’) each and since there are
twelve rasis, these twelve parts are supposed to represent the
twelve rasis. In Mesha rasi, for instance, the twelve parts will
commence with Mesha and end with Meena. In Vrishabha rasi,
the twelve segments will be Vrishabha, Mithuna, Karkataka,
Simha’etc and end with Mesha. Each part will be governed by the
lord of the rasi which it represents. The ruling deities are Ganesa,
Aswini- Kumara, Yama and Sarpa, repeated thrice in succession
for the twelve amsas.

The Thrimsamsa division has thirty parts in each rasi consisting
of one degree per part. Among the Vishama or Purusha rasis,
namely Mesha, Mithuna, Simha, Thula, Dhanus and Kumbha the
division is as follows :

1. The first five parts are ruled by Kuja (Mars)

2. The next five parts are ruled by Sani (Saturn)

3. The next eight parts are ruled by Guru (Jupiter)

4. The next seven parts are ruled by Budha (Mercury)
5. and the last five parts are ruled by Sukra (Venus)

For the Sama or Sthree rasis the division is as follows :

1. The first five parts are ruled by Sukra (Venus)

2. The next seven parts are ruled by Budha (Mercury)
3. The next eight parts are ruled by Guru (Jupiter)

4. The next five parts are ruled by Sani (Saturn)

5. and the last five parts are ruled by Kuja (Mars)

37

Saptha Varga (sevenfold classification)

In addition to the six types of divisions considered in the
Shadvarga classification, one more type called the Sapthamamsa
is included. Sapthamamsa is to divide a rasi into seven equal
parts, each spanning 4° 17’. The counting commences from the
same rasi if it is a purusha (odd) rasi, for the sthree (even) rasi it
would start from the 7th rasi thereof. The names of the seven
divisions in the odd signs are: Kshaara, Ksheera, Dadhi, Ghrita,
Ikshu-rasa, Madhya and Suddha jala. These designations are
reversed for the even signs.

Dasavarga (tenfold classification)

To the seven types of division mentioned above, three more kinds
are added, namely, Dasamsa, which is a division into ten equal
part of 3° each, shodasamsa, which is a division of a rasi.into
sixteen segments and Shastiamsa, which is a division of a rasi
into sixty parts, each part consisting of half a degree or 30’.

For Dasamsa, the counting starts from the same rasi for an odd
sign and from the 9th thereof in the case of the even sign. The ten
amsas are presided over by the ten mulers of the cardinal
directions: Indra, Agni, Yama, Rakshasa, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera,
Isana, Brahma and Anantha in the case of odd signs and the same
in the reverse order for the even signs.

In Shodashamsa each segment consists of 1° 52°30". The
counting starts from Mesha for the chara (movable) rasis, from
Simha for the sthira (fixed) rasis and from Dhanus for the ubhaya
(dual) rasis. The presiding deities are: Brahma, Vishnu, Siva and
Surya successively, repeated four times for the purusha (odd) rasis
and the same in the reverse order for the sthree (even) rasis.

38

Shashtiamsa

For the odd (purusha) rasis, the designations of the shashtiamsas
are given below, marked by the suffix “M’ for malefic and ‘B’ for
benefic (from Brihat Parasara Hora sastra)

1.

2.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

Ghora (M) - awful, violent
Rakshasa (M) - demoniacal]
Deva (B) - divine, Spiritual
Kubera (B) - Celestial treasurer
Yaksha (B) - Celestial singer

Kinnara (B) - a mythical being with a human head in the
form of a horse - a deformed man.

Bhrashta (M) - fallen, vicious

Kulaghna (M) - One who ruins a family

Garala (M) - Poison or venom.

Vahni (M) - fire, gastric juice, digestive faculty, appetite.
Maya (M) - deceit, jugglary

Purishaka (M) - dirt

Apampathi (B) - the ocean, Varuna (the rain-god)

Marut (B) - the wind-god

Kaala (M) - dark blue colour, Weather, Time, considered as

one of the nine dravyas by the Vaiseshikas, a person who

distils and sells liquor, Saturn, Siva, a personification of the
destructive principle.

39

16.
17.
18.
19,
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

30.
31.
32.

Sarpa (M) - Snake

Amrita (B) - immortal, nectar

Indu (B) - moon, the number 1, camphor
Mridu (B) - moderate, soft.

Komala (B) - tender, agreeable

Heramba (B) - Ganesa, a boastful hero, buffalo

Brahma (B) - The first of the triad, the universal father, a
missile, sacred knowledge.

Vishnu (B) The second deity of the sacred triad, name of
Agni, name of a law giver (author of Vishnusmriti), a pious
man.

Maheswara (B) - The third deity of the triad, entrusted with
the task of the great destruction, a great ord or sovereign.

Deva (B) - same as no. 3

Ardra (B) - moist

Kalinasa (B) - destruction of strife
Kshiteesa (B) - ruler of the earth

Kamalakara (B) - Surya, one who is responsible for the
blossoming of lotuses.

Gulika (M) - Saturn’s son.
Mrithyu (M) - Son of Mars, death

Kaala (M) - same as no. 15

40

34.
35.

36,

37.
38.
39,
40.
AL.
42.

43,

4A,

45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.

Davagni (M) - forest conflagration
Ghora (M) - Same as no. 1
Yama (M) - death personified

Kantaka (M) - Thorn, any troublesome fellow, enemy of
government or law and order

Sudha (B) Nectar, ambrosia, name of the ganges.

Amrita (B) - same as no. 17

Poornachandra (B) - full moon

Vishadagdha (M) - destroyed by venom, consumed by grief
Kulanasa (M) - same as no. 8

Vamsakshaya (M) - the decay or degeneration of the family

Utpata (M) - an unusual phenomenon portending calamity
like an earthquake, flood, draught etc.

Kaala (M) - same as no. 15

Saumya (B) - relating to the moon, gentle, handsome,
auspicious

Komala (B) - same as no 20.

Seetala (B) - Cold, moon, camphor, turpentine, sandal
Karaladamshtra (M) - One who has frightful teeth
Chandramukhi (B) - having a face like the moon

Praveena (B) - Clever, skillful

4]

51.

52.

53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.

60.

Kala Pavaka (M) - the destructive fire at the end of the
world

Dandayudha (M) - the staff held by an ascetic (or bya
brahmin)

Nirmala (B) - resplendent, sinless, stainless, virtuous
Soumya (B) - same as no. 45

Kroora (M) - cruel, terrible, pitiless

Atiseetala (B) - very cold

Amrita (B) - same as no. 17

Payodhi (B) - Ocean

Bhramana (M) - wandering

Chandra-Rekha (B) - the digit of the moon

For the even signs (sthree rasis) the counting is done in the reverse
order, i.e.; the 60th will become the first one, the 59th the second
and so on. This kind of indepth study of the planets’ positions, the
rasis they are located in, will doubtless facilitate a proper
interpretation.

Shodasavar ga (Sixteen-fold division)

According to Parasara’s Hora Sastra, there are sixteen types of
division of a rasi

1.

?

ae

3.

Rasi - 30°- 1
Hora -15°-\%
Drekkana -10°-4%

42

4. Chaturthamsa - 7° 30’-W%

5. Sapthamamsa -417-Y

6. Navamsa - 3°20°- %

7. Dasamsa - 3°- Yo

8. Dwadasamsa - 2° 30’- Yi2

9. Shodasamsa - 1°52’ 30"- Ye
10. Vimsamsa - 1°30’- Yo

11. Chaturvimsamsa or Siddhamsa - 1° 15’- 44

12. Bhamsa or Sapta Vimsamsa or

Nakshatramsa - 1° 6°40" - a7
13. Trimsamsa - 1°- Yo
14. Chatvarimsamsa - 45’- Yo
15. Akshavedamsa - 40’ - 45
16. Shashtiamsa - 30° - Yeo

Out of these sixteen types of division ten have already been
covered; the six not included are given below :

1. Chaturthamsa

Every rasi is divided into four parts and they are ruled by the lords
of the four angles - For example, for Mesha, the first part is ruled
by the lord of Mesha, Kuja; the second part is ruled by the lord of
Karkataka (4th rasi), Chandra; the third part is ruled by the lord of
Thula (7th rasi), Sukra; the fourth part is ruled by the lord of

A3

Makara (10th rasi), Sani. The deities are Sanaka, Sananda,
Kumara and Sanatana respectively.

2. Vimsamsa

The calculation of Vimsamsa ('40 of a rasi) starts from Mesha for
chara (movable) rasis, from Dhanus for Sthira (fixed) rasis and
from Simha for the Ubhaya (dual) rasis. The presiding deities for
the 20 Vimsamsas in purusha rasis are respectively: Kaali, Gauri,
Jaya, Lakshmi, Vijaya, Vimala, Sati, Tara, Jvalamukhi, Sveta,
Lalitha, Bagala mukhi, Pratyangira, Sachi, Raudri, Bhavani,
Varada, Jaya, Tripura and Sumukhi. For the sthree rasis the deities
are: Daya, Megha, Chinnasi, Pisachini, Dhoomavathi, Matangi,
Bala, Bhadra, Aruna, Anala, Pingala, Chuchchuka, Ghora,
Vaarahi, Vaishnavi, Sita, Bhuvaneshwari, Bhairavi, Mangala and
Aparajita.

3. Chaturvimsamsa or Suddhamsa

The rasi is divided into 24 parts with each part consisting of 1° 15’
The calculation conmences from the Simha rasi for the purusha
(odd) rasis and from Karkataka for the sthree rasis. For the former,
the ruling deities are respectively Skanda, Parsudhara, Anala,
Viswakarma, Bhaga, Mitra, Maya, Antaka, Vrisha-dwaja,
Govinda, Madana and Bhima. These twelve are repeated twice.
For the latter (even signs) the order is reversed and repeated.

4. Bhamsa or Saptavimsamsa or Nakshatramsa

The distribution of the 27 parts, each consisting of 1°6’40"
commences from Mesha and other chara rasis for all the 12 signs.
The presiding deities of the 27 amsas are the same as those for the
27 Nakshatras. They are: Dastra (Aswini Kumara), Yama, Agni,
Brahma, Chandra, Isa, Aditi, Jiva (Brihaspati), Ahi (Rahu), Pitara,

Bhaga, Aryama, Surya, Tvashta, Marut, Sakragni, Mitra, Vasava,
Rakshasa, Varuna, Visvadeva, Govinda, Vasu, Varuna, Ajapa,
Ahirbudhanya and Pusha for the purusha rasis and the order is
reversed for the sthree rasis.

5, Chatvarimsamsa

Each rasi is divided into 40 parts, each part consisting of an arc of
45’. The counting starts from Mesha for the Purusha rasis and
from Thula for sthree rasis. The presiding deities are Vishnu,
Chandra, Marichi, Tvashta, Dhata, Siva, Ravi, Yama, Yaksha,
Gandharva, Kala and Varuna successively repeated for both the
odd and even signs.

6. Akshavedamsa

The rasis are divided into 45 parts, each part comprising an arc of
AQ’. The distribution of the parts starts from Mesha, Simha and
Dhanus for the chara, sthira and ubhaya rasis respectively. The
presiding deities for the chara rasis are Brahma, Siva and Vishnu;
for the Sthira rasis, Siva, Vishnu and Brahma; for the ubhaya
rasis, Vishnu, Brahma and Siva repeated successively 15 times.

The significance of the Shodasavargas (the sixteeen types of
divisions) is as follows:

1. Rasi Lagna - The physical appearance and characteristics
2. Hora - Wealth or financial status

3. Decanate or Drekkana - Brothers and sisters (Siblings or
co- borns) and happiness through them

4. Chaturthamsa - Bhagya or prosperity

5. Sapthamamsa - Progeny, Children and grandchildren

6. Navamsa - wife or husband (spouse)
7. Dasama - Profession

8. Dwadasamsa - Parents

9. Shodasamsa - Conveyances

10. Vimshamsa - spiritual progress

11. Chaturvimsamsa - Academic achievements

12. Bhamsa or Nakshatramsa - strengths and weaknesses
13. Thrimsamsa - Malefic results

14. Chaturvimsamsa - Auspicious and inauspicious

15. Akshavedamsa - General indications of good and bad

16. Shashtiamsa - Good and bad

If a planet occupies the same rasi in the Rasi chart and the
Navamsa chart, it is known to be in its vargothama which is a
position of strength. Likewise, if a planet occupies good positions
such as its Moolatrikona, its sign of exaltation or its own sign or
rasi, in various varga charts, its strength is known to increase in
due proportion.

In the shadvarga scheme, if there are two good vargas i.e., two
good positions among the six charts, it is designated as Kimsuka.
If there are three good vargas, it is called Vyanjana; if there are
four good position it is called Chamara; if there are five it is
known as Chatra; if there are six vargas i.e., good positions in all
the six charts, it is called Kundala.

If the sapthavarga scheme is used, the above six designations are
applicable to six good positions and if there are seven good
positions or vargas, it is known as Mukuta.

46

In the Dasa Varga Scheme, the good vargas are called: (according
to Parasara)

Parijata - for 2 good vargas (or positions of strength)
Uttama - for 3 vargas

Gopura - for 4 vargas

Simhasana - for 5 vargas

Paravata - for 6 vargas

Devaloka - for 7 vargas

Brahmaloka - for 8 vargas

Sakravahana - for 9 vargas and

Sridhama - for 10 vargas

In Sarvartha-chintamani, however, the last three names are given
as Amara for 8, Iravata for 9 and Vaiseshikamsas for 10.

For the Shodasavarga, scheme, the good positions are known as:

Bhedaka -2
Kusuma -3
Nagapushpa -4
Kanduka -5
Kerala -6
Kalpa vriksha -7
Chandana- Vana -8
Poornachandra -9
Uchchaisrava - 10
Dhanvantara - il
Suryakanta - 12
Vidruma - 13
Sakra-simhasana -14
Goloka - 15

Sri Vallabha for 16 vargas

AT

CHAPTER - ITI
Description of Rasis and Grahas
RASIS

MESHA (ARIES) : It is blood red and yellowish in complexion
and cruel. Itis a fire sign. It is an odd rasi,
male and rises with its back (prishtodaya).
It has a prominent physique and is
courageous. It is a quadruped and strong
during night. It resides in the east and is
related to kings; it is a Kshatriya rasi.

It wanders in hills and forests (movable
sign) and predominates in Rajoguna (which is the second of the
three gunas, namely, Satthwa, Rajas and Tamas and is responsible
for great activity in living beings). Itis related to minerals. It causes
bilious complaints and liver disorders. Its ruler is Kuja (Mars).
Those born in Mesha Lagna will therefore be active and courageous,
enthusiastic and interested in travel, if Mars is well placed and
strong; if he is ill-placed they may be aggressive and domineering
or overbearing.

Ae:

aa wie: saan vata: Msemrat Area cag: wt maga
ofa: a: AeA Tl SY Usd: | sieg aul: srecp: Taga
aa mel fede cane) oihatea) aaarge:) vaca
aeueAaS: | ACU: | Ege! ahrava (sft calfas7))
STATA TAM

Ase ayedayavel Al wal YA:

mel cased d fash wacact: Il

(sft arsdivdyu: 1)

48

< 7. fa nd
< = % ry eat it 5
~ ta “ S = Q = =
2) e/ 2/2] 2] 2] 2] 2] & 5
5 = = 5
i < ° = =)
= © = - m a Zz.
4 E> ie me
be
< a
«. ny wy ft ~ i
z a | Bel Fl] S] e] 3] & a zx
bs < wo < % i=) <t a * ar
2 = is =
5 Fi Ax > bas 3 = = ia =
is
L
bs iol < a>) 7 nc a
ne = ae ES a > a = Fs a
< 7, ge is = o < “ ~
iv < & i 2} P= 4 > Eo
tt Bel °
< n mare) x Pa < 2 mH fo) <
> a > am Ss mn
Rd s &
N . > Ss 5
~ s) 7 F] = 5 a io iI x
7, 4 feo] a co wy ae mm
< 5 s Q a < < «< 5 ad
= eG x < & = =. a a =m
a al ao 77) bend
ws Z a
L
= y 4
Re! g | =)
me = cs =
ao = bl rm
a & a fai 4
ae i oa i

BLACK
VAYU

SUKRA
SUDRA

SEMI-FRUIT
FUL

ea
—
a)
<
ma
te
lant
ot
n : y
g < es BS a = 4
ra x o = a = x
a fe wn _ 5 mx
ce = m = fi % =
oe a a > be a
25
5 < x .
BS 5 z | 2 a fs
a
x “ o z * om
= oe i =x me cs
<
Oo a x =
< < 7 3 wy =
4 = lant a -
5 s| 2/2] 2 = me
‘ i = Ss > Fast
< = eB < gi iS <
is} ~ a = ~
is a = mn > fa
zs PA
Zz - g < a = He
SI > 2] 3 = z
q < 2 8 < 2 x
S > n a oa =
= =
oe ia iso < = z Py oa
MM is} i= 2 H Pa +2
5 is} 7} < ie] a re 4 he
‘ < wy .
<t wn i= ‘ ~ 4
Pa | Aa) Evel fa
2/5) 2)¢/ 2] @| = s | &
5 x ™ < x g = 2 z
=
4 Po Zz af doz
Z Fx 2 Z < we a = gon mw
a a} 3 s z 5 a ZAR fa Oe oe
< 5 a a =) a Zz saC BC a
om = fo) aq Oo is) a Cx ma <
Oo 5) io) a Sm pe foo)

‘Those born in Mesha rasi are likely to suffer from disorders of the
eyes; they will be compassionate, wealthy, they enjoy music, are
religious minded, courageous and they love to eat fish. The Mesha
rasi rises with its back; it has a slightly red or yellow complexion;
itis cruel, bilious in constitution; lacks lustre; well-proportioned in
physique; wanders in mountain ranges; is only slightly interested
in women and has limited progeny. It is firm in resolve and loud in
speech.

Those born in this lagna have the following characteristics : They
are flerce in temperament, are egotistic, wealthy and auspicious. He
is prone to rage, harms his own people, is bold and adventurous, is
helpful to others.

VRISHABHA (TAURUS) : Its complexion is white and it is
feminine. It is a quadruped, has a long
body and rises with its back. It is strong
during night and resides in the south. It
represents villages and businessmen
(Vaishya). It is an earthy sign and is
related to the vegetative kingdom. Its
ruler is Sukra (Venus). Those born in the
Vrishabha Lagna will be patient and
persevering; fond of arts and preoccupied with the accumulation of
wealth. [If Venus is ill-placed, they may be stubborn and lazy
(It is a fixed sign and hence it inclines to make them inflexible
and self-willed).

aay: I

seg fasisdar:| AEG | atest) QAR) ee.) fee) yoRe:
oly Wea) fea aRe; Bsearea) ysaleu! gMeeasra: |
arufteae: | qragapia| edaacl: | aermrecat:| Fe |

FAR |
talorste Carey, wala: erat arig-cac:| fasda.| ocerafirersh
(sla Gesoaale: |)

49

AATAMAPATL |
gua ydosnd yeu: fysae: |
To pat ett qse: ye: aasrafee:

(sfa aisdtadte: |)

The special characteristics of this rasi are :a benign temperament,
feminine, equanimous, firm, robust, tends to be rustic during nights
and during day time a denizen of the forests; short in stature, rises
with its back, moral in outlook, lord of a beautiful landscape, is of
a windy constitution, white in complexion, has a loud voice,
moderately interested in women and has an average progeny.

Those born in this rasi tend to be generous, hoarse in voice, fearless,
attracted to the wives of others.

Those born in this lagna are respectful to elders, soft spoken, well-
mannered, energetic and active, wealthy, avaricious, courageous
and liked by all people.

MITHUNA (GEMIND): It has an even body with the colour of
7 green grass. Itis a human sign, rises with

its head and is strong at night. It is a male
rasi, lives in the west and is an airy sign.
It lives in villages and is windy in
constitution. Its ruler is Budha
(Mercury). Mithuna is symbolised by
twins and hence signifies a dual nature.
Those born in Mithuna Lagna are intelligent and versatile and are
involved simultaneously in more than one project. Being windy, it
tends to make them restless and go in search of intellectual
stimulation.

50

fayqy

aguafa: etal: aafted fare qeaetag: Hemera
aa wid or: Treg) scart) He aoue:| eHAfe:| fata
ag vata

(sft geeondarea: |)
Py aaTAh TA!
faysteaatd) Ht Fasacaet: |
cart ant edt arth Veaaishaes: 1
(sft aisdiweu: |)

The characteristics of the rasi are : a windy constitution, grass green
complexion, lives in gardens, affectionate, moderately interested
in women and has an average progeny. Those born in this lagna
have a high self-regard, are fond of their own people, are ready to
sacrifice, love enjoyments, wealthy, sensuous, clever at
manoeuvering and they can overcome their enemies.

KARKATAKA (CANCER) : Its complexion is pale red. It is a
centipede or multilegged and has a bulky
body. Itresides in the north and represents
brahmins. It is satwic in disposition andis
a feminine rasi. It rises with its feet and is
strong at night. It is related to minerals
and is a movable sign. It signifies water
and is ruled by Chandra (Moon). Moon
symbolises the mind and therefore it provides those born in the
Karkataka Lagna with a fertile imagination and an emotional
disposition. Their personalities are sensitive and changeable. If ill-
placed, they may be given to moodiness.

HS: It

qq ysslea:) sddaul) cmoayapia:) fevre) wera
TAGS: | GAMA! SF VIET HT) HUSA Guise
Hfaca salted sppftrcan)

(sla saifasH)
RTA STATI TTA
sce:
GHW RMA: |
faa queq pein fast
agua: qadtsfaesw: | ,
(sf aarsdtyata: |)

This rasi rises with its back, is white in complexion, is phlegmatic
in constitution, affectionate, moves about in water, fond of women,
and has a large progeny.

The characteristics of one born in this rasi are : a deceitful mind
being soft spoken, diplomatic, having an aversion to travel and a
tendency to borrow money.

If a person is born in this lagna with the moon occupying the
Karkataka rasi, he will possess a clean conduct, an interest in arts
and learning and a love of sporting in water. He will be fond of
perfumes, will have a lean physique, will be after sensuous pleasures
and will seek money or wealth.

SIMHA (LEO) : It has a large, white body. It is a quadruped,
: masculine and rises by its head. It is
strong during night and resides in the east.
It resorts to forests and is related to

vegetation. It is satwic and royal, being a
kshatriya. It is a fixed or immovable rasi.
It is fiery and is ruled by Ravi (Sun).

vr
i)

Those born in Simha Lagna are generous and magnanimous,
constructive and inventive. They are good organisers and enjoy
appreciation and praise. If the Sun has malefic aspects, they may
become too authoritative and egoistic.

Tae: ll

arffaufer: | Gaaur: | Ba | aaa) HE | ASMOs: | ACTA ATA: |
ACURA AST |

qa crawerd! seh) giant: | eresanfer: | site AST |
shee: | Aenea i

(sit GesoIatH4iee: |)
racdiediscugaya aicarel Tifa: tl

(sfa aArsdtuele: |)

This rasiis an Agni (fire) rasi, yellow in complexion, coarse, cruel,
moves about in mountains, only slightly interested in women and
has a limited progeny.

Those born in this rasi are short-tempered, quick footed, laugh with
derision, are loquacious, fickle-minded, cold amd fond of fish.

Those who are born in this lagna enjoy life, overcome enemies, full
of zeal and enthusiasm and have the strength of an elephant. They
have a slim waist and a small progeny.

KANYA (VIRGO) : It has a medium build and is variegated in
colour. It rises with its head and is strong
during day time. It resides in the south
and loves hill resorts. It is a human rasi,
feminine in nature and represents the earth.
Itis a virgin and is tamasic in disposition.
It is related to the business community

wl
os

and is ruled by Budha (Mercury). Those born in Kanya Lagna are
preoccupied with purity and cleanliness and tend to be critical and
fastidious. They are methodical and aim at perfection. But Mercury
being inconstant, they may be changeable with regard to their ideas
and also circumstance. With an ill-placed Mercury, they may be
overcritical and dissatisfied with themselves and with others.

ATM

ag vislea feageni ftiteraut arquapfa:) sitareearan
YRysau! Val VMs Teese) ACTA steugET|

AA CATHY AMES HeTa VAAN Vika: wafer wel
aay |

(sha Salers)
TA START
oaeaeat Acal arenes: |
SMPaURETa: GRE TALE

Sareea
gat wif wrens —
yardictac@repdse: |
fanesitcga saalcea:
gfatta fafuar ufea: Gar

This rasi is feminine, rises with its back, strong during the day,
tawny in complexion, windy constitution, cold in temperament,
moves about on clean ground, coarse, well-knit physique, curt in
speech, only slightly interested in men and has a small progeny.

(sf alsdtaate: 1)

The characteristics of those born in this rasi are : a faith in
scriptures, worry regarding change in his status, quarrels with his
wife constantly.

Those born in this lagna are well-versed in several branches of

learning, are full of auspicious qualities, good looking, fond of
sexual pleasures.

THULA \ LIBRA): It is black in complexion and has a medium

wa build. Itis a biped sign, rises with its head
| and is strong in daytime. It is a western
sign and resorts to land. It is masculine
and is predominant with Rajoguna. It
symbolises air and is related to the mineral
kingdom. It is a movable rasi and is sudra
Mm bycaste. It is destructive or mischievous.
Itis ruled by Sukra (Venus). Itis symbolised by a balance and those
who are born in the Thula Lagna are constantly seeking harmony
in their lives. They are interested in arts and love beautiful objects
and enjoy luxury. They find it difficult to make decisions and are
preoccupied or indulgent with their spouse.

Fee

fara sea) arract:) fr-grecn aaaiftuh areca
CUMS! GAAS TA VIS Herd! ach! faarat:| Gig fac: |
(ft site H!)

Garey Gar sid: gel: AeHAacae: |

fagradacifag sareal atagisret: tt (sia aisdivete: 1)

dats ieihafahal
feorgerdaerar: Yar
wisi Aft agers
Fasactadtaatacne: |i

(sf aisdiaete: 1)

This rasi rises with its head, is of variegated complexion, is
speechless, wanders in forests, has little interest in women, has a
small progeny and well-proportioned physique.

cr
ori

Those born in this rasi are eloquent in speech, learned, suffer from

women.

Those born in this lagna tend to be intelligent, scholarly, well-
versed in various arts, engaged in righteous acts, wealthy and
honoured by people.

VRISCHIKA (SCORPIQ) : It has a reddish brown complexion
and a slender hairy ‘physique. It is
feminine. It rises with its head and is
strong during the day. It is a centipede
sign and resides in holes. Its direction is
north and it resorts to water and land. It is
related to vegetation and is a fixed sign. It

symbolizes water and belongs to the
brahmin caste. It is sharp and passionate. Itis ruled by Kuja (Mars).
People born in Vrischika Lagna are energetic and work very hard.
They are business-oriented and have a fertile imagination and
strong determination. They express their need for.ccommunication
and relationships through sexuality. If Mars is ill-placed, it could
make them ruthless and even self-destructive.

afar: tt
a viele; gdaaul) seater) Huse: | eR) aeqe:
qeetag:| fasaq:) area fasiodg: - dea. SAN GPT TH
fer) Gore: | ahaqusnie: | Tee: |
Ta saa yafa - Al aecuia) pore K:
) PUG! He

(sh GESoIAHTES: |
AO AAM AR AA!
aanleatsra: warfagseeh: |
yafgaarual fandt gem: get
(sfa arisdtudte: 1)

This rasi rises with its head, is white in complexion, is a Jala (water)
rasi, moves about in water, phlegmatic in constitution, greatly
interested in women and has a large progeny.

Those born in this rasi are silent, slow in gait, compassionate,
weak-willed and associate themselves with lowly persons.

Those born in this lagna are courageous, wicked, learned, cause
dissent among friends, good looking and intelligent.

DHANUS (SAGITTARIUS) : It is of a tawny brown colour and
even build. It rises with its feet and is
strong at night. It is a royal sign whose
first half is biped and latter half quadruped.
It is a masculine rasi and is sathik in
temperament. It resides in the east and
resorts to forest and gardens. It is human.
It is ruled by Guru (Jupiter) and is
splendorous. Those born in Dhanur Lagna are optimistic, frank and
forthright. They have a zest for life and love travel. They are
interested in religion and philosophy and like to acquire knowledge

as a key to happiness.

OF
qe vislea:| da: cacfauil at) ude: | Hergreq ant: | SSF: |
ee) Gor) freamalt:| aecde: | Seuss) aTaarsr: |
UAT STAR AA |
mel gram quanta: yfa wy: gal adelarendt a!
(sft sttaralcaht)

ACTA ART!
eqam aya Alea sar gah
Paes ye WU ug adeq dea il

(gfe arsdtadia: |)

afr a
THAMHM: WAel Aer
foncianferd: Utena ara |
weet fe sq adi
wa 4 Hilt wrcqaz

This rasi rises with its head, is golden in complexion, wanders in
mountains, makes loud noise, strong in physique, coarse, hot and
bilious in constitution. It is an Agni (fire) rasi. It has little interest
in women and has a small progeny.

MAKARA (CAPRICORN): It has a large body and a variegated
complexion. It rises with its back and is
powerful at night. Its first half is a
| quadruped and the lower half a footless
animal moving in water. It is a feminine
rasi, representing the earth and resorts to
both forests and land. It resides in the
south and is related to minerals. It is a
movable sign and is tamasic in
temperament. Its caste is Vaishya. It is ruled by Sani (Saturn).
Those born in Makara Lagna are characterized by a single-minded
desire and ability to achieve their goals despite numerous obstacles.
They are honest and upright and make good and loyal friends. They
have good organizational abilities and great perseverance. They are
disciplined and reserved. If Sani is not well-placed, it may cause
depression and pessimism.

Ame il

sales: | fretach:) Bar| aftr; elas: | teu: |

seuetas: | aawalt: | vores: |
HA SIR HAA) Were: | GAG: | SaUTAH CsA A,

elas: |

58

Q) agra cenanry, — aaled fren faced
Watt qa eqafsia: eat
agony ya: ald
cada a gq arae: Il

2) Uegnnatsadeey — - fray: fc afa—
WHEN ated! Aeage: |
Forpeiltsafiat we
feqaHt Hat yes! vad

3) APFAGHAH TAHA | — UTI: ifs:

eggs: Ad

Pra Fadl Hat Hes

Waldaret Peare4wahysa Il

a warafakaqafa aa

soared Fata

qage pala: UHH
agatsyal AGATE |

q) Ynieracsaney = - | afeadiasiad casia?d ory
omauy HMA sehaqal

¥) Tater carter

wygd grat Aer
pias fasrishi afadaq
Hata: Gy Age:
Hua afedl JIAAga: |
aurea yarns:

(sf ares yaeya: 1)

It rises with its back, is tawny in complexion, coarse, cold by
temperament, windy in constitution, only slightly interested in
women and having limited progeny. Those born in this rasi are
always happy and are devoted to their parents. If born in the
Sravana nakshatra, they will be married more than once. Those
born in Makara Lagna with Ravi in the lagna, will be : always

|

q) wield att

59

mobile, deserted by friends, devoid of money and without luck. If
Chandra is in the lagna, he is prone to colds, knows music, is gentle
fond of sex, follows the ancestral profession.

>

If kuja is in the lagna, he acquires status by his own effort and gets
a good wife; he will be wealthy and will bring prestige to his family.

If Guru is in the Lagna : all his desires will be fulfilled, he will be
happy on many counts, will be overcome by cupid, will have a
mean mind and will serve others.

If Sukra is in the Lagna : he is much worried and emaciated in body,
scared of expenses, loves the company of poets or solitude.

If Sani is in the lagna : he will be compassionate, will be honoured
by kings, will love to decorate himself with beautiful garments and
perfumes, will delight in young women and will have wide eyes.

KUMBHA (AQUARIUS) : Its complexion is deep brown and it
has a medium build. It rises with its head
and is very strong during the day. It is a
biped and is masculine. Its temperament
is tamasic. It resides in the west and
resorts to deep water. Itis an airy sign and
is related to the vegetable kingdom. It
represents the Sudra caste and is ruled by
Sani (Saturn). It is an immovable sign. Those born in Kumbha
Lagna are socially conscious and like to participate in group

activities which aim at removing social and political injustices.
They tend to be high strung, impatient and inflexible if Sani has
difficult aspects.

HRL I
ag sides: | aofed| Hea) qeanetes:| adeaph

60

ara) agate: | fever: | Sour: | seeat: | ara Hale: | VATE: |

Tt WAHT!
Rud etatemedgar:| extiergn: Heyet |
(sft walfasy)

TATRA TAT
aoradetedis agate:
HMedaHfetcis fafa awe: |
Hae wMaHt At
wefa Aso: Il

He rises with his head, is devoid of legs, pigeon coloured, moves
about in forests, windy in constitution, affectionate, hot, having
windy, billious and phlegmatic constitution, having a moderate
interest in women and_an average progeny.

Those born in this rasi are brilliant, possess horses, elephants and
wealth, are troubled by their teeth and are unfriendly.

If Chandra is in Kumbha lagna, the native will be indolent, clever
in arts, fond of others’ children and honoured in assemblies.

MEENA (PISCES) : Its complexion is blue, itis footless and has
mo a medium: build. It rises with both head

and tail and is strong at night. It rules the
north and resorts to watery places. It is a
watery sign and has a_=sathwik
temperament. It is feminine and belongs
to the brahmin caste. It is a human rasi
and is ruled by Guru (Jupiter). People
who are born in Meena Lagna are sensitive, honest and
compassionate. They love the arts and are spiritually oriented.
They are imaginative, intuitive and emotional. They find it difficult
to express themselves clearly and are sometimes moody and

61

Vo9o

ASUAAWad “yay y- i
aaaniva — “TANTS LSAM-HLNOS a SVAVL vAHYaa =| HLaN:
GaxOUA qOW ;
CALIADNOD
wold ~ snotaaava | LsaM-HLaos | ‘iva orva SVAVL HLvaa qHVva
SOIT
Suva ‘SuIVH rem | |
AMNDWAW SNOQNAL CALVIOVA
axvsxour | ‘sixaKveort | LNaTOGNI axNv AGNIA LNWAWSS MOWHOS AVA SVAVL VAVA INVS
yovlg ‘SWANIS TIVL 'SHAa
"VWLSAL ‘SHNO@ Hsia
GNOWVIG . 4IVH
K WALSAS
CNV THvad ISAS AddVH OVA AGOE | 1 ye
"WAATIS aU a axrvo1 | isvaninos | insiavad | SRT | agisisn sanisaa vive sviva IAHSYV1 vans
APAIOIOD | cca Gawas | “THASVATA SAAa NTH NW Ads
“LTA Sasa NAW ‘ATAAOT
WALSAS MIVH
HAA S<LVO HSIGaaa
NY (109 ‘noi, | LNSOFTTSLNT | ISVa-HLYON | (HAR AAVSH | OULVAOS THE | WAISINIW WOdSLM vsv¥V VMHLLVS YWRVad nano
MOTIAA 8 XMOUE
SASSLL “NATIOD
ALLVA ;
ae fe QLLVWOaTHd
NIMS ’
SIVA NTHL HLONATWLS
a109 WALSAS Y . ;
. ATMOL DXINOOT . AAIHO-NI NV
LIM aw119S1K 11 HLLAOS ; saorma TAINO! I SVAYL vrnm
THA SOK | snOwHNaD ONIOA YAUNVAWOO | ADVMNOD
QNV GAH | MORAVA-ANOF SAAd TAINO "IVOISAHd —
ALIULYSA
7 av. nia ys | LSA Saat. | OLLWWoa"THa AND 1 f v ¥S TEL vad
Tadd WIVWRa | NIWOdS.LAC MBLYON AAA wos NCEA aNIK viv MgLLL VAUVd NVHO
ALLIHM ‘Lsvada anditavad | ONY AGNIM
‘dood
ato9 SANOGANIdS | GHIAINDIA Pent a
8 WaddOD “LaVaH snororTnd LSVa cond snoria ONTH VALVY VAIHS AVE
a ‘ava SNOHODIA :
TWLaW , : orn: atina Adod . ALI IVNOSWAd ;
aan dioiog | SLUvdAGos | ALITVNOSHaa} NoLLoamia | TRACT To snog| SMES eer | VMBLLVL | aria | VHVaD
SVHVU) AO SOLLSIMALOVAVHO
« « « . wn wi
5S erE 2 B86 eh gz BESaBS
ae ot Lon) —
o . Oo Ss 2 So
S a@é 5 BD 52 25:5 8
cv) & SEs iS ee z > uk GD
ao) oOo 5 ao fom) oom ows Oo Oo | Oo
= io £35 - o 3 e652”
— . c
S _ Saag a o 8 9O 2.6 Ys
io) Toy 6 = fc = ar Oo 8° o9 ., O-s =
} Wal Zz 0 & Boy Se es gas
>) nee 3 mn o B =
a. ~ %¥Q> = a > Sa SME &
ro) ") Foe g a 5B OO > @
oO. ~ ny = fo) . Oo 4 & « Qi an TC
ey lo) ive) ~ pu oem Ne
oO is oye) Mm oO oO ‘<= 0 Co fF
@ 5 22 6 22 8» m| 625° o 6
= — _ m EQ 2 —& € 0 el oS E48 2
as —_ — . an! «
- ~~ oe on Gs o + zo GS) s oO fe. ra
| ~ 3s oe ca a Zst avs
we re od oO A ot Td on Z. Sof fs =
5 Oo 8 a o 3 e a — SH
— te > 3 § > Of aiuscn i
o c ‘< mmol = 2 OO oO Fs
o go yt o of S.=2 Og
om - - > ao oO Pu zaYe Ss 5 0
3 AB & y = 2 3.2
be oo oO a4 fae} o Pn So o oO
5 & a as S a= Spe Os 2
> j b 25 oy mwzp & S| S25 Su
a r ae > nw & Fast * oa ox te
3 7 e eg Ba HK oOo s =
7 ss 6 un OS cS os o S «o
= Gg = 3 0 ob os 6-5
5S OF _ iw cd g Eth mn 4 ao aoe 48s 2a
a & oe ee 72362 #3 6 = 5, ES. 42s
a 6 e 1 Ff Enea SE 22 Z22255
ga 5 — E%® Eo « Es 60 &B2E
= ob bo ¢ B28 o -F > -¢oe., w wo oO s
so = p E & oO = =~ cp ze¢ os § > €
. Lapand > C .
ce & = > 258s 8° £28 SeEEaR ES
_ : ; a
3 S85 S » © om E ra 7) 3S
33 = ie Pe DoS 228 Sy B ese Se Ss
=o 7 —“— co SU o'°O Co > 9 aw & = =
cates) “= € op € a € S 3s = = oO 2 4
303 Faemod FS FS 5 8a

whom they worship. They are also identified with different
shapes, directions and distances.

Every planet has lordship over one or two rasis, one of them being
a Moolatrikona and they all have a position of exaltation and
debilitation in one of the rasis. The table below gives the details

Graha Swakshe- | Moolatrikona Uchcha Neecha

|
tra (rasis (exaltation) | (debilitation)
\

owned)

4 _
Ravi | Simha 1°-20° Simha 10° Mesha
(Sun)
Chandra | Karkataka |3°-30° Vrishabhaj 3° Vrishabha] 3° Vrischika
(Moon)
Kuja Mesha 1°-12° Mesha 28° Makara | 28° Karkataka
(Mars) Vrishchika
Budha Mithuna [16°-20° Kanya [15° Kanya_ |15° Meena

10° Thula

(Mercury)| Kanya

Guru Dhanus 1°-10° Dhanus  |5° Karkataka| 5° Makara
(Jupiter) | Meena

Sukra Vrishabha | 1°-5° Thula 27° Meena | 27° Kanya
(Venus) | Thula

Sani Makara 1°-20° Kumbha |20° Thula | 20° Mesha
(Saturn) | Kumbha

1) Aspects

All planets aspect the 3rd and 10th houses with a quarter sight;
the Sth and 9th houses with halfa sight; the 4th and 8th houses with
three quarters of a sight and the 7th house with a full sight. In

addition to this some planets have special aspects such as :
Kuja aspects : 4th and 8th with a full sight.
Guru aspects : Sth and 9th with a full sight.

Sani, Rahu and Ketu aspect : 3rd and Oth with a full sight,

2) Ravi represents the human soul or jeeva. Chandra, the mind;
Kuja. physical force and strength; Budha, speech and worldly
knowledge; Guru. spiritual knowledge and intuitive skill;
Sukra, cupidity, desire and worldliness: Sani. sorrow and

labour.

3) Raviis the most powerful. barring Rahu and Ketu and is in the
position of a King. Chandra is the next powerful, comparable
toa queen: Kuja ts like a Commander-in-Chief; Budha is like
a prince or heir-apparent; Guru and Sukra are like ministers;

and Sani is like a servant.

4+) There is a slight difference of opinion regarding their caste.
Guru and Sukra are brahmins; Ravi and Kuja are kshatriyas.
Chandra 1s a vaisya. Budha is a sudra and Sani, a chandala
according to Varahamihara. Sarvartha Chintamani considers
Budha also to be a Vaisya and Sania Sudra.

5) Pianets and the deities they symbolise

Ravi - Shiva
Chandra - Parvathi

Kuja - Subrahmanya
Budha - Vishnu

Guru - Brahma
Sukra - Lakshmi

Sani - Yama

Rahu - Death

Ketu - Brahma

64

6)

7)

It is believed that the worship of deities who represent the
planets will mitigate the ill-effects caused by the ill-placed
planets during their periods.

Planets and their precious stones

Ravi - Manikyam (Ruby)

Chandra - Muktha (Pearl)

Kuja - Pravala (Coral)

Budha - Marakatha (Emerald)

Guru - Pushparagam or Pushyaragam (Topaz)

Sukra - Vajram (Diamond)

Sani - Neelam (Sapphire)

Rahu - Gomedhaka (Agate)

Ketu - Vaidurya (Lapis Lazuli or Turquoise)

Planets, their colours and metals

Ravi - Red and dark brown - Copper

Chandra - White - Pearls and Corals

Kuja - Blood red and white - Gold

Budha - Green - Brass

Guru -_——- Yellow (like - Gold and Cat's eye
molten gold)

Sukra -  Allcolours, especially - Silver, Pearls
light blue or ultra marine and Diamond

Sani - Black - Jron and Mercury

Rahu -_ Black

Ketu - Dark red.

The metals and minerals associated with planets would be

useful in the administration of medicine. For example, diseases

caused by a powerful Ravi in his period may require medicines

containing copper or its compounds; diseases caused by a malefic
Chandra in his period may be cured by oxides of pearls or corals;

those caused by Kuja may need iron and gold compounds; those
due to Sukra may respond to medicines containing oxides of silver,
pearl or mercury; those caused by Sani may be cured by compounds
of Iron or Mercury. Rahu is similar to Sani and Ketu to Kuja with
regard to diseases and medicines required for them.

8) Planets and stature
Ravi and Sukra are of normal height.
Chandra, Kuja and Sani are short.
Budha, Guru and Rahu are tall.

9) Planets, the elements they represent and their tatthwa

Ravi - Agni or Fire God - Tejo tatthwa
Chandra - Varuna or Rain God - Jala tatthwa
Kuja - Agni - Tejo tatthwa
Budha~ - Prithvi or Earth - Prithvi tatthwa
Guru - Akasa or Space - Akasa tatthwa
Sukra _- Jala or Water - Jala tatthwa
Sani - Vayu or Air - Vayu tatthwa

10) Planets and their gunas
Ravi, Chandra and Guru are Sathwik (good).
Budha and Sukra are Rajasik (Passionate)
Kuja, Sani, Rahu and Ketu are Tamasik (Slothful or dull)

11) Planets and panchendriyas or senses they rule :
Sani presides over the sense of Touch (Twak)
Budha rules over touch and Taste (Twak and Jihva)
Kuja governs touch, taste and Sight (Twak, Jihva and Chakshu)
Sukra rules over touch, taste, sight and Smell (Ghrana)
Guru governs touch, taste, sight, smell and Hearing (Srothra)

According to this hierarchy, Sani rules over planets which have
only the sense of touch. Budha rules over lower forms of life like

66

oysters and snails which have only two senses, those of touch and
taste. Kuja rules over slightly more evolved organisms like the
insects which have three senses, those of touch, taste and sight.
Sukra governs living beings having four senses, those of touch,
taste, sight and smell. Guru rules over higher beings who are fully
evolved like the mammals which includes the human species, who
have all the five senses.

Chandra presides over the Mind and Ravi is the Soul.

12) Planets and taste
Ravi governs hot and pungent tastes

Chandra- — saltish Sukra - sour
Kuja = -___ bitter Sani - astringent
Budha - All tastes

Guru -~—s Sweet

13) Planets and their Dristi (looks)
Ravi looks above
Chandra and Guru look straight
Kuja looks sideways
Budha and Sukra look down

Sani and Rahu look obliquely

14) Planets and their strength during day and night
RAVI, KUJA and SANT are prishtodaya planets that rise first
with their feet. They are powertul during the night.
GURU, SUKRA and RAHU are shirodaya planets which rise
with their head. They are strong during the day.

BUDHA, CHANDRA and KETU are ubhayodaya planets that
are powerful during both day and night.

15) Planets and the directions they rule

Ravi - East
Chandra - North West
Kuja - South
Budha - North
Guru - North East
Sukra - South East
Sani - West

Rahu and Ketu. - South West

16) Planets and the Ritus (seasons)

Ravi and Kuja govern Grishma ritu-  Jyeshta - Ashadha
(May - June)
Chandra governs Varsha ritu - Sravana - Bhadrapada
(July - August)
Budha governs Sharad ritu -  Aswaija - Kartika
(September - October)
Guru governs Hemantha ritu - Margashira - Pushya
(November - December)
Sani governs Sishira ritu -  Magha - Phalguna
(January - February)
Sukra governs Vasanta ritu - Chaitra - Vishaakha
(March - April)
A planet in lagna or the lord of drekkana indicates the season
at the time of birth.

17) Planetary periods of time

Sani and Rahu denote | year

Ravi - Ayana or 6 months
Budha - Ritu or 2 months
Guru - Masa or 1 month

68

Sukra - Paksha or 15 days 21) Planets and the substances they rule

Kuja - Dina or | day Raviand Sukra are moola planets, i.e., they govern the vegetable

Chandra - Muhurtha or 48 minutes kingdom.

These periods of time also apply to the rasis which they rule. Chandra, Kuja, Sani and Rahu are dhatu planets, i.e., they rule
This information will be useful in horary astrology for predicting over the mineral kingdom.
the time of occurrence of events. Budha and Guru are jeeva planets, i.e., they govern the living
18) Planets and their pace beings.

Ravi, Kuja, Guru and Sukra are walking planets. 22) Planets and the trees and vegetables they govern

Chandra and Rahu are creeping planets. Ravi - Trees growing on mountains, chillies, radish, pepper

Budha is a flying planet. etc,

Sani is a limping planet. Chandra - Coconut palm, cold substances, tender fruits and

vegetables
19) Planets and garments Kuja - Thorny trees, ginger, grains, pulses and ground-
Ravi - Garments made of thick thread nuts
Chandra - Fine and new clothes Budha_ - Plantain trees, wetcrops, brinjals, lady's fingers etc
Kuja - Rough and pez i .
J ough and partly burnt or singed Guru - Plantain trees, wet crops, roots and bulbs
Budha - Wet clothes _ . .
. Sukra —_- Fruit trees, flowering trees, climbers and creepers,
Guru - Ordinary and somewhat used : . ,
exotic vegetables like cabbage, cauliflower etc
Sukra - Clothes made of strong texture .
Sani - Palmyra trees, thorny, poisonous trees and plants,
Sani - Torn clothes

bitter vegetables, astringents, tobacco etc
Rahu and Ketu. - Rags 6 s

Rahuand - Same trees as Sanirules, snake gourd, spices, garlic
20) Planets and abodes Ketu etc

Ravi - Thatched hut

23) Planets and the grains they govern
Chandra and Sukra - Terraced building

Ravi's  grainis Wheat

Kuja and Ketu - House built with mud and bricks Chandra - Rice

Budha - Artistic house Kuja - Toor dhal

Guru - Wooden house Budha_—- Green gram

Sani and Rahu - Houses built with stones Guru : Bengal gram
Sukra - Cow gram

69 70

26)

Sani - Sesamum

Rahu - Black gram
Ketu - Horse gram

) Planets and the type of places they rule

Ravi presides over places of worship like temples etc
Chandra rules over tanks, wells and water reservoirs

Kuja governs fire places, kitchens, armoury and weaponry
Budha presides over play grounds

Guru governs places where money and jewellery are kept like
the treasury, banks tc.

Sukra is associated with the bedroom and the drawing room.
Sani rules over hospitals and health clinics

Rahuand Ketu preside over places where serpents and poisonous

reptiles reside.

Planets and the species they govern
Ravi, Kuja and Sani govern quadrupeds
Chandra and Rahu rule centipedes
Budha, Guru and Sukra govern bipeds

Planets and the distances they indicate

Raviand Budha indicate 8 yojanas (A yojanamay be equivalent
to 4-5 miles)

Chandra - | yojana

Kuja - 7 yojanas

Guru - 9 yojanas

Sukra - 16 yojanas

Sani - 20 yojanas

Rahu - 20 yojanas

The distances of rasis is the same as that of their lords. The

distances given above will be useful in determining the distances to
which a person is likely to travel, or to predict how far a thiet has
gone.

27) Planets and the shapes associated with them

Ravi - Rectangle

Chandra - Small circle

Kuja - Small drum (damaru)
Budha - ‘Triangle

Guru - Elliptical

Sukra - Octogonal

Sani - Shape of a window
Rahu- A line

This would be useful in preparing lockets, amulets, rings or
pendants to represent the planets.

28) Planets and the body parts and processes they rule

Ravi - Head, heart, spinal column, bones, man’s right
eve, woman's left eye.

Chandra - Face, breasts, blood, man’s lefteye and woman's
right eye, uterus, ovaries, fertility.

Kuja - Head, chest, bone-marrow, external sex organs,

left ear, muscular system. uterus, pelvis and

prostate

Budha —-s Hips. skin, lungs and nervous system

Guru - Brain, thighs, stomach, liver, circulation of blood,
fat content in the body

Sukra - Semen, kidneys, eyes, generative system, throat,

chin, cheeks

72

Sani -

Bones, teeth, muscular and nervous systems,
hair and ears

29) Planets and diseases

Ravi -

Chandra

Kua

Budha -

Guru -

Sukra

Sani -

Rahu and -
Ketu

Fever, liver disorders, heart complaints, eye
diseases, dental complaints, neuralgias and skin
disease

Disturbances with sleep, diseases of lungs, mental
disorders, digestive disturbances, impurity of
blood, danger from water

Bilious complaints, bone-marrow diseases,
excessive heat, small-pox, ulcers

Mental diseases, skin diseases, anemia, liver
complaints

Appendicitis, phlegmatic disorders, ear troubles,
liver disorders, growths and cysts.

Anemia, liver and bilious complaints, sexual
disorders, genito-urinary diseases, skin troubles,
eye infections, ovarian problems

Paralysis, rheumatism, stomach disorders, bodily
deformity, cerebral complaints, gall stones,
trouble with teeth, weak knees, bones.

Epidemics, hysteria, epilepsy, cancer, dropsy,
leucoderma, leprosy, diseases caused by poisons
and toxins

30) Planets and the principles they represent

Ravi represents heat, light and physical evolution

Chandra represents mental evolution

~]

Kuja denotes physical force and bodily energy
Budha signifies mental vigour and abstract thinking
Gururepresents intellectual evolution and aesthetic appreciation

Sukra is related to feelings and emotions and personal charm
or magnetism

Sani represents the time and life principles

Rahu and Ketu denote destructive forces or principles of
disintegration and dissolution leading to emancipation

31) Planets and the branches of knowledge

Ravi represents vedic learning, medicine and alchemy
Chandra is connected with aesthetic pursuits, fine arts and
textiles

Kuja is concerned with culinary sciences, war or defence
services, history and engineering.

Budha is related to pure mathematics, astronomy, accounts and
drawing.

Guru is associated with philosophy, psychology, yoga, spiritual
knowledge and wisdom.

Sukra is connected with naval sciences, (marine engineering),
law, literature, poetry, music, foreign languages, logic, grammar
etc.

Rahu and Ketu are related to drama, magic, buffoonery etc.

The following is a comprehensive list of characteristics

of each of the planets.

RAVI (SUN):

He is the lord of Simha rasi, his moolatrikona is 0° -20° Simha,
exalted in Mesha 10° and debilitated in Thula 10°, aspects the 7th

house, represents the Soul, has the status of a King or Head of state
(or ihe Government), a kshatriya, masculine, his day of the week is
Sunday, his god is Shiva, gemstone is ruby, colour is red and metal
is gold and copper. He is of normal height, has reddish eyes. a
square build, broad shoulders, limited hairs and of a bilious
constitution. He is fiery, he is symbolised by Agni or the fire god.
ais tartiwa is Tejo tatthwa. he is of Saatthwik temperament (guna),
he governs hot and pungent taste, he looks above (dristi), he is
strong at night. he rules the east. he is associated with the grishma
ritu (summer), his time penod is 6 months (ayana), he is a walking
planet, his clothes are made of thick or coarse thread, his abode is
a thatched hui, he rules the vegetable kingdom, he governs trees
growing in hilly regions and plants bearing pungent fruits, chillies,
radish, pepper ete., his grain is wheat, he presides over places of
worship, he is the lord of quadrupeds, he indicates 8 yojanas, he is
represented by arectangle, the body parts rules by him are the heart
and spine, head, the right eye of man and the left eye of woman,
bones, spleen, throat and brain. The diseases are fever, head ache,
liver disorders, heart complaints, eye diseases, dental complaints,
neuraleias and skin diseases. He stands for physical evolution and
principles of heat and light. He represents vedic learning, religious
sacrifices, astrology, medicine and alchemy. He signifies the self,
father, career, power, dignity, authority, good fortune, health and
vigor, If he is well-placed there will be optimism, generosity.
brilliance, individuality and warmth. If l-placed, there will be

arrogance, egoism, irritability and jealousy.
CHANDRA (MOON):

He is the lord of Karkataka, moolatrikona is 3° - 30° Vrishabha,
exalted in Vrishabha 3° and debilitated in Vrischika 3°, aspects the
seventh house, represents the Mind, has the status of a queen, is a

vaisya, feminine, his week day is Monday, goddess is Parvatht,
gemstone is pearl, colour is white. He has a short body, thin and
round, young and old, lean and white, fine lovely eyes, thin black
hair, soft voice, mud in temperament. He has a windy and phlegmatic
constitution, Hle represents Varuna or the rain god. has a Jala
tatthwa, a saatthwik temperament (guna) and presides over the
mind. He governs the salush taste, looks straight (dristi), is strong
during both day and night. He is the lord of the north westein
direction and the varsha ritu (rainy season). He denotes a muhurtha
(48 minutes), his pace is that of a creeping planet, he is associated
with fine, new clothes and a terraced building. He rules the mineral
kingdom and the species of centipedes. He governs coconut palm,
plantain trees, tender fruits, flowers and vegetables, cold substances
(food and drinks), rice, muk products like curds, butter and ghee,
honey and sugarcane. He presides over water reservoirs, tanks and
wells, he denotes | yojana and is represented by a small circle. He
rules over the face, breasts, blood, man’s lefteye and woman's right
eye, uterus, ovaries and the ability to conceive. The diseases related
to him are sleep disturbances, diseases of lungs, mental and
cerebral disorders, digestive troubles, diseases caused by impure
water, like cholera, and impurity of blood. He stands for mental
evolution, aesthetic pursuits, fine arts and textiles. He has todo with
matters relating tothe mother, home, family, infancy, bodily health
and beauty. The professions are those related to shipping, sea,
water products, pearls, corals, agriculture and cattle, He symbolises
changeability in moods, residence and career, heart, understanding,

receptivity and tenderness.
KUJA (MARS):

He is the lord of Mesha (Aries) and Vrischika (Scorpio), his
moolatrikonais 1°- 12° Mesha, exalted in Makara 28° and debilitated

76

in Karkataka 28°, aspects the 4th, 7th and 8th houses, represents
physical force and strength, has the status of acommander-in-chief,
he is a kshatriya, masculine, his day of the week is Tuesday, god is
Subrahmanya, gemstone 1s coral, colouris red and metal is gold. He
has sharp and cruel eyes, a young body, with a slender waist,
shining curly hair, an unsteady mind, wrathful but generous, of
bilious constitution, short stature, his element is Agni, he is of tejo
tatthwa, tamo guna, he rules the sense of sight, and bitter taste, he
looks sideways (dristi), he is strong at night, he governs the
southern direction, he is related to the grishma ritu (summer), he
denotes a dina (one day), he has a walking pace, his clothes are
rough and partly burnt, his house is built with mud and bricks, he
rules the mineral kingdom, he is the lord of thorny trees, grains,
pulses, groundnuts, ginger and toor dhal, he governs fire-places,
kitchens, weapons, armoury, kilns, brick-making, the species he
rules is that of quadrupeds, he indicates a distance of 7 yojanas, he
is represented by a small drum (damaru). The body parts connected
with him are the head, chest, bone-marrow, external sex-organs,
leftear, muscular system, uterus, pelvis and prostrate. The diseases
caused by him are excessive heat, small pox, ulcers, bleeding, fire
accidents, wounds, bilious complaints and bone-marrow diseases.
He represents physical force and bodily energy. He is concerned
with culinary sciences, war or defence services, history and
engineering. The professions relating to him are goldsmiths,
hunters, military, dentists, surgeons, butchers and_ barbers.
Wealth is acquired through metals, gold, battles, cooking, land
acquisition, spying and thieving. He has to do with younger
siblings, paternal relations, physical energy, courage, animal
instincts and desires. He stands for ambition, self-confidence,
prowess and combativeness.

77

BUDHA (MERCURY):

He is the lord of Mithuna (Gemini) and Kanya (Virgo), his
moolatrikona is 16°- 20° Kanya, exalted in Kanya 15° and debilitated
in Meena 15°, aspects the 7th house, represents speech and worldly
knowledge, he has the status of a prince, he is a vaisya, a female
hermaphrodite, his day of the week is Wednesday, his god is
Vishnu, gemstoneis emerald, his colour is green and metal is brass.
He is tall, full of nerves, pleasant in speech, has red and broad eyes,
fond of fun, has an impediment in speech, he is of a bilious, windy
and phlegmatic constitution. He is of prithvi tatthwa, rajo guna,
rules the sense of smell and has a mixed taste, he looks down
(dristi), he is powerful both day and night, he governs the northern
direction, he is associated with the sharad ritu, he denotes a time
span of two months (ritu), his pace is fast, he is a flying planet,
he wears wet clothes, he lords over living beings. He rules wet
crops, plantain trees and also fruitless trees, vegetables like the
brinjals and lady's fingers, his grain is green gram. He presides over
play grounds and governs bipeds. He denotes 8 yojanas and he is
symbolised by a triangle. The parts he rules are the hips, lungs, skin
and the nervous system. The diseases associated with him are
mental derangement, skin diseases, anaemia and liver complaints.
He represents mental vigour and abstract thinking. He is concerned
with pure mathematics, astronomy, accounts, drawing, trade,
architecture, education and learning, eloquence, fine arts, dexterity
in speech, aptitude for acquiring knowledge and mechanical skill.
The professions he guides are salesman, agents, orators, linguists
and the like. Wealth is acquired through poetry, scriptures, clerical
work, astrology, vedas and mantras. He is connected with maternal
uncle, relatives and friends.

78

GURU (JUPITER) :

He is the lord of Dhanus (Sagittarius) and Meena (Pisces), his
moolatrikona is 1°- 10° Dhanus, he is exalted in Karkataka 5° and
debilitated in Makara 5°, he aspects the 5th, 7th and 9th houses. He
represents spiritual knowledge and intuitive skills, he has the status
of a minister, he is a brahmin by caste and masculine. His day of the
week is Thursday, god is Brahma, gem is pusparagam (topaz),
colour is yellow. He has a big body of yellowish hue, brown eyes
and hairs, he has an elevated chest and is tall and fat, his constitution
is phlegmatic. He represents the akasha tatthwa (space), sathwa
guna, sense of hearing, sweet taste and cold food and drinks. He has
a straight forward look (dristi), is strong during day time, rules the
north-eastern direction, is related to the hemantha ritu (winter), he
denotes one month (masa), he has a walking pace, his clothes are
ordinary and somewhat used, his metal is gold, he governs living
beings (jeeva). He is the lord of plantain trees, fruit-bearing trees,
wet crops, roots and fruits. His grain is bengal gram. He rules over
places where money and jewellery are kept such as the treasury and
bank, he governs the bipeds, he indicates a distance of 9 yojanas and
is represented by the elliptical shape. The body parts associated
with him are the stomach, brain and liver and the processes like the
circulation of blood in the arteries and the fat content in the body.
The ailments which are referred to him are liver complaints like
jaundice, injuries, hernia, appendicitis, skin diseases, ear troubles,
growths and cysts. The professions that are associated with him are
those connected with education, law, religion, philosophy and
banking. Wealth is acquired through brahmins, moral and religious
pursuits. Guru represents intellectual evolution and aesthetic
sensibilities. He is a preceptor, a master, who communicates
spiritual knowledge and ancient wisdom. He is responsible for
prosperity, physical development, health and progeny. He bestows

79

nobility, a love of honesty and integrity, an interest in abstract,
intellectual, artistic and spiritual matters. He gives honours and
titles, wealth and wisdom.

SUKRA (VENUS) :

He is the lord of Vrishabha (Taurus) and Thula (Libra), his
moolatrikona is 1°- 5° Thula, exalted in Meena 27° and debilitated-
in Kanya 27°, he aspects the 7th house, represents cupidity, desires
and worldliness, he has the status of a minister, he is a brahmin by
caste and feminine, his day of the week is Friday, goddess is
Lakshmi, his gem stone is diamond, silver and pearls. He is
multicoloured. He has a beautiful body, black curly hair, green,
lovely and broad eyes, limbs and body are huge, he has a windy and
phlegmatic constitution, he 1s of normal height. He represents jala
(water) tatthwa, rajo guna, presides over the sense of smell and sour
taste, he looks down (dristi), he is strong during daytime, he rules
over the south-east, he governs the vasantaritu (spring), he indicates
a paksha (15 days), he has a walking pace, his clothes are of strong
texture, his house is a terraced building, he governs the vegetable
kingdom. He is the lord of fruit trees, flowering trees, climbers and
creepers, exotic vegetables like the cabbage, cauliflower etc, his
grain is the cow gram. He is associated with the drawing room and
the bed-room, he governs the bipeds. He indicates a distance of 16
yojanas and is represented by the octogonal shape. The body parts
and processes he rules over are the kidneys, eyes, the generative
system, throat, chin, cheeks and the semen. The diseases which are
related to him are anaemia, liver and bilious complaints, sexual
disorders, genito-urinary diseases, skin troubles, eye infections and
ovarian problems. Sukra represents feelings and emotions, personal
charm and magnetism. He is connected with naval sciences like
marine engineering, law, literature, poetry, music, dance drama,

80

foreign languages, logic and grammar. The professions he governs
are those of a musician, film-maker, actor, transport worker,
jeweller, merchant, weaver, tailor, doctor and politician. Wealth is
acquired through women's merchandise, animals, music and dance,
poetry, silver and silk. Sukra has to do with wives, vehicles,
ornaments, love affairs and pleasure. He epitomizes the aesthetic
and sensual aspects of life, the desire for worldly enjoyments.

SANI (SATURN) :

Sani is the lord of Makara (Capricorn) and Kumbha (Aquarius); his
moolatrikona is 1°-20° Kumbha, exalted in Thula 20° and debilitated
in Mesha 20°, aspects the 3rd, 7th and the 10th houses, he represents
sorrow and labour, he has the status of a servant and he belongs to
the sudra caste and is a male hermaphrodite. His day of the week is
Saturday, his god is Yama, his gemstone is neelam (sapphire), his
colour is black, and the metals are iron and mercury. Sani is lazy,
has deepset eyes of a golden colour, a thin and tall body, full of
arteries and veins, large teeth, stiff hair, dark and lame, he has a
windy constitution. He represents Vayu (air) tatthwa, he is tarnasik
(guna), he rules the sense of touch and the astringent taste, his look
(dristi) is oblique, he is strong at night, he governs the western
direction and the sishira ritu. He denotes one year (samvatsara), he
is alimping planet and represents torn clothes and a house built with
stones. He governs the mineral kingdom, thorny and poisonous
trees and plants, the palmyra trees, bitter and astringent vegetables,
tobacco, cotton; his grain is sesamum. He rules over hospitals and
health clinics, burial grounds and dumping heaps, he governs the
quadrupeds. He denotes a distance of 20 yojanas and is symbolised
by the shape of a window. The body parts and processes he rules are
the bones, teeth, hair, ears and the muscular and nervous systems.
The diseases that are associated with him are paralysis, rheumatism,

ol

stomach disorders, cerebral complaints, gall stones, troubles with
teeth, bones, knees and bodily deformities. He is related to astrology,
medical sciences, alchemy, biology and physical sciences. The
professions may involve working with metal, iron, wool or leather
products, taming of wild beasts, travelling in foreign countries.
They may include an executioner or a butcher, blacksmith, oil
monger and servant. Wealth is acquired through roots. and fruits,
servants, sculpture, woods. Sani has to do with longevity, death,
fear, misery, sickness, misfortune, servitude, captivity and poverty.
He is also concerned with a person's life and livelihood, cause of
death and adversity. If the planet is well-placed, he may bestow
qualities like prudence, frugality, self-control, loyalty and
steadfastness, perseverance, industriousness and patience. If he is
ill-placed, there may be laziness, indolence, depression, cruelty or
indifference.

RAHU (NORTH NODE) :

Rahu owns Makara (Capricorn) and is exalted in Vrishabha and
Mithuna (Taurus and Gemini), debilitated in Vrischika (Scorpio)
and Dhanus (Sagittarius), aspects the 3rd, 7th and 10th houses. He
is considered to be a female. He belongs to a low caste, his god is
Death, gem stone is gomedhaka (agate), his colour is black. His
head is black and he is tall. He represents the tamoguna, his sight
(dristi) is oblique, he is strong during daytime, he rules the south-
west direction, he denotes one year, he is classified as a creeping
planet, his clothes are rags, his abode is built of stones, he governs
the mineral kingdom, his grain is black gram, he rules over thorny
trees and plants, cotton, bitter vegetables, snake gourd, drumstick,
jack fruit, onions, garlic and other spices. He presides over places
where serpents and other poisonous reptiles reside, like the anthills
cic. He rules over centipedes, he indicates 20 yojanas, he is

82

represented by a line. He is associated with diseases like rheumatism,
epilepsy, hysteria, cancer, dropsy, leucoderma, leprosy, eczema,
carbuncle, epidemics and diseases caused by poisons and toxins.
He governs professions involving dance, music, drama, buffoonery,
magic, the theatre, doctor of poisons, hunter, snake charmer and the
like. He represents destructive forces or principles of disintegration,
evil actions like thieving, murder, dacoity, cheating, impersonation
and similar antisocial behaviour, he is also connected with
alcoholism, imprisonment and so on. He is irreligious, garrulous
and conceited. He signifies the paternal grand parents. If he is well-
placed he will bestow power and material success.

KETU (SOUTH NODE) :

He is the lord of Mesha (Aries), is exalted in Vrischika (Scorpio)
and Dhanus (Sagittarius) and debilitated in Vrishabha (Taurus) and
Mithuna (Gemini), aspects the 3rd, 7th and the 10th houses. He
belongs to a low caste and is a eunuch, his god is Brahma, his gem
stone is vaidurga (lapis lazuli or turquoise), his colour is dark red.
He is red, fierce in look, inhales smoke, has bruised limbs, is tall
lean and malicious. He is tamasik, rules over the sour taste, he is
strong during both day and night, he rules the south west direction,
his clothes are rags, his abode is built with mud and bricks. He rules
over the same trees and vegetables as Rahu, his grain is horse gram,
like Rahu, he also presides over places where snakes and poisonous
reptiles reside, he is associated with the same diseases like Rahu
such as epidemics, hysteria etc, in addition to accidents, death in
battle-field, self-immolation or prosecution. He also represents evil
forces, sinful actions, sexual aberrations and the professions relating
to tanneries, kilns, butchery and the like. He stands for hardships
and isolation. If he is well-placed, he will bestow a spiritual and

83

meditative influence on the native and incline him towards
renunciation and emancipation. He signifies the maternal grand
parents.

The relationship between the Planets :

According to some,

Guru is the friend of Ravi
Guru and Budha are friends of Chandra
Sukra and Budha are the friends of Kuja
Chandra, Kuja, Guru, Sukra and Sani are the

friends of Budha
Ravi, Chandra, Budha, Sukra and Sani are the

friends of Guru

Kuja, Budha, Guru and Sani are the friends of Sukra

Budha, Guru and Sukra are the friends of Sani

But according to Sathyacharya, a planet's friends are the lords
of the 2nd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and the 12th houses from his
Moolatrikona sign, as well as the lord of the sign in which he is
exalted, provided they are not also the lords of the other houses. The
remaining planets are his enemies. Taking Ravi as an example, we
find that Simha is his Moolatrikona house. The 2nd, 4th, Sth, 8th,
9th and 12th houses from Simha are Kanya, Vrischika, Dhanus,
Meena, Mesha and Karkataka. Their lords are respectively, Budha,
Kuja, Guru, and Chandra. Ravi is in exaltation in Mesha and Kuja
1s its lord. Eliminating the repetitions, we get Budha, Kuja, Guru
and Chandra. The lords of the other six houses are, Sukra (Thula
and Vrishabha), Sani (Makara and Kumbha), Budha (Mithuna) and
Ravi himself, who is the lord of Simha. Budha figures in both the

84

lists and therefore he is neither a friend nor an enemy, he becomes (Neutral), Satru (enemy) and Atisatru (great enemy) as follows

Natural relationship Resultant

neutral. We, therefore arrive at the following list :

Friends Enemies Neutral - —
Ravi: Kuja, Guru Sukra Budha Mitra Mura Aumitra
Chandra Sani Satru Satru Atisatru
Sama Mitra Mitra
; Sama Satru Satru
Following the same procedure for the other planets, we get the Mitra Satru Sama

following table :

Chandra, Kuja, Sukra, Sani Budha
Guru
Chandra|Ravi, Budha_ Kuja, Guru, Sukra,
Sani
Ravi, Chandra, Sukra, Sani Budha
Guru
Ravi, Sukra Chandra Kuja, Guru, Sani
Ravi, Chandra, Sani Budha, Sukra

Kuja
Budha, Sani Ravi, Chandra } Kuja, Guru
Sukra, Budha Guru Ravi, Chandra, Kuja

In addition to the above relationships, in a horoscope the
planets which occupy the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 10th, 11th and 12th houses
from a particular planet are the friends of that planet and the rest are
his enemies for the time. Further, the planets occupying the
exaltation sign of this particular planet are also his friends.
Combining the natural relationships with those that obtain due to
their positions at the time of birth, we get five kinds of relationships
between the planets - Atimitra (great friend), Mitra (friend), Sama

CHAPTER IV

Description of Nakshatras and
Bhavas

Just as the rasis and grahas (planets), the nakshatras also
have been classified into different groups on the basis of their char-
acteristics and attributes.

1) Sex of the nakshatras:

Male — : Ashwini, Punarvasu, Pushyami, Hasta, Anuradha,
Sravana, Poorvabhadra and Uttarabhadra

Female : Bharani, Krittika, Rohini, Aardra, Aaslesha, Makha,
Pubba, Uttara, Chitra, Swaathi, Vishakha, Jyeshta,
Poorvaashaada, Uttaraashada, Dhanista and
Revathi.

Neuter : Mrigashira, Moola, Shathabhisha.

This would be helpful in predicting the sex of the progeny, by
determining in which star constellation, the lord of the 5th house
is situated and in which rasi and the planet (Ududasa lord)
ruling that star (nakshatra). :

2) Gandantha nakshatras:

The nakshatras (asterisms) which commence with a rasi or
end with a rasi are known as gandantha nakshatras. They are:
Aswini (Mesha), Makha (Simha) and Moola (Dhanus) belonging
to the former category and Aaslesha (Karkataka), Jyestha
(Vrischika) and Revathi (Meena).

3) Sristi, Sthithi and Laya nakshatras:

The nakshatras are divided into groups of three serially and
the first nakshatras belongs to the Sristi group the second to
the Sthithi category and the third to the Laya or Samhara group.

SRISTI STHITHI LAYA

Ashwini Bharani Krittika
Rohini Mrigashira Aardra
Punarvasu Pushya Aaslesha

Makha
Hasta

Uttara
Swaathi

Pubba
Chitra

Vishaakha Anuradha Jyestha
Moola Poorvaashaada | Uttaraashaada
Sravana Dhanishta Shatabhisha
Poorvaabhaadra Uttaraabhaadra | Revathi

4) Durithamsa nakshatras:
The third and fourth quarters of Samhara nakshatras are known as
durithamsa and are believed to be unfavourable.

5) Abhukta Moola nakshatra:

The last ghati (24 minutes) of Jyeshta and the first two ghatis (48
minutes) of Moola are called Abhukta Moola. Children born during
that period are believed to bring misfortune to the father unless the
planets are propitiated by the performance of certain rites.

6) Adhomukha-nakshatras:

Bharani, Krittika, Aaslesha, Makha, Pubba, Vishaakha, Moola,
Poorvaashaadha and Poorvaabhaadra look downwards.

7) Vainasika nakshatra:

The 22nd nakshatra from one's birth nakshatra is known as the
vainasika nakshatra, which should be avoided for auspicious
events.

8) Tatthwas of Nakshatras:

Prithvi - Ashwini, Bharani, Krittika, Rohini,

Mrigashira

Jala - Aardra, Punarvasu, Pushya, Aaslesha,
Makha, Pubba

Tejo - Uttara, Hasta, Chitra, Swaathi, Vishaakha,
Anuradha

Vayu - Jyesta, Moola, Purvashaadha,
Uttaraashaadha, Sravana

Akasa - Dhanista, Shatabhisha, Poorvaabhaadra,

Uttaraabhaadra and Revathi.

When the planets and the nakshatras in which they are situated are
of the same tatthwa, their effects are unmodified; but if they belong
to dissimilar or conflicting tatthwas, their effects will be modified.
For example, if Buddha, who belongs to Prithvi (earth) tatthwa, is
situated in the 5th house and in Dhanista whichis of Akasa tatthwa,
his capacity for offering progeny is curtailed as prithvi and akasha
are diametrically opposed to each other. If Sukra, who belongs to
Jala tatthwa is the lord of the 7th house and is situated in the
nakshatra swaathi, which is of Tejo tatthwa, the native's chances of
conjugal happiness are blasted as water and fire are inimical toeach
other.

89

9) Nakshatras and the Directions:

Krittika, Rohini, Mrigashira - Central regions
Aardra, Punarvasu, Pushya - Easter regions
Aaslesha, Makha, Pubba - South-eastem regions
Uttara, Hasta, Chitra - Southern regions
Swaathi, Vishaakha, Anuradha - Southwest regions
Jyeshta, Moola, Poorvaashaada - Western regions

Uttaraashaada, Sravana, Dhanishta - North-western regions
Shathabhisha, Poorvaabhaadra

Uttaraabhaadra - Northern regions
Revathi, Ashwini, Bharani - Northeastern regions

The effects of planets at birth and in transit will occur in the regions
or areas indicated by the nakshatras in which they are situated, or
the rasis or the planets themselves, depending on which of the three
is most powerful - the planets, rasis or the nakshatras (or their

lords).
10) Nakshatras and their caste:

Krittika, Pubba, Poorvaashaada, Poorvaabhaadra - Brahmins

Pushya, Uttara, Uttaraashaada, Uttaraabhaadra = -_—“‘Kshatriyas
Ashwini, Punarvasu, Hasta, Abhijit - Vaishya
Rohini, Makha, Anuradha, Revathi - Sudras
Jyeshta, Mrigashira, Chitra, Dhanishta - Servant class
Aardra, Swaathi, Shathabhisha, Moola - Butchers
Bharani, Aaslesha, Visaakha, Sravana - Chandalas.

11) Nakshatras and their nature:

Rohini, Uttara, Uttaraashaada, Uttaraabhaadra are fixed. Sravana,
Dhanishta, Shathabhisha, Hasta, Swaathi are movable. Aardra,
Aslesha, Jyeshta, Moola are hot (thrisna). Bharani, Pubba,

90

Poorvashada, Makha, Poorvaabhaadra are ferocious. Aswini,
Pushya, Hasta are light (laghu). Mrigashira, Chitta, Anuradha,
Revathi are soft. Krittika, Vishaakha are soft and hot.

During the period of a planet situated in a particular star, effects will
be felt according to the above characteristics.

12) Nakshatras and the parts of the body that they rule.

Nakshatra Body part Nakshatra Body part
. Krittika Head 15, Anuraadha Stomach
2. Rohini Forchead 16. Jyeshta Right side
of trunk
3. Mrigashira Eye brows 17. Moola Left side
of trunk
4. Aardra Eyes 18. Poorvaashaada Back
5. Punarvasu Nose 19, Uttaraashaada Waist
6. Pushyami Face 20. Sravana Sex organs
7. Aaslesha Ears 21. Dhanishta Anus
8. Makha Lips and Chin 22. Shathaabhisha Right thigh
9. Pubba Right hand 23. Poorvaabhaadra Left thigh
10. Uttara Left hand 24. Uttaraabhaadra Shins
11. Hasta Fingers 25. Revathi Ankles
12. Chitra Neck 26. Ashwini Upper part
of feet
13. Swaathi Chest 27. Bharani Soles
14. Vishaakha Breasts

This information is useful in predicting the location and spreading
of disease. The lord of the 6th house indicates disease and his
placement in the Rasi Chakra and Navamsa Chakra would reveal
the locations of the disorder and how it is likely to spread.

GI

The following are the characteristics of those born when Chandra
transits the various nakshatras at the time of their birth. The effects
will fully come to pass only if the moon is powerful.

1. Ashwini:

The constellation known as Ashwini is of the shape of a horse's
head, composed of three stars and its
presiding deity is a man riding a horse,
The god is Ashwini devas, caste is Vaisya,
sex is male, Prithvi tatthwa, North re-
gions, upper part of the feet; is represented
by Garuda. The person born in this con-
stellation ‘will be fond of ornaments, will

be of fine appearance, will be popular, skilled in work and intelli-
gent.

atrat:
ea eargied fata: acamac werner
at faysreasiyds: eaeadisa Aaa

The person born in Ashwini is humble by nature, endowed with
capabilities and obtains all kinds of prosperity. He is fond of or-

naments and is made happy by his children
2. Bharani

The constellation of Bharani consists of three stars in a triangular
shape and its presiding deity is Yama. It
belongs to the Chandala caste, sex is
female, Prithvi tatthwa, North-eastregions,
soles of the feet; is represented by the
crow.

The person born in this constellation will

92

be successful at work, truthful, free from diseases, able and free

from grief.

TO:
germalfs fe Hear
arifasteed fadanres: |
cael fac aoe: GY RA
Ufo Uy Ae: i
The person born in Bharani becomes notorious and is condemned

by people; he spends his time in various kinds of pleasures, he is
particularly fond of water-sports and he is fickle-minded.

3. Krittika

The constellation of Krittikais in the form of a fire-flame consisting
of six stars and its presiding deity is Agni.
It belongs to the Brahmin Caste; itis a
female; of Prithvi tatthwa; Central region,
the body part is head and it is represented
by a peacock. The profession of those
born in this constellation has to do with
fire such as pottery, smithy, priests who

perform sacrificial rites etc.

The person born in Krittika ‘will be a glutton, fond of the wives of
other men, of bright appearance and of widespread fame.

apt erent
quit: acasaaetl
qucacaaaia: ae |
Heltah, UfsrHtad Fa
Ud Hae ATS: Wet!

93

The person born in Krittika is always hungry, devoid of truth and
wealth, wanders about aimlessly, is ungrateful, is harsh in speech
and indulges in deeds which are harmful to others.

4. Rohini

The constellation of Rohini is in the form of a fish, consisting of five
stars and its presiding deity is Brahma. It
belongs to the Sudra caste; it is a female;
itis of Prithwi tathwa; central region; the
body part is the forehead. Persons born in
Rohini will be wealthy, devout, will pos-
sess cattle and wealth derived from moun-
tain produce; yogis, rulers or farmers.

The person born in this constellation 'will be truthful, will not covet
the property of other men, will be of clean habits, of sweet speech,
of firm views and of fine appearance.’

Ctevtt

euetardt pu: Hela:
gqaedel facrscactar:
equa loranfiacsral

a ofecia: @ att a ae

The person born inRohiniis skilled in the performance of virtuous
deeds, well-mannered; well-proportioned in body and is impres-
sive in appearance. He is highly passionate and amorous, he is
wealthy and proud.

5. Mrigashira

The constellation of Mrigashira is in the form of a cat's foot,
consisting of three stars and its presiding deity is Chandra. It

94

belongs 0 the servant class, Wisa eunuch; The person born in Aardra ‘will be insincere, of irascible temper
of Prithvi tatthwa; central region; the body ungrateful, indulge in torture and be addicted to wicked deeds.
part is eyebrows and 1s represented by ‘
quadrupeds. The professions are: perform- aust

ers of yagas, revered men, writers, paint- geal ara wee aid:
; a ers and singers; they will be fond of per- afefua: alagd fala: |
fumes, dresses, ornaments, fruits and flowers, precious stones, wild walcanrel a ae fecal
beasts, birds and deer. aq aedar: sreomeastaii

The person born in Aardra has an excessive appetite; has a
reddish complexion; he is fond of quarrel; is short-tempered; he
is disobedient; he will not forgive even if he is entreated.

The person born in this constellation ‘will be of firm principles, will
be able, timid, of good speech, of active habits, rich and willindulge

in sexual pleasures.

Anes: 7. Punarvasu

oearaeal fae: The constellation of Punarvasu is in the form of a bow, consisting

werent Afra gery
ATFIEAS AT. WUT:
eatadl rssgar mi

The person bornin Mrigashira is interested in archery; is humble
and affectionate, is well-mannered and devout; he is virtuous in
conduct.

6. Aardra

The constellation of Aardra is like a lotus or a gem consisting of a

single bright star and its presiding deity is
Siva or Rudra. It belongs to the butcher
caste; it is a female; of Jala tatthwa; east-
ern regions; the body part is eyes and it is
represented by whole grains. Those born
in this constellation will be oil-mongers,

washermen, thieves, people practising blackmagic, cruel and evil-

minded

of five stars and its presiding deity is Aditi.
It belongs to the Vaisya caste; it is a male;
of Jala tatthwa; eastern regions; the body
part is nose. People born in this constella-
tion will be truthful, generous, respect-
able, clean, wealthy, concerned with per-
sonal beauty and fond of the company of

painters and sculptors.

wag:
Ueda: HawMesaaet: |
ARH GC YGOTSE: |
aa yar agefeost:
Gada weg aerate: |
The person born in Punarvasu has many friends; he loves to study

the scriptures; he is fond of jewels and fine garments; he is
generous and bold and he is honoured by people

96

8. Pushya

The constellation of Pushyami is in the form of an arrow, with a

single star and its presiding deity is Brihas-
pati. It belongs to the Kshatriya Caste, itis
male of Jala tatthwa; Eastern regions; the
body part is face and is represented by the
peepal tree (Asvaththa). People born in
; this constellation will be ministers or rul-
ers, sadhus, traders dealing in wet crops like rice, sugarcane, wheat,
barley etc. They are fond of singing and dancing, parties, perform-
ance of rituals and flowers.

The person born in Pushya ‘will have control over his desires, will
be generally liked, learned in the Sastras, rich and will be fond of

acts of charity.’

yee: (ferer:)
eaudgl feast: |
yop: Gy Gea
Seu al tare sree ||

The person who is born in Pushya is fortunate; pleasant in
appearance, devoted to his parents; dutiful and well-mannered,

he gets honoured and possesses fine vehicles and wealth.

9. Aaslesha

The constellation of Aaslesha is like a discus or wheel consisting
of six stars and the presiding deity is a Serpent (Rahu). It belongs
to the Chandala caste; it is a female; of Jala tatthwa, South-eastern
region; the body part is ears and is represented by serpents, water
creatures and reptiles. The persons born in this constellation

97

practice medicine, cheat others of their
property and are fond of fruits and per-
fumes.

The person born in Aaslesha ‘will not be
attentive to the work of other men, will be
a promiscuous eater, will be sinful, un-
grateful and skilled in cheating other men.’

pocuevaly get SA

ad def fe watered:

HRUaAT AAS: I

The person born in Aaslesha wanders about aimlessly; has an

excessively wicked mind, he gives trouble to people without
reason, he is arrogant and self-willed.

10. Makha

The constellation of Makha is in the form of a plough, consisting
of five stars and the presiding deity is the
Pithru deva or the ancestral spirits (manes).
It belongs to the Sudra caste; itis a female;
of Jala tatthwa, south-eastern regions, the
body parts are lips and chin and is repre-
sented by the banyan tree. People born in
this constellation will be devoted to filial
duty, religious rites, possess horses and elephants, will be valiant
and wealthy, will hate females and are non-vegetarian.

The person born in Makha ‘will have numerous servants, will be
very rich, will live in comfort, will worship the Devas and Pitrus
and will be engaged in important works.

D8

aaitad: fgHiganh:
daca wideastaaad: |

sory Ge Fee: Fa-
afd: aenifafaarere al |

The person born in Magha (makha) is hard-hearted but takes
good care of his parents. His feelings are intense and he has alove
of learning. He is capable of much harm.

11. Pubba

The constellation of Purvaaphalguni is in the form of a cot, consist-
ing of two stars and its presiding deity is
Bhaga. It belongs to the brahmin caste; it
isa female; of Jala tatthwa; South-eastern
regions; the body part is the right hand is
represented by the jackfruit tree. People
born in this constellation will be virgins,

prostitutes, will be fond of dance, music,
painting. sculpture, fond of enjoying the pleasures of youth, have
to do with cotton, salt, honey and oil.

The people born in Pubba ‘will be of sweet speech, will be liberal
intheir gifts, of fine appearance; of wandering habits and will serve

under kings.’

yetew equi
geo areat yfaral
aaehrd: Cafeouels free: |
qd. gas Utara: WTA,
PERASAAHI TTT!

99

The person born in Purvaaphalguni (Pubba) is brave, generous,
adventurous and wealthy; he is short tempered, cruel and crafty

but efficient. He suffers from excessive wind (vaata).

12. Uttara

The constellation of Uttaraaphalguni is in the form of a bedstead
(cot) with two stars and its presiding deity
is Aryama. It belongs to the Kshatriya
caste; it is a female; it is of Tejo tatthwa;
Southern region; its body part is the left
hand and it is represented by the __ ficus
tree (Atti). The people born in this constel-
lation are chaste women, ascetics, kings,
dancers and heretics; they will be clean, modest, generous, learned,

virtuous and wealthy. They will be in the company of princes; the
articles associated with them are grains, jaggery, salt and water.

The person born in Uttara ‘will be generally liked; will earn money
by his learning and will live in comfort.

TUUH ST

aa carey: FAS -YPileit
fase: Gaia: Wer: |
ay ws ad yeraa-
vag Heya walt:

The person born in Uttaraaphalguni is generous, compassionate,
affectionate towards his family and relatives; he has a good
reputation, is good-natured, soft but brave.

13. Hasta

The constellation of Hasta is in the form of a hand consisting of five
stars and its presiding deity is Savitha (sun). It belongs to the Vaisya

100

caste; itis a male; of Tejo tatthwa; South-
ernregion; the body part is the fingers and
it is represented by the ficus tree (Atti).
The people born in this constellation will
be well-diggers, barbers, hillmen, thieves,

weavers, physicians, garland makers,
elephant keepers, prostitutes, charioteers, merchant, chief minister,

learned in sastras and bright in appearance.

The person born in Hasta ‘will be of active habits, full of resources,
shameless, merciless and a thief and a drunkard.

zen
eral ugieadl Gai Hae
qeaqearapayy: |
Uafdael fet Ge Se
SeMeaT TY TAETAET |

The Person who is born in Hasta is generous, celebrated and self
willed. He serves Kings and gods, but not inclined towards fire-
rituals (yagnas). [le acquires wealth without exertion.

14. Chitra

The constellation of Chitra is like a pearl, with a single bright star
and its presiding deity is Viswakarma. It
belongs to the servant class; it isa female;
it is of Tejo tatthwa; Southern region; its
body part is the neck and it is represented
by the bilva tree. The people born in this

constellation are writers, singers, artists,

painters, prostitutes, vedic scholars, gold merchants, dealers in

101

precious stones, jewels, utensils, fine clothes, manufacturers of
perfumes, mathematicians, weavers and surgeons.

The person born in Chitra ‘will wear clothes and flowers of various
colours and will have beautiful eyes and limbs.’

fart
WaT aa aTAT a
eal qa amy fataaarer: |
uuldatel afe cea faa
gafahaa wea aes Bes

The person born in Chitra (chitta) is capable of overcoming his
enemies by his valour; he is efficient and diplomatic. He loves to
dress in a variety of ways and he has a versatile mind.

15. Swaathi

The constellation of Swaathi is red like kumkum, consisting of a
single star and its presiding deity is Vayu.
It belongs to the butcher caste; it is a
female; of Tejo tatthwa; South-west re-
gion; its body part is chest. The people
born in this constellation are servants,

merchants, boatmen, reporters, messen-
gers, charioteers, mariners, dancers and
skilled tradesmen. Thev will have weak freindships and are temper-
ate in habits; they are associated with birds, deer, house, grains and
beans.

The person born in Swaathi ‘will be of a mild and quiet nature, will
control his passion, will be skilled in trade, will be merciful, of

sweet speech and disposed to do acts of charity.’

102

paueqqual aad:
erate: weafayirant: |

The person born in Swaathi has an attractive appearance. He is
a favourite among women. He is very intelligent and has many

attainments to his credit.

16. Vishaakha

The constellation of Vishaakha is like a torana (festoon) consisting
of four stars and its presiding deities are
Indra and Agni. It belongs to the chandala
caste; it is a female; of Tejo tatthwa;
South-west region; its body part is the
breast. People born in this constellation
are associated with things which are bright

red or crimson; trees yielding red flowers
or red fruits; the other articles are cotton, ginger, black gram, beans,
chicken-peas and saffron.

The person born in Vishaakha ‘will be jealous of another's property,
will be a niggard, of bright appearance, of distinct speech, skilled
in earning money and disposed to bring about quarrels among men.

Tayrat
qalrqenl fafaateoarat
qaularey Beale
ea veel Uy srafgeral
wal a Heaty wacwaa: i

103

The person born in Vishaakha is interested in doing many things.
He is befriended even by goldsmiths; but he can not be a good
friend to anyone. (Ile is not trustworthy).

17. Anuraadha

The constellation of Anuraadha is in the form of a serpent, com-
posed of seven stars and its presiding deity
is Mitra. It belongs to the Sudra caste; it is
male; of Tejo tatthwa, South-west region;
its body part is stomach. The people born
in this constellation are friendly, valiant,

fond of the company of sadhus, heads of
parties, ministers and drivers; things asso-
ciated with them are vehicles and all types of crops.

The person born in Anuraadha ‘will be rich, will live in foreign
lands, will be unable to bear hunger and disposed to wander from
place to place.’

ATTA

qealt aidga aelcda: SI-
wot Rego a Heuser: |
eared yey frergquel

dues) fafael yaar

The person born in Anuraadha is a celebrity and is always in a
festive mood. He overcomes his enemies and he is talented in fine
arts. He is deeply and differently affected by prosperity and

calamity.

18. Jyeshta

The constellation of Jyeshta is in the form of a boar's tusk or acircle,
consisting of three stars and its presiding deity is Indra. It belongs

104

to the servant class; it is female; of Vayu
tatthwa; Western region; its body part is
the right side of the trunk and it is repre-
sented by the jack-fruit tree. The people
born in this constellation are rulers, val-
iant soldiers, beautiful, wealthy and fa-
mous; they are disposed to cheat others of their property, they are
fond of travel and are associated with crops and rain.

The person born in Jyeshta ‘will have few friends, will be very
cheerful, virtuous and of irascible temper.’

FAST
aeatd gafafaa: aad

fartladls aaa: |

Aesulasal faaeeaarat

wat HATE TY GATATeH ||

The person born in Jyeshta is blessed with fame and good

progeny; he is wealthy; his bravery and courage are evident. He
has a status in life but his character is defective.

19. Moola

The constellation of Moola is in the form of the tail of a lion,

composed of nine stars and its presiding
deity is Nirrti. It belongs to the butcher
caste; it is a eunuch; of Vayu tatthwa;
Western regions; its body part is the left
side of the trunk. The people born in this
constellation are druggists, those who deal
in medicinal plants and herbs, leaders of
men and soldiers. They are rich and are associated with gardens,

105

fruits, flowers, roots and seeds.

The person born in Moola ‘will be haughty, rich, happy, not

disposed to injure other men, of firm views and will live in luxury.

Act:

Yel faesragd aye

pea eecda dela at:
dead: your faslard,
arenas Porgaes: ||

The person born in Moola, although believed to bring misfortune
to his family, is actually a benefactor to his family. He is prosper-
ous and longlived.

20. Poorvaashaada

The constellation of Poorvaashaada is in the form of a winnow-
basket or an elephant’s tusk, consisting of
four stars and the presiding deity is Varuna.
It belongs to the brahmin caste; it is fe-
male; of Vayu tatthwa; Western region;
its body part is the back and it is repre-
sented by the Banni tree. The people born

in this constellation are gentle, truthful,
wealthy, clean and are associated with water in various ways; sea-
farers, boat-men, fruits and flowers growing in water, rivers, wet

fields, wells and so on.

The person born in Poorvaashaada ‘will have an agreeable wife,
will be proud and attached to friends.’

106

yatarat
Wa YORAM
an ea aayparnsfiee: |
yature: setae afe ea
aie: eaehat Parra |

The person born in Poorvaashaada likes people who praise him
repeatedly. He is devoted to God, honoured among relatives and

he is very efficient. He is a terror to his enemies.

21. Uttaraashaada

The constellation of Uttaraashaada is in the form of a serpent,
consisting of four stars or in the form of an
elephant's tusk composed of eight stars
and its presiding deity is Viswa. It belongs
to the Kshatriya caste; it is female; of
Vayu tatthwa; of North-west region; its
body part is the waist and it is represented
by the jack-fruit tree. The people born in

this constellation are bright in appearance, happy, principled,
religious; They are: chief minister, wrestler, soldier or one who
possesses elephants and horses.

The persons born in Uttaraashaada will be obedient, will be learned
in the rules of virtue, will possess many friends, will be grateful and
return favours received and will be generally liked.’

TATATT
alt Cura ferry fata:
aeadoa fad: aha: |

107

The person born in Uttaraashaadha is generous, compassionate,
successful, and humble. [le is inclined towards doing good deeds.
He is bestowed with all good things in life. He is happy with his
wife and children.

22. Sravana

The constellation of Sravana is in the form of an arrow composed
of three stars and its presiding deity is
Vishnu. [t belongs to the Chandala caste;
itis male; it is of Vayu tatthwa; of North-
west region; its body part is sexual organs
and it is represented by the Calitropis

plant (Ekka). The people born in this
constellation are bold, virtuous, god-fear-
ing, truthful, of active habits, efficient in their work; they are public

officials, priests or physicians.

The person born in Sravana ‘will be prosperous and learned, will
have a liberal-minded wife, will be rich and of wide-spread fame.’

AAT

Meayonl aegatha:

acgaufepfatsranttar: |

Usotaie sau fe wes

Ar Guorsraey Gaur: 11

The person born in Sravana is interested in scriptures; he has

numerous friends and many children. His sons are good and
devoted to him and he conquers his enemies. He likes listening to

puranas and he is accomplished.

108

23. Dhanishta

The constellation of Dhanishta is in the form of a drum (mardala),
made up of five stars and its presiding
deity is Asta- Vasu. It belongs to the serv-
ing class; itis female; of Akasa tatthwa; of
north-west region; its body part is the
anus; and it is represented by the Banni

tree. The people born in this constellation
are rich, generous, free from temptations,
women-haters, heretics, have weak friendships; are treasury offi-
cers.

The person born in Dhanishta ‘will be liberal in gifts, rich, valiant,
fond of music and will be a niggard.'

attest
STAM CATE Met
waned Gear Sarg: |
ued Yad) a wag afasal
Heculasarafedl 4x: Rare

The person born in Dhanishta is respected for his good conduct;
he is very wealthy and strong; he is merciful and he acquires high

StAUUS.

24. Sathabhisha

The constellation of Sathabhishak or
Sathabhisha is in the form of a circle,
comprising a hundred stars and its presid-
ing deity is Varuna. It belongs to the
butcher caste; it is a eunuch; of Akasha

tatthwa; of northern region; its body part

109

is the right thigh. The people born in this constellation are physi-
clan, poets, minister, tradesman, washerman, dealer in liquors and
wine and are associated with fish, hogs and birds.

The person born in Sathabhisha ‘will be harsh in his speech, will be
truthful, will suffer grief, will conquer his enemies, will thought-
lessly engage in work and will be of independent ways.’

water (eratren)
waiataaedt Fer
fog fé aqy ad wag
- Aftorafagaa erect
qroulgy Ue wea aay

The person born in Sathabhisha is always excessively adventur-
ous, he is blunt in his speech and clever, Le ts extemely cruel to

his enemies.

25. Poorvaabhaadra (pada)

The constellation of Poorvaabhaadra is in the form of acot, consist-
ing of two stars and its presiding deity is
Ajapada (Ajaikapada), It belongs to the
brahmin caste; it is male; of Akasha tat-
thwa; of northern region; its body part is
the left thigh and it is represented by a
coconut tree. The people born in this

constellation are shepherds and thieves,
wicked, mean, cruel, deceitful; they neglect religious rites and are
vood in fighting.

ihe person born in Poorvaabhaadra ‘will suffer from grief, will
place his wealth at the disposal of his wife, will be of distinct speech
and will be a niggard.’

110

yderacar (aiesaaq)
fdfaa: adaenrg cai
faatca: aq dea facaq)
wader Ed saga
gal wel aeyel weet

The person born in Poorvaabhaadrapada is self-restrained, he is
accomplished in all arts. He wins over his opponents and attains

unpecedented status in life.

26. Uttaraabhaadra (pada)

The constellation of Uttaraabhaadrapada which is also called
Praushthapada is in the form of a bedstead
(paryanka) composed of eight stars and its
presiding deity is Ahirbudhnya. It belongs
to the Kshatriya caste; it is male; of Aka-
sha tatthwa; northern region; its body part
is the shins. The people born in this con-

stellation are dancers, travellers, rulers,
dealers in rice, fruits and roots, gold; they are rich, generous, devout
and follow the rules of the holy scriptures.

The person born in Uttaraabhaadra ‘will be an able speaker, will be
happy, will possess children and grandchildren, will conquer his
enemies and will be virtuous.’

SACMTETT
HUSH Gera else: |
acHdcna freezer}
Use Te) WAC: I

The person born in Uttaraabhaadrapada is wealthy, well-born,
skilled in performance. Ie is honoured by kings, he is strong and
full of lustre. He likes to do good deeds and is attached to his
family.

27. Revathi

The constellation of Revathi is in the form of a fish, consisting of
thirty-two stars and its presiding deity is
Pusha (an aspect of the Sunlike Bhaga and
Aryama). It belongs to the Sudra Caste; it
is a female; of Akasha tatthwa; of North-
eastern region; its body part is ankles and
it is represented by the Indian Olive tree
(Ippe). The people born in this constella-
tion are travellers, servants of the rulers (government servants),
boatmen and those who are associated with water flowers, per-
fumes, salt, gems, conch-shells, pearls and creatures of water.

The person born in Revathi'will possess perfect limbs, will be liked
by all people, valiant in fight, will never covet the property of other
men and will be rich.’

tadt
aesictaual fadiaa:
Reha: CANSGTHAG |
AMA ay veaelaedl
tad wafa er aaTsTAI

The person born in Revathi is reputed for his good conduct and
self-restraint. He is born in a good family and is singularly
attached to it. Le will live like a king.

It is believed that birth in certain nakshatras would cause mis-

fotunes to the person himself or to his close relatives unless the
devas are propitiated by rituals and suitable offerings are made. But

mere birth in these nakshatras cannot be the sole factor; the

horoscope as a whole has to be assessed for any untoward happen-
ing. For example: if Guru is in the lagna or is aspecting it, it will

cancel the ill-effects of the nakshatra. The following is a list of

nakshatra gandas.

I.

Cs

6.

Ashwini

Bharani
Rohini

Pushya

Aaslesha

Ist quarter (pada) - bad to father for 3 montis
Shanti (propitiation) - gift offering of goid.
3rd quarter - bad for the baby for 27 days.

Ist quarter - bad for maternal uncle.

2nd quarter - bad for father

3rd quarter - bad for mother

4th quarter - good for al!

Birth of boy during day time - bad for father.
Birth of girl during night - bad tor mother
Ist quarter - bad for maternal uncis
Middle of 2nd quarter - bad for materna!
uncle for 3 months

Shanti - gift of sandaiwood,

Ist quarter - auspicious

2nd quarter - bad for the baby

3rd quarter - bad for mother

4th quarter - bad For rather.

Shanti - offering of food.

Two ghatis (48 minutes) during the end of Aasiesha and the

beginning of Makha and during the end of Revathi and the

beginning of Ashwini are considered to be inauspicious.

Shanti - propitiation of the nine planets.

7. Makha

8. Uttara

9. Chitra

10. Jyeshta

Jyeshta

1st quarter - bad for father for 5 months.
Shanti - gift offering of a horse.

Ist and 4th quarter - bad for parents and
siblings for 3 months.
Shanti - gift of sesame seeds in a vessel.

Ist, 2nd and 3rd quarters - bad for parents and
siblings for 6 months.

Shanti - gift of clothes.

It is divided into ten equal parts.

Ist part - bad for maternal grandmother.
2nd part - bad for matenal grandfather.

3rd part - bad for parents and mother's siblings
Ath part - bad for siblings

5th part - bad for the baby

6th part - auspicious

7th part - bad for the wife

8th part - bad for the baby

Oth part - bad for the father

10th part - bad for the mother.

4th quarter - bad for father for 9 months
Shanti - gift of cow

11. The interval of 1/2 ghati (12 minutes) covering the last part
of Jyeshta and the first portion of Moola is known as Anthar-
ala. If a boy is born during this period, it is bad for the baby.
If a girl is born, there 1s no dosha (ill-effect).

12. Moola

It is divided into 12 equal parts and the
following relatives and matters will be
affected adversely.

1) Father 2) Mother 3) Brother 4) Sister

114

5) Father-in-law 6) Father's siblings (co-borns) Dharma, Karma, Laabha and Vyaya. Sage Parasara gives the

7) Mother's siblings 8) Financial loss following interpretation for the various bhavas.

9) Loss of living 10) Poverty 11) and

12) bad for the native. 1. First House - Physique, appearance, intellect (or the
These bad effects last for 3 months. organ of intelligence i.e., the brain),

Lo, complexion, vigour or weakness, hap-
Shanti - gift of buffalo. , P . 6 . P
piness or grief and innate nature are all

Moola - Ist quarter - bad for fath
q ad tor rather to be judged by the ascending sign.
2nd quarter - bad for mother
3rd quarter - loss of money 2. Second House - Wealth, grains (food and drink), fam-
4th quarter - good for all. ily, death, enemies, metals, precious

stones etc., are to be assessed by the

13. Poorvaashaada - a) A boy born in day time is bad for second house

father

b) A boy born at sunrise, sunset or 3. Third House - Valour, servants, brothers and sisters,
midnight in Poorvaashaada or initiation (upadesa), journey and par-
Pushyami will be adversely affected. ent's death can be predicted through the
¢c) A child born in Poorvaashaada and third house

ne will cause misfortune to its 4. Fourth House - Conveyances, relatives, mother, hap-
ather.

; piness, treasure, lands and houses are
14. Revathi - 4th quarter - bad for father for 3 months indicated by the fourth house.
Shanti - gift of gold.

§. Fifth House - Amulets, sacred spells, learning, knowl-
Bhavas and their significance edge, sons, royalty (or authority) or fall
of positiori can be deduced by the fifth

The twelve zodiacal signs or rasis are also called houses or Bhavas house.
and are counted serially from the lagna or the ascendant in the 6. Sixth House - Maternal uncle, doubts about death,
clockwise direction. The sign rising at the horizon at the moment enemies, ulcers, step-mother etc., are
of birth is called the lagna which is reckoned as the first house. to be estimated through the sixth house.

Suppose it falls in the Simha rasi, it is counted he firs ave

; as the first bhava, 7. Seventh House - Wife, travel, trade, loss of sight, death

Kanya becomes the 2nd bhava, Thula the 3rd and soon. Each bhava
signifies an aspect of one's life and is given an appropriate name
suchas Thanu, Dhana, Sahaja, Bandhu, Putra, Ari, Yuvati, Randhra,

are to be worked out on the basis of the
seventh house.

115 : 116

10.

11.

12.

The twelve houses or

Eighth House

Ninth House

Tenth House

Eleventh House

Twelth House

groups such as:

l
2
3
4.
5
6
7

The eighth house reveals longevity,
quarrels, enemies, forts, wealth
through inheritance, the past and
future lives.

Fortunes, wife's brother, father, relig-
ion, brother's wife, visits to shrines
etc., are indicated by the ninth house.

Royalty (or authority), place, profes-
sion, honour, father, living in foreign
lands and debts are to be deduced from
the tenth house.

All gains, son's wife, income, prosper-
ity, quadrupeds etc., are signified by
the eleventh house.

Expenses, history of enemies, one's
own death and emancipation can be
found out through the twelth house.

bhavas are classified into various

. Kendras or angles: Ascendant, 4th, 7th and 10th houses.
. Panaparas or Succedents: 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th houses.
. Apoklimas or Cadents: 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th houses.
Trikonas or trines: 5th and 9th houses.

. Trikas or evil houses: 6th, 8th and 12th houses.

. Chaturasras: 4th and 8th houses

. Upachayas: 3rd, 6th 10th and 11th houses.

The 3rd house is known as Duschikya, The 5th house is called
Trikona, the 9th house is known as Tapas and TriTrikona. The

117

kendra houses are naturally powerful, the panapara houses are less
powerful than the kendras and the apoklima houses are the least
powerful. According to Varahamihira, out of the 4 kendras, the
biped or dvipada rasis are powerful in the Ist kendra i.e. the lagna,
the quadruped or chatushpada rasis are powerful if they happen to
be the 10th kendra, the centiped or bahupada rasi if it is the 7th
kendra and the aquatic or jala rasis if they are the 4th Kendra. The
house next to the one occupied by Ravi is known as Vesi.

For each Bhava, there is a Karaka or a planet who bestows the
effects of that house:

Thanu bhava - Isthouse - Ravi

Dhana bhava - 2ndhouse - Guru

Sahaja bhava - 3rdhouse - Kuja

Bandhu or Mathru

bhava - 4thhouse - Chandra

Putra bhava - S5thhouse - Guru (Guru, Ravi for

Sons, Chandra, Sukra
for daughters)

Satru bhava - 6thhouse - Sani
Kalatrabhava - 7thhouse -  Sukra

Randhra or

Ayurbhava - $8thhouse - Sani

Pitrubhava or

Dharmabhava - 9thhouse - Ravi

Karma bhava - 10th house - Guru and Budha
Laabha bhava - |lthhouse - Guru

Vyaya bhava - 1]2thhouse - — Sani.

For maternal relations Rahu is the karaka and for paternal relations
Ketu is the karaka.

CHAPTER V

A concept which is unique to the Hindu predictive astrology is the
Dasa system which is concerned with the timing of events. There
are many dasa systems like Vimshottari, Ashtottari, Shodasottart,
Dwadasottari and so on but the system which is most widely
followed ts the Vimshottari dasa system.

Vimshottari dasa system:

According to this system. the optimum life span of a human being
in the Kaliyuga is 120 years. This has been divided into nine
periods of varying lengths called dasas, each dasa being ruled by
a planet. The basis for this classification is the concept that the 27
nakshatras or star constellations are governed by the nine planets.
The nakshatra in which the moon is posited at the time of birth
determines the first dasa, which is that of the planet ruling that

ee = = = = = = ee
NO. NAKSHATRAS DASA LORD DASA PERIOD
+ = 4
| Krittika, Uttaraphalyuni, Ultarashada Ravi 6 years
jo so
2 Rohini, Hasta, Sravana Chandra LO years
\ ~T ~
3 Mrigashira, Chitta, Dhanishta Kuja 7 years
| +. ~ a a _
4 Aridra, Swathi, Shatabhisha Rahu 18 years
4. { _
| 5 Punarvasu, Visakha, Poorvabhadra Guru 16 vears :
| Ft t
6 Pushyami, Anuradha, Uttarabhadra Sani 19 years |
7 Aslesha, Jyeshta, Revathi | Budha 7 years |
4 4 4
8 Makha, Moola, Aswini Ketu T years i
+ - 4
9 Poorvaphalguni, Poorvashada, Bharani Sukra 20) years
119

nakshatra which is called the Janma Nakshatra . The planet is
known as the Udu dasa lord. The dasas follow each other in a
definite order. The table below gives the details of the Vimshottari
scheme.

To find the Udu dasa lord, the nakshatras are counted from
Krittika to the Janma nakshatra and when this is divided by nine,
the remainder will indicate the lord of the first dasa, the order
being Ravi, Chandra, Kuja, Rahu, Guru, Sani, Budha, Ketu and
Sukra. For a detailed assessment and prediction, each dasa 1s
further divided into Antara dasas and Pratyantara dasas. The
planets are said to offer their effects during their major dasas and
in their antara dasas and pratyantara dasas according to their
positions and strength in the horoscope.

Ashtottari dasa system:

This system is followed in certain parts of the country. There are
only eight dasas in this system, Ketu being left out. It covers a

NO. | NAKSHATRAS | DASA LORD DASA PERIOD
H+ . a
1 Ardra, Punarvasu, Pushyami, Ravi, Ravi | 6 years
Aslesha ‘
2 Makha, Poorvaphalguni, Uttaraphalguni Chandra {5 years
3 Hasta, Chitta, Swathi, Visakha Kuja | 8 years
—_ ——}— _———
4 Anuradha, Jyeshta, Moola Budha 17 years
—_ ++ 4
5 Pooravashada, Uttarashada, Abhijit, Sani 10 years
i | Sravana L
— _
6 Dhanishta, Shatabhisha, Poorvabhadra Guru 19 years
J —————— . ee T +—__- ~4
7 Uttarabhasdra, Revathi, Aswini, Bharani Rahu 12 years

— —_——— —
8 Krittika, Roni, Mrigashira Sukra 21 years

120

total span of 108 years. The order of the dasas is also different.
The malefic planets namely Ravi, Kuja, Sani and Rahu govern
four nakshrtras each whereas the benefic planets like Chandra,
Budha, Guru and Sukra rule three nakshatras each. One more
nakshatra called Abhijit has been added to the list after
Uttarashada and before Sravana. The table below gives the details.

In the Vimshottari system, the dasa period of a planet covers the
span of each nakshatra ruled by it. In the Ashtottari system, on the
other hand, the dasa period is divided equally between the
nakshatras governed by the planet. For example, there are four
nakshatras which are ruled by Ravi. Each one of them spans 4 of
the dasa period allotted to Ravi. If a person is born in Aslesha, 4
4 years of Ravi dasa are considered to be over and Aslesha covers
only the last 1 % years of Ravi dasa. The expired period out of
11% years is calculated in the same manner as in the Vimshottari
system i.e. the portion of the nakshatra which has been transitted
by the moon at the time of birth.

The construction of a Horoscope:

The term horoscope is derived from two Greek words -‘hora’
which means an ‘hour’ and ‘scope’ which means a ‘vision’ or
‘picture’; horoscope literally means the ‘picture of the hour’. In
Sanskrit a horoscope is called the
‘Rasi chakra’, which literally

means the “zodiacal wheel’. Rasi
means a ‘heap’ and refers to a
configuration of stars or a
‘zodiacal sign’ and chakra means
a wheel. The representation of a

horoscope varies from region to

North Indian model region in India; there are circular

and rectangular diagrams, the

121

latter variety being more common. The north Indian model differs
from the south Indian, although both are rectangular in shape.

In the former, the position of the ascendant or ‘Lagna’ is fixed; it
occupies the upper middle enclosure. The rasis are denoted by
their numberes, counted serially from Mesha and they are placed
sequentially in an anticlockwise direction from the lagna. Each
enclosure represents an entire rasi consisting of 30 ° of the zodiac.

in the South Indian model, the positions of the rasis are fixed; the
first rasi, Mesha, always occupying the second upper enclosure
and the rest sequentially placed in a clockwise fashion.

| The lagna is indicated by a

| Meena | Mesha | Vrishabha}| Mithuna | diagonal line in the appropriate

pf} _1-__+ rasi. The details of the position

{
( \ { - . .
iKarkaaka| Of Planets in their — star

i Kumbha ,

—— ____.__| constellations, Nakshatras, are
i Makara | | Simha | given separately.
rome mare === The essential details required
Dranus | Vrishehike | Thoia | kanya to construct a horoscope (and
Leet ened {O Interpret it) are the date, the

exact ume, and tne piace of birth, the time Of sun rise and the day

f the week The thith! ie. the relative position of the moon from
the sun, tng vows, Karana and the star consteliation in which the
moon is weated Would be the addidional information which woul:
be useful. The fixing of the ‘Lagna’ is the most important first ste)
in the casting of a Aoroscope. There are different methods fo
doing this. The conventionai one 1s to refer to the ‘Panchanga’ ©
the almanae for the astronomical details. The other method Is to
refer to the Ephemeris for the exact position of the planets. The

122

most modern procedure is to use a computer which has been
programmed to give all the relevent astronomical data.

The Panchanga Method:

The Indian almanac is known as the ‘Panchanga’ which means
‘having five limbs’ because it gives information regarding five
basic categories such as the thithi (phase of the moon), vara (day
of the week), nakshatra (the star constellation through which the
moon is passing), yoga and karana. In addition it gives tables for
the correction of the time of sunrise for various longitudes, the
time taken by the sun to traverse each rasi, the navamsa chart, the
shadvarga chart, the sayana positions of the planets, based on
drigganitha (astronomical data) etc. But basically the day te day
information given is according to the siddhantas which are
outmoded and inaccurate. Unless proper corrections are made
according to drigganitha taking into account the ayanamsa for the
year, the calculations are bound to prove incorrect. Nevertheless,
the conventional procedure for preparing a horoscope is given
below:

1, Note the time of sun rise for the place of birth or a place
negrest to its longitude, making the appropriate corrections
given in the panchanga. The difference between the time of
birth and the tire of sunrise should then be calculated and
this should be converted into ghatis and vighatis by
multiplying the hours and minutes by 2.5 because there are
24 hours in a day, which are equivalent to 60 ghatis
(24X2.5=60). If the birth is at night, add 24 hours to the
birth time and subtract the time of sunrise and then convert
it into ghatis and vighatis.

123

2)

3)

4

A

See

)

Note the rasi in which sunrise occurred and the exact
position of the sun in that rasi at the moment of sunrise.
This can be ascertained by the table giving the duration of
time (in hours and minutes) the sun will take, after sunrise,
to reach the next rasi. This should also be converted to
ghatis and vighatis.

The position of the sign rising at the horizon at the time of
birth, which is known as the Lagna of the native, has to be
calculated by referring to the table giving the apparent time
the sun takes to traverse each of the rasis. By noting the
rasi in which sunrise took place on the day of the birth of
the native and calculating the number of rasis which have
moved up the horizon till the moment of birth will reveal
the exact position of the rasi rising at the horizon. This is
called the lagna. The lagna sputa i.e. the fixing of the
position of the lagna with reference to the rasi and the
nakshatra pada is the most important part of the casting of
the horoscope.

The position of the other planets on the day of the birth will
be given in the panchanga. The nakshatra for the day gives
the position of the moon. It denotes the star constellation in
which the moon is situated. itis called the ‘Janma
nakshatra’. All the above details have to be filled in the
birth chart.

After fixing the lagna, the next important step is to find out
the Dasa balance. Each nakshatra is ruled by a graha (a
planet) and the planet which rules the janma nakshatra is
known as the Udu dasa lord. It is he who governs the first
phase of one’s life span. The moon passes through each

124

star constellation (nakshatra) for a certain duration of time
which is approximately equivalent to 24 hours or 60 ghatis.
But the actual time taken by the moon to cross the janma
nakshatra has to be calculated accurately by referring to the
panchanga. The lunar day does not always coincide with
the solar day; in fact it rarely does. The span of a nakshatra
therefore, usually overlaps the night of the previous day

+

and a part of the day of the birth or vice versa. The total
span is called ‘parama ghati’. The proportion of time the
moon would require to cross the star constellation from the
moment of birth in relation to the total span of time the
moon would require to cross the entire constellation
multiplied by the number of years allotted to the Udu dasa
lord is known as the dasa sesha or the balance of time at the
disposal of the planet who rules the janma nakshatra.

The ephemeris method

The positions of the Sun, moon and the planets at the specified
time are given in the ephemeris for each day. Raphel gives Sayana
positions at noon G.M.T which is equivalent to 5.30 p.m. L.S.7T,
Lahiri gives the Nirayana positions at 5.30 a.m. 1.S.T from 194!
onwards and at 5.30 p.m. I.S.T earlier to 194),

1} To workout the lagna, add the time corrections for the loca!
meridian time (LMT) to the siderial time {noon G.M.T?. ff the
birth is before noon IST, deduct 12 hours. With the aid of the table
of Houses for the lattitude of the birth place, calculate the lagna
(in degrees and seconds) and the tenth cusp. The 7th and the 4:h
bhava cusps will be 180° away from the lagna and the tenth cusp
respectively. We now have the cusps for the Ist, 4th, 7th and 10th
bhavas. To obtain the cusps of the remaining bhavas, the span of
each quarter has to be divided into three equal parts.

125

According to the western method, the longitude of a house, known
as the ‘cusp’ is the starting point of that house or the junction of
two consecutive houses. For the Indian or Hindu astrologers,
however, the ‘cusp’ or the longitudes given in the ephemeris are
the middle points of the respective houses or bhavas. The cusp is
the central point of the bhava and as such, the most sensitive point
in the horoscope.

The rasi chakra represents the position of the planets in the
different rasis and the position of the lagna. The houses or bhavas
are counted from the lagna rasi and some times from the rasi
where the moon is located. But when the exact positions of the
lagna and the planets are calculated in terms of degrees and
minutes and the cusps of various houses reckoned from the
ephemeris, the bhavas may be found to overlap two or more rasis,
instead of coinciding with them. For instance, a bhava may start at
20° in Vrischika and extend to 24° in Dhanus, spreading over two
rasis; or it may begin at 29° Mesha and extend to 2° of Mithuna,
overlapping three rasis. For purposes of interpretation, a planet
located within the span of a bhava should be reckoned as
belonging to that bhava, irrespective of the rasi in which it is
located. The lord of the bhava, however, is the lord of the rasi in
which the cusp (the mid-point of the bhava) falls. It would
therefore, be desirable to have two charts, the rasi chakra and the
bhava chakra drawn separately or the cusps indicated by their
degrees and minutes in the rasi chakra itself so that a clear picture
is obtained for proper assessment. The following example
illustrates this point.

126

Birth- 14-12-61 at 3-20 a.m. at

{- | Madras.

— (lat 13° 04°, Long 80° 15’)
Chandra wes Raho | Lagna - 16° 48 - Thula
Gum Chart Ravi - 28 °27 - Vrischika
Kaho | Chandra -16°18 - Kumbha
Toy Kuja - 28 °42 - Vrischika
“Tain Bar Budha - 27° 04 - Vrischika
Guru - 13 °25 - Makara
T Sukra - 17°48 - Vrischika
Sani - 4 °29 - Makara

Za a —| Rahu - 27°16 - Karkataka
Vv

Rahu Ketu - 27°29 - Makara

Bhava
Chart :
Guru and sani are found to be

Makhara

in the third bhava although

they are placed in the fourth
rasi.

Interpretation of a horoscope:

Tathwa siddhanta: There are five tathwas, known as ‘Pancha
tathwas’ which are the five elements namely 1) Prithwi (earth) (2)
Ap (water) 3) Tejas (fire) 4) Vayu (air) and 5) Akasha (ether).
They operate in a sequential order for specific durations of time
from sun rise to the next day’s sun rise. They move in a clockwise
order first and then in an anticlockwise fashion. The former is
known as Aroha tathwa and the latter cycle as Avaroha tathwa.
Aroha means ‘ascending’ and Avaroha means ‘descending’. The
order in the ascending or aroha series is prithwi, ap, tejas, vayu
and akasha; The order is reversed in the descending or avaroha

127

series. The duration is 6, 12, 18, 24 and 30 minutes respectively in
the aroha; each cycle of aroha- avaroha taking 3 hours for
completion. There will be 8 cycles of 3 hours each in a day
comprising 24 hours. The nature of the tathwa at sun rise each day
depends on the day of the week. The following table gives the
details:

Tathwa in Aroha Tathwa at sunrise Duration Sex

Prithwi (Earth) Wednesday 6 minutes Male

Ap (Water) Monday and Friday 12 minutes Fernale
Tejas (Fire) Sunday and Tuesday 18 minutes Male
Vayu (Air) Saturday 24 minutes Female
Akasha (Ether) Thursday 30 minutes Male

It is said that a male child will be born when prithwi, tejas or
akasha tathwa is operating at the time of birth and a female child
will be born during the periods when ap or vayu tathwa is
operating. This information would help verify the correctness of
the birth time. A person born at the moment when a male tathwa
is ending and a female tathwa is beginning may turn out to be a
eunuch or an impotent person. The tathwa theory could be further
elaborated or divided to comprehend tathwa-antaratathwa-
antharanthara tathwa in the same way as the dasas are divided into
dasa-antharadasa and so on.

The knowledge of the tathwa predominating at the time of birth
could also be of assistance in judging the personality traits of the
native. A person born in prithwi tathwa is likely to be earthly in
his ambitions and materialistic in outlook whereas an individual
born in tejo tathwa will most probably be bright and impressive.
Birth in akasha tathwa may bestow an ability for abstract thinking
and an inventive or creative intellgence. Aroha tathwa would
imply a gradual improvement in opportunities and achievements

128

as age advances while avaroha tathwa indicates a life with
diminishing results or effects.

Grahasamayam:

This refers to the state of the Ududasa lord at the time of birth.
There are 27 states mentioned and it would be useful to know the
state of the planet ruling the janma nakshatra at the time of birth
as it would throw light on the character of the native. To find out
the state, the number of rasis from Mesha to the lagna are counted
and the number of rasis from lagna to the rasi housing the ududasa
lord are also counted. These two are added and multiplied by
twice the number of years allotted to the udu dasa lord. This
product is then divided by 27. The remainder indicates the state of
the planet. For example, in the chart given below, the ududasa lord
is Guru.

Ketu

| Chandra | Mesha to lagna = 10

Lagna to Guru = 12
Budha

Rasi |__| (10+12) x 2 x 16 _ 704
27 ~ 27
a | 2
Sani, Su- an
kra, Guru | Rahu 2655
Kuja

The remainder is 2. i.e. the second state.

The 27 states and their significance are as follows:-

1) Snanam (Bathing) : Good progeny; Conjugal happiness,

respected by relatives; success in endeavours.

129

2) Vastra Dharanam (Wearing Clothes) : Honoured by the king
and government, acquisition of wealth, clothes, precious metals,
ornaments and perfumes; having good strength.

3) Vibhuthi or Gandhalamkaram (Fame or Decorated with
Sandal paste) : State honours, happiness and joy, ability in work

4) Shivalingam or Poojayathnam (Preparing to worship) :
Money through lands, acquisition of vehicles, happy living,
revered by kinsmen.

5) Panchakshari japam (Chanting of a five-syllabled mantra):
Acquisition of lands and money; trouble through the government;
loss of money.

6) Shiva pooja (worship of Shiva) : Association with wicked
men; love of people; monetary gains.

7) Upasana or yagna yathnam (Preparing to perform a
sacrifice): Heart disease; educational discourses; professor-ship;
liver complaint.

8) Vishnu Pooja (worship of Vishnu) : Felicity; monetary gains
through relatives and lands; winning over enemies.

9) Namaskara (Salutation): Pleasing talk; good vehicle;
deceitful.

10) Giripradakshinam (Going round the mountain): Disease of
spleen; fever with diarrhoea; trouble from the government;
worship of goddess Durga.

11) Rudra pooja (worship of Rudra) : Head of a village, town or
city; prosperity to wife and children; increased wealth and
happiness.

130

12) Athithi pooja (worship of guests) : Showy; predominance of
rajoguna, acquisition of treasure; mantravadin (magician)

13) Bhojanam (meal time): Bereft of rituals of his caste
(cosmopolitan); critical of others, sickly and unhappy.

14) Udakapadam (base of waterpot) : Eating prohibited food,
enmity with relatives and friends.

15) Kopam (anger): Poverty; teases and envies others.

16) Thamboolam (pan-chewing): Acquisition of clothes and
vehicles; money and good conduct; acquaintance with kings and
emperors; dexterity in speech and efficiency in management.

17) Aasthana or Devasabha (assembly of gods) : Good heart,
balanced conduct; self-restraint; mastery over mantras or spells
(mantra siddhi); helpful nature; high morality.

18) Kirita dharanam (wearing a crown) : Army Commander;
monetary gains; educated and renowned.

19) Rahasyam (secret): Good words, secretive and lazy.

20) Alasyam (indolent) : Lazy, indolent and dull; knowledge of
sastras.

21) Nidra or Seshashayana (sleep) : Adept in doing others’
work; highly lustrous, irritable;teases mother, wife etc.

22) Jalapana (drinking water) : Enmity with his kinsmen, elders
and preceptor, sickly. .

23) Amrithapanam (drinking nectar) : Healthy; happy wife and
children; sumptuous meals, revered by king or the government.

131

24) Dhanarjana (earning money) : Respectable ; wealthy success
in undertakings;multiple sources of income.

25) Kirita visarjana (removal of crown) : Loss of profession and
status, unhappiness, rebuked by people and discarded ; disgrace.

26) Athi nidra (excessive sleep) : Thamasic or indolent, crippled
by rheumatism and liver diseases, enemy of the government (raja
virodhi) or a traitor.

27) Sthree sambhogam (sexual intercourse): Highly lustrous;
irritable, blaming others, vexed by sorrow.

Shadbala :

To interpret a horoscope, it is important to evaluate the strength of
the planets There are six categories under which the strength of
planets is assessed. This is known as ‘shadbala’ The six kinds of
strength (bala) are:

1. Sthana bala or positional strength

2. Dik bala or directional strength

3. Kaalabala

4, Cheshta bala or motional strength.

5. Naisargika bala or natural strength and
6. Drigbala or aspectual strength

The evaluation of strength is confined to the seven planets, the
nodes are not considered for this. The strength of the planets could
be either for good results or for bad depending upon whether they
are benefics or malefics for the particular horoscope. The
strength is measured in terms of rupas and virupas (60 virupas
make one rupa)

132

1. Sthana bala

a. A planet placed in its position of exaltation is said to have
uchcha bala. Similarly if it is placed in its moolatrikona it becomes
very powerful; it gets 74 power. If it is in its own sign i.e. in the
rasi that it rules it gets 2 power. With regard to planets owning
two houses, one should remember that male planets are stronger
in male signs and female planets are stronger in female signs. For
example Kuja, a male planet, is stronger in Mesha, a male rasi
(which is also its moolatrikona) than in Vrischika, which is a
female rasi,though both are owned by him. Similarly, Sukra,
which is a female planet is stronger in Vrishabha rasi than in
Thula, which is a male rasi.If it is situated in a friendly sign or in
arasi whose lord is a friend, the planet obtains 4 power. If it is in
its vargotthama position it is as powerful as when it occupies its
own sign i.e. ¥2 power. It has no power if it occupies its sign of
debilitation or if it is in an enemy’s house.

The relative strength can be calculated by the formula given
below. .

The longitude of the planet to point of debilitation divided by 3. If
the difference between the longitude of the planet and its point of
debilitation is more than 180° it should be deducted from 360° and
then devided by 3. This gives the uchcha bala in virupas. The
maximum is | rupa

b. Saptavargaja bala

This is the consolidated strength obtained on the the basis of the
planet’s position in Rasi (explained above), Hora, Drekkana,
Sapthamamsa, Navamsa Dwadasamsa and Trimsamsa.

In hora, drekkana and trimsamsa divisions, Ravi, Kuja and Guru
are stronger in the hora of Ravi whereas Chandra, Sukra and Sani

133

are stronger in the hora of Chandra. Budha is strong in both the
horas.Ravi is stronger in the male or odd rasis while Chandra is
stronger in the female or even rasis .In the thrimsamsa division
Ravi is similar to Kuja and Chandra is akin to Sukra. The affects
of the planets will be full, medium and nil depending upon their
placement in the beginning, middle or the end of a hora
respectively

c. Ojhayugma rasiamsa bala

This is the strength acquired by the placement of planets in odd or
even rasis and in odd or even navamsa. Ravi, Kuja and Guru are
male planets, Chandra and Sukra are female planets, Sani and
Buddha are neutral or eunuch bodies. The odd signs are male and
the even signs are female. Therefore, if the male and neutral
planets occupy the odd rasis or navamsas they are strong.
Similarly, if the female planets are placed in the even rasis or
navamsas they acquire strength

d. Kendradi bala

A planet in a kendra or an angle gets full strength (i.e. in Ist,
4th,7th and 10th houses). If it is in a succedent (2nd, 5th, 8th and
11th) it gets only half the strength. A planet in the cadent (3rd, 6th,
9th and 12th) has only one quarter strength. Measured in terms of
virupas: kendra - 60 virupas, succedent-30 virupas, cadent-15
virupas.

e. Drekkana bala

If the male planets are in the first drekkana, they get one quarter
strength. The female planets get one quarter strength if they
occupy the second drekkana and the neutral planets get one

134

quarter strength if they are situated in the third drekkana. (each
drekkana consists of 10° of a rasi).

2. Dikbala

Budha and Guru have dikbala i.e. full strength if they are in the
lagna or ascendant. Chandra and Sukra have dikbala in the 4th
house. Sani is most powerful when he 1s in the 7th house. These
strengths are full if they fall on the cusps of the respective houses.
To calculate the exact strength, the longitude of the planet should
be noted and the cuspal degree where its strength is totally absent.
The difference should be divided by 3 to get the dikbala in
virupas. The highest rating would be | rupa or 60 virupas.

3. Kaalabala

There are four kinds in this: Ahoratra bala, Paksha bala, Varsha-
Maasa-dina-hora bala and Ayanabala.

a) Ahoratra bala : Chandra, Kuja and Sukra are strong at might;
Ravi, Guru and sani are strong during day time. Budha is strong
both day and night.

b) Paksha bala : The benefics are strong in sukla paksha Le from
new moon to full moon. The malefics are sirong in krishnapaksha
i.e. from full moon to new moon.

c) Varsha-maasa-dina-hora bala: The planet who is the lord of the
year in which the birth took place is known as the varsha lord and
he gets 15 virupas or 4 rupa. This can be ascertained from the
Panchanga of the year. He is the lord of the week day on which the
lunar year of birth commenced. The lord of the maasa or month is
the lord of the sign in which Ravi is located in the birth chart. His
strength is 30 virupas or 2 rupa. The lord of the dina or day is the
lord of the week day on which the native was born. He gets 45

135

virupas or 3/4 rupa. The lord of the hora or hour at which the bith
occurred obtains 60 virupas or 1 rupa. He is the most powerlul
amongst them.

d) Ayanabala:

Ravi, Kuja, Guru and Sukra have ayanabala in northern
declination or uttarayana, Chandra, and Sant have ayanabala in
the southern declination or dakshinayana. Budha has ayanabala
always.

There is yet another bala called the yudhdha bala which is the
strength acquired during a planetary war. A planet in the
uttarayana becomes victorious in a planetary war. This applies
only to Kuja, Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani.

4, Cheshta bala or motional strength

Ravi’s cheshtabala is nothing other than his ayanabala; 1.e. he is
strong during uttarayana. Chandra gets his cheshtabala during the
sukla paksha i.e. the brighter half of the month . In other words,
the waxing moon is strong while the waning moon is not. The
former is considered a benefic whereas the latter is a malefic.

Eight kinds of motion are attributed to the other five planets,
namely Kuja, Budha, Guru, Sukra and Sani. They are:

a) Vakra or retrogression. b) Anuvakra (re-entering the previous
rasi as a result of retrograde motion) c) Vikala (apparently
maintaining a stationary position) (d) Manda (slow motion) (e)
Mandatara (slower than the previous category) (f) Sama (even-
naced or the usual speed) (g) Chara (faster than usual) (h) Atichara
(entering the next rasi in accelerated motion). The strengths
allotted to them are 60; 30; 15; 744; 45 and 30 virupas
respectively.

136

5. Naisargika bala or natural strength

This strength is in direct proportion to the luminosity or brightness
of the planet. The Sun being the brightest has the maximum
strength while saturn, being the darkest gets the least strength. The
naisargika bala remains the same for all horoscopes. Its
significance lies in instances where two planets get the same
shadbala score; The brighter of the two planets prevails over the
other due to its greater naisargika bala. The following is the score
for the planets:

Ravi = 1.000 rupa
Chandra = 0.857 "
Kuja = 0.286 "
Budha = 0.429 "
Guru = 0.571"
Sukra = 0.714"
Sani = 0.143 rupa

6. Drigbala or aspectual strength:

A planet becomes powerful when it is aspected by a benefic and
loses its strength when aspected by a malefic. The degree of
aspectual strength varies according to the number of houses
separating the two planets.

All planets aspect the 7th house with full sight (1 rupa); the 4th
and 8th houses with three quarters of a sight (45 virupas); the 5th
and 9th houses with half a sight (30 virupas) and the 3rd and 10th
houses with a quarter sight (15 virupas). In addition, Sani aspects
the 3rd and 10th houses with a full sight; Guru aspects the 5th and
9th houses with a full sight and Kuja aspects the 4th and 8th
houses with a full sight. In western astrology, an apposition would

137

always mean 180° apart, with a margin of 8° on either side, i.e. a
full aspect is when the planets are between 172° and 188° apart,
but in Hindu astrology the houses they occupy are more important
than the difference in degrees.

In judging the strength of the planets, it is necessary to find out
their state or avastha. Different kinds of avasthas or.states have
been listed by the ancient sages. One classification is known as
Baalaadi avasthas. There are five states depending on the
position of the planet in a rasi. For the odd rasis the list is as
follows:

1. Balavastha - infant state - 0°-6° - strength is one quarter.

2. Kumaravastha - adolescent state - 6° - 12° - strength is half.
3. Yuvavastha - youthful state - 12°-18° - full strength

4. Vridhdhavastha - old age - 18° - 24° - negligible strength

5. Mritavastha-end of life - 24° - 30° - strength is nil.

The order of the states is reversed for the even signs

Another classification of states is done in terms of Awakening,
Dreaming and Sleeping. A planet is said to be in the state of
awakening or alertness if it is in full exaltation or placed in its own
sign; it then gets full strength. If it is situated in a friendly house
or in a neutral sign, itis considered to be in a dreaming state. It has
only medium strength. If the planet is occupying an enemy’s
house or if it is in debilitation, it is known to be ina sleeping state,
where it has no strength whatever.

There is yet another classification in which 9 states are mentioned.
They are: Deepta, Swastha, Pramudita, Saanta, Deena, Vikala,

138

Khala and Kopa. Deepta is a state of luminosity when the planet
is placed in its state of exaltation. Swastha which means ‘well
being’ is experienced when the planet is situated in its own house.
Pramudita is a state of jubilance which a planet experiences
when residing in a close friend’s (atimitra) house. Santa means
‘tranquil’ which is the state of the planet when it is placed in a
friendly sign. A planet is in a Deena state, a ‘piteous’ state, if it is
situated in a neutral house. Vikala means ‘unwholesome’; it is the
state of a planet when it is conjoined with a malefic. A planet is in
a Khala or ‘wicked’ state if it is placed in an enemy’s houses.
When a planet is in a state of combustion (asthangatha) it is angry’
or in a state of Kopa.

One more classification lists 6 avasthas, which are; Lajjitha,
Garvita, kshudita, Trushita, Mudita and kshobita. A planet is in
Lajjitavastha (Lajjita means ‘bashful’) if it is in the 5th house
with a node, Sun, Saturn or Mars. Itis in the Garvitavastha when
it is in exaltation or in its moolatrikona. The word Garvita means
‘being proud’. Kshudita is being hungry; a planet is in
Kshuditavastha when it is in an enemy’s house or in conjunction
with an enemy or Saturn or when it is aspected by an enemy. The
fourth state is called Trushita which means being thirsty. A planet
is in Trushitaavastha when it is situated in a watery sign and is
aspected by a malefic. Muditavastha is the state of ‘being
happy’. A planet is happy when it is in a friendly sign in
conjunction with or aspected by a benefic or Jupiter. The sixth
state is known as Kshobhitavastha or an ‘agitated state’ which is
caused by the conjunction with the Sun and an aspect or
association with a malefic or an enemy. The houses which are
occupied by planets in their kshuditaavastha or kshobhitaavastha

are destroyed.

139

Benefics, Malefics and Neutral planets

Some planets are known as natural benefics. Of them jupiter
stands first, being the biggest and having the most powerful
influence on the earth. Venus comes next, being the brightest and
most beautiful. The waxing Moon is the third natural benefic. The
Sun is considered a natural malefic because of the intensity of his
rays which dry up the earth and oppress the living creatures with
a sense of fatigue. Mars symbolises aggression and Saturn with a
ring around its circumference projects a feeling of constriction.
They are, therefore, considered to be inimical in their influence.
Mercury has a changeable character; when it is conjoined with or
aspected by a benefic, he will bestow favourable results but if he
is under the influence of a malefic he will give unfovourable
effects. The following table gives the list of natural benefics,
malefics and neutral planets.

Natural Benefic Natural Malefic Neutral

Jupiter Sun Mercury
Venus Waning moon
Waxing Moon Mars

Satum
Rahu
Ketu

Individual Benefics, Malefics and Neutrals.

Apart from their natural qualities, each planet could become either
a benefic, malefic or neutral depending on its rulership, position
and aspects in an individual horoscope. The rationale for this is as
follows.

1. The lord of Lagna (ascendant) is a benefic (auspicious)
because the Lagna is both an angle and a trine.

140

The 5th and 9th houses are especially signifant for prosperity
and the 7th and 10th for happiness. Hence the planets
owning these four houses are considered benefics.

If natural benefics own angles, they will not give good results
whereas malefics owning them will refrain from giving bad
results. They become benefics if they simultaneously own a
trine

The planet owning the 3rd, 6th or the 11th house will become
amalefic. The 8th lord is not auspicious because the 8th is the
12th from the 9th house. If he also owns the 3rd, 7th or 11th
he will be especially harmful; but if he rules a trine at the
same time he will bestow favourable results.

The effects caused by the lords of the 8th house and the 12th
will depend upon their association. If the Sun or the Moon
happens to own the 8th no evil effects will accrue.

The planet owning an important house can counteract the
influence of another planet which owns a less significant
house.

The strength of the benefics increases in the order: Ist, 4th,
7th and 10th, which means the 7th house is more powerful
than the 4th and the 10th more powerful than the 7th.
Similarly with the trine; the 9th house lord is stronger than
the lord of the Sth.

The strength of the malefics also increases in the ascending
order from 3rd, 6th and 11th houses. The order for the other
group is 12th, 2nd and 8th house. The lord of the 8th house is
more powerful than the 2nd and the 2nd lord is stronger than
the 12th.

From the above statements it follows that the most powerful
benefics are the lords of the 9th and 10th houses and the
strongest malefics are the lords of the 8th and 11th houses

141

10.

respectively. For a person born in Mesha lagna, Sani is the
lord of both the 10th house and the 11th. The 11th house
Kumbha is also his moolatrikona which makes him more
powerful. He therefore is more of a malefic than a benefic. In
the case of a person born in Mithuna lagna, Sani happens to
be the lord of the 8th house and the 9th. The 9th house, being
his moolatrikona makes him more of a benefic than a malefic.

Rahu and Ketu, by virtue of not owning houses, give results
according to their position, associaion and the rulers of the
houses occupied by them.

The following table gives the individual benefics, malefics and
neutrals for the 12 lagnas according to sage Parasara. The houses
ruled by the planets are also mentioned.

Benefies Malefics

Favourable
associations

Kuja (1 and 8)
Ravi (5)
Guru (9 & 12)

Vrishabha | Sani (9 and 10)
Ravi (4)
Budha (2 and 5)

Mithuna Sukra (5 and 12)

Karkataka | Kuja (5 and 10)
Guru (6 and 9)
Chandra (1)

Budha (3 and 6)
Sukra (2 and 7)
Sani (10 and 11)

Guru (8 and 11)
Sukra (1 and 6)
Chandra (3)

Kuja (6 and 11)

Guru (7 and 10)
Ravi (3)

Sukra (4 and 11)
Budha (3 and 12)

142

Ravi - Guru
Guru - Kuja
Ravi - Kuja

Budha - Sani
Budha - Ravi

Exchange between
Guru and Sani in
9th and 10th

Sani - Guru in 9th
or 10th. Sani in 9th
Guru in 10th

Kuja-Guru
Kuja - Ravi
Kuja - Chandra

Vrischika

Dhanus

Makara

Kuja (4 and 9)
Guru (5 and 8)
Ravi (1)

Budha (1 and 10)
Sukra (2 and 9)

Budha (9 and 12)
Sani (4 and 5)

Guru (2 and 5)
Chandra (9)
Ravi (10)

Kuja (5 & 12)
Ravi (9)

Budha (7 and 10)
Budha (6 and 9)
Sukra (5 and 10)

Sukra (4 and 9)
Sani (1 and 12)

Kuja (2 and 9)
Chandra (5)
Guru (1 and 10)

Malefics

Budha (2 and 11)
Sukra (3 and 10)
Sani (6 and 7)
Kuja (3 and 8)
Guru (4 and 7)
Chandra (11) 10th
Guru (3 and 6)
Ravi (11)

Kuja (2 and 7)
(Sukra is Neutral)
Sukra (7 and 12)
Budha (8 and 11)
Sani (3 and 4)
(Kuja is Neutral)
Sukra (6 and 11)
(Guru is Neutral)

Kuja (4 and 11)
Guru (3 and 12)
Chandra (7)
(Ravi is Neutral
Guru (2 and 11)
Chandra (6)
Kuja (3 and 10)
Sani (10 and 11)
Sukra (3 and 8)
Ravi (6)

Budha (4 and 8)

Favourable
associations

Budha - Sukra
Budha - Ravi in

Chandra-Budha
Rajayoga

Saturn in Sth/9th

Ravi-Budha
Guru-Chandra

After ascertaining the strength of the different planets and their
disposition with regard to each lagna i.e. whether they are
benefics, malefics or neutral, the next step is to assess the bhavas
or houses which they rule and those which they occupy. As
explained in Chapter IV, each bhava represents an aspect of life
and is ruled by a planet who bestows the results of that house,
who is known as the Karaka. This is irrespective of the ruler of the
house and its occupants. Here again, Maharshi Parasara says that

143

for proper assessment of the various bhavas,the reckoning should
be done from the lagna as well as from the position of the Karaka.
For instance, in judging the 9th (for father), 10th and 11th houses,
the counting should be done both from the lagna and from the
position of the Sun. For evaluating the significance of the Ist, 2nd,
Ath, 9th and the 11th houses, the reckoning should be done also
from the position of the Moon. In interpreting the 3rd bhava, the
3rd house counted from Mars should also be taken into
consideration. The effects of the 6th house (from lagna) should
also include those of the 6th house from Mercury. Similarly, the
judgment of the 5th house, for progeny, should be supplemented
by the significance of the 5th house from Jupiter; the 7th house,
for spouse, should also consider the 7th from Venus and the 8th
and 12th houses for death, should include the effects of the 8th and
12th houses from Saturn. For a comprehensive study of the
horoscope, therefore, the position and nature of the house and its
lord, the characteristics of the rasi, the placement of its lord in a
friendly, inimical or neutral house, the other occupants, if any, the
aspects from other planets, benefic or malefic, the star
constellations or nakshatras in which the planets are situated and
their lords are some of the inportant factors to be taken into
consideration. The timing of the effects on the basis of the Dasa
and antaradasa should also be worked out. For each bhava, the
appropriate varga chart or division chart has to be prepared to
gain more insight.

Yogas

The placement of planets in cetain special houses or rasis and in
particular combinations in a horoscope are said to bestow
extraordinary effects on the native. These are called Yogas. Some

144

of them are auspicious and some inauspicious. They can be
classsified into five categories :

1. Yogas formed in relation to the lagna.

2. Raja Yogas.

3. Yogas pertaining to Chandra known as Chandraadhi Yogas.
4. Yogas centering round the Sun.

5. Parivarthana Yogas.

Although the Yogas are believed to have special effects
throughout the life of an individual, the maximum influence is felt
only during the dasa period or the antaradasa of the planets which
constitute the Yoga.

Mahapurusha Yogas :

A group of five yogas named panchamahapurusha yogas belong
to the first category because the positions of the planets are judged
in relation to the lagna. They are : Ruchaka, Bhadra, Hamsa,
Malavya and Sasa.

Ruchaka Yoga

When Kuja is placed in either Mesha or Vrischika (his own rasis)
or in Makara, in his sign of exaltation; and is at the same time ina
Kendra (1st, 4th, 7th or the 10th from lagna), it is called the
Ruchaka Yoga. For the Yoga to operate Kuja, Lagna and Chandra
should be without blemish; they should not be associated with or
be in conjunction with malefics; nor should they be combust or
sandwiched between malefics. An example is given below.

A person born in Ruchaka Yoga has a long and lustrous face; is
dark red in complexion, with attractive brows and black hair. He

145

is courageous and victorious in wars. He will be powerful,
arrogant, healthy and famous.

Bhadra Yoga

If Budha occupies Mithuna
rasi (his own rasi) or Kanya
rasi (his sign of exaltation)
which is identical with a
kendra, the Yoga so formed is
called the Bhadra Yoga,
provided Budha, lagna and
Chandra are without blemish.

A person having Bhadra Yoga
will be well-built with strong,
long arms. He _ will be
intelligent and learned. He will
cy, | Possess a satwik nature and
will be pure in body and mind.
He will be eloquent in speach,
wealthy and long lived.

Hamsa Yoga

Chandra

Hamsa Yoga is formed when
Guru is in Dhanus or Meena
rasis (his own houses) or in
exaltation in Karkataka rasi
which is also a kendra and the
lagna, Chandra and Guru are
free from unfavourable

associations or aspects.

146

A person having Hamsa Yoga in his natal chart will be handsome,
with a well developed nose. He will possess sharp intelligence,
will be phlegmatic, very passionate and virtuous. He will be like
a king, respected by good people.

Sukra

Malavya Yoga
Chandra ,
Cum | If Sukra is in his own house,
either in Vrishaba or Thula rasi
or in Meena, where he is
exalted and at the same time in
a kendra from lagna, without
suffering from malefic
influences, it is known as
Malavya Yoga. The person
having Malavya Yoga will be
of medium stature he will have a lustrous body with beautiful lips,
white teeth, a slender waist and strong limbs. He will be blessed
with a good family and fortune. He will be learned and renowned.
He will have good vehicles and will enjoy the pleasures of life.

—

Sasa Yoga

When Sani occupies his own
house, namely Makara or
Kumbha or is placed in Thula,
his house of exaltation which
is identical with a kendra, Sasa
Yoga is said to exist. As in the
above cases the lagna, Sani and
— Chandra should be free from
malefic associations and aspects. A person with Sasa Yoga will be
strong and valourous. He will have small teeth and face, a slender

Gum
Chandra

147

waist and beautiful thighs. He will be wise and enjoys wandering
in forests and mountains. He will have good servants and will be
like a king. He will enjoy other people’s wealth and women.

Sometimes a person may have more than one such Yoga which

will make him doubly fortunate.

Raja Yogas

When there is a conjunction of the rulers of the trikona houses,
namely the 5th and 9th houses, in the natal chart, Raja Yoga is
believed to be present. Such a combination or ‘Yoga’ endows the
individual with qualities which would enable him to live like a
king (Raja). The effects of the Raja Yoga will be felt most in the
areas represented by the house occupied by the planets and during
their dasa and antharadasa periods. The areas of life ruled by the
two planets ( Karakathwa) will also experience the benefit. The
table below gives a list of Raja Yoga combinations for the

different lagnas:

Lagnas Conjunction of planets
Mesha Ravi and Guru
Vrishabha Budha and Sani
Mithuna Sukra and Sani
Karkataka Kuja and Guru
Simha Guru and Kuja
Kanya Sani and Sukra
Thula Sani and Budha
Vrischika Guru and Chandra
Dhanus Kuja and Ravi
Makara Sukra and Budha

148

Kumbha Budha and Sukra
Meena Chandra and Kuja.

In addition, there are a number of combinations of planets and
their positions which are believed to be very auspicious and which
are included in the purview of Raja Yogas. Some of them have
also been given. specific names. The following are a few
examples.

Amala Yoga is formed when there is a benefic planet in the 10th
house from the lagna or the moon.

Mahabhagya Yoga: If a male child is born during the day and the
lagna, Ravi and Chandra are all in odd signs (Mesha, Mithuna
etc.) or, if a female child is born during the night and the lagna,
Ravi and Chandra are all placed in even signs (Vrishabha,
Karkataka etc), it is known as mahabhagya yoga.

Kesari Yoga is formed when Chandra is in a kendra, reckoned
from Guru.

Vasumathi Yoga is caused when all the benefics are in upachaya
houses, namely the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th.

Pushkala Yoga is produced when the lords of houses occupied by
the lagna and chandra are together in a kendra or in the house of
an atimitra and a strong planet is expecting the lagna.

Subhamala Yoga is formed when all the planets in regular order
are posited in the 5th,6th and 7th houses from the lagna.

149

Lakshmi Yoga is produced when Sukra and the lord of the 9th
house occupy their own houses or their signs of exaltation
identical with a kendra or a trikona.

Gowri Yoga is formed when Chandra is in his own house or in
exaltation, identical with a kendra or a trikona and aspected by
Guru.

- Saraswathi Yoga is caused when Budha, Guru and Sukra are in

kendra or trikona houses from lagna or in the 2nd house and are
aspected by Guru who is in his own house, in a friend’s house or
in the sign of exaltation.

Srikantha Yoga is produced when the lord of the lagna, Ravi and
Chandra are all in their own houses or in a friend’s house or in

exaltation and simultaneously occupy kendra or trikona houses.

Srinatha Yoga is formed when Sukra the lord of the 9th house
and Budha are in their exaltation which are identical with kendra
or trikona houses.

Virinchi Yoga is caused when Guru, the lord of the 5th house and
Sani are similarly placed.

There are several other Raja Yogas mentioned in the ancient texts
which ensured kingship in the olden days. In the modern context,
however, they should be taken as indications of opportunities for
living like a king, in comfort and happiness. The rationale for
these Raja Yogas is none other than the principle that three or
more planets well-placed, in their own signs or in exaltation,
well-aspected and in angles or trikonas would confer a prosperous
and glorious life to the native.

150

Lunar Yogas.

The yogas mentioned above are in relation to the lagna. There are
other yogas which are centered round the Moon. These are called
the ‘Lunar Yogas’. Sunapha, Anapha, Durudhara and
Kemadruma are the four major lunar yogas.

Sunapha Yoga: Any planet excepting Ravi, Rahu and Ketu
placed in the 2nd house from Chandra produces a yoga known as
Sunapha yoga. The results of the yoga will depend upon the nature
of the planet and its position in the horoscope.

Anapha Yoga: Any planet (except Ravi and the nodes) in the
12th house from Chandra causes a yoga called Anapha yoga. The
effects are influenced by the nature of the planet and its situation.

3. Durudhara Yoga:

If there is a planet in both the 2nd and 12th houses from Chandra
(other than Ravi, Rahu and Ketu) the yoga produced is known as
Durudhara yoga.

The idea is that unless there is a planet on either side of Chandra
or along with it he will not be well-balanced and therefore would
not be in a position to offer a comfortable life to the native.

4. Kemadruma Yoga:

If the above three yogas are absent and if there are no planets in
the angles from the Moon and if he is devoid of aspects the yoga
produced is called kemadruma yoga which is caused by the
unfortunate Chandra and results in unending difficulties to the
native.

151

Taking into account all the possible combinations and
permutations, it has been calculated that there can be 31 kinds of
Sunapha yoga, 31 kinds of Anapha yoga and 180 kinds of
Durudhara yoga.

Maharshi Parasara is of the opinion that the lunar yogas prevail
over the other yogas, good or bad, found in a horoscope. When
Chandra is flanked by benefic planets who are in their own houses
or in exaltation, the native will, by his own efforts become
wealthy, virtuous, learned and famous. If on the otherhand,
Chandra is surrounded by malefics contrary results will obtain.

Yogas from the Sun:

Just as there are yogas caused by the Moon there are yogas which
are centered round the Sun. Similar to the Sunapha, Anapha and
Durudhara yogas (lunar yogas) there are Vesi, Vasi and
Ubhayachari Yogas caused by planets other than Chandra, Rahu
and Ketu, by being in the 2nd, 12th and both 2nd and 12th houses
from the sun.

Vesi yoga is caused by a planet being situated in the 2nd house
from the Sun. When a benefic planet produces the yoga it is called
“Subha-Vesi’ and when it is a malefic or a planet in debilitation it
is called ‘Papa-Vesi’

Vasi Yoga is produced by a planet placed in the 12th house from
the Sun. If it is a benefic it is called ‘Subha Vasi’ yoga, if it is a
malefic it is known as ‘Papa-Vasi’.

Ubhayachari Yoga is caused when the sun has planets on either
side of him i.e., in the 2nd house and the 12th house. If the planets
are good and well placed the effects will be favourable and the

152

yoga will be ‘Subhobhayachari yoga’; otherwise it will be
‘Papobhayachari’.

The effects of these yogas will vary according to the nature of the
planets producing the yogas, the houses they are situated in, their
strength and so on.

Kartari Yoga

This is similar to the Ubhayachari Yoga where the Sun is flanked
by planets and Durudhara yoga where the Moon is surrounded on
either side by planets. Kartari yoga is formed when there are
planets on either side of the lagna. If the planets are benefics it is
called ‘Subha-Kartari yoga’ and if there are malefics in the 2nd
and 12th houses it is called ‘Papakartari yoga’.

Parivarthana Yogas.

When two lords of different houses mutually exchange places i.e,
they are situated in each other’s house, it produces a parivarthana
yoga. The total number of parivarthanas or exchanges possible
has been calculated as 66 starting from lagna and ending with the
12th house. Of these, 28 are known as Maha yogas which are
auspicious, 30 are called Dainya yogas which are inauspicious,
because they are caused by the lords of the 6th,8th and 12th
houses and 8 are caused by the lord of the 3rd house and these are
known as Kahala yogas. According to Manthreswara, the
individual with a kahala yoga will be haughty in speech at times
but well-spoken at other times. He will be prosperous at certain
times and poor and miserable at other times. But not so the
persons with Mahayoga. They will be fortunate throughout their

153

lives whereas those with a Dainya yoga will perpetually be faced
with dificulties.

There is however a difference of opinion with regard to the
Dainya yogas. Some are of the view that the exchange of houses
between the lords of the 6th, 8th and 12th houses could make the
native very prosperous provided they aspect each other and are in
no way influenced by the lords of the other houses either through
conjunction or aspect. In fact they call it a ‘Vipareetha Raja
Yoga’.

154

A philosophical interpretation of
planetary aspects

An interesting and imaginative analysis of the concepts underlying
Hindu astrology on the basis of Vedantic and Sankhyan ideology
has been furnished by Sri B.S. Gopalakrishna of Madikeri. He has
visualized the positions of planets in three successive stages:

1. Before creation 2. Poised for creation and 3. After creation. In the
first stage, the planets are in their own houses, in perfect equilib-
rium. There is no action and therefore no effects. In the second
stage, the planets move from their houses to occupy their Moola-
trikona positions, poised for the act of creation. In the third stage,
they shift to their houses of Exaltation, their most powerful posi-
tions and commence their journey round the Sun. He has explained
the significance of the three stages and the symbolism underlying
their positions and aspects in terms of the emergence of the 'Self or
Jeeva, its sojourn in the transactional world of illusion and its
ultimate re-union with the Supreme, eternal Atman.

Of the twelve rasis, the Sun and the Moon have each one rasi torule
and the other five planets have two houses each to govern. Every
one of the planets has a house where it is exalted and another house
which is known as its Moolatrikona. The planets have attributes
(Gunas) like Satthwa, Rajas and Tamas; they possess qualities of
the primordial elements (Tatthwas) such as Fire, Water, Air, Earth
and Space and they symbolise an aspect of the human personality.
Ravi represents the Ego or Ahamkara; Chandra symbolizes the
Mind; Kuja stands for the Body; Budha signifies the Intellect or
Buddhi and Speech; Guru is identified with the individuated Con-
sciousness or Prajna or Jeeva; Sukra personifies desire or Kamaand
Sani stands for torpor or delusion. The rasis also have gunas and
tatthwas. Each planet exerts a direct influence on the house diamet-
rically opposite to it (the seventh rasi) and on its occupant. Its effect
is also felt, to a lesser degree, in the 4th and 10th houses which are

155

Before Creation

Diagram - |

156

Beginning of Creation In the Transactional World

Di -
lagram - Il Diagram - III

158

known as kendras. (1st, 4th, 7th and 10th). Every planet is strength-
ened or supported by the occupants of the Sth and 9th houses which
are called Trikonas.

Diagram I shows the position of planets before creation. The gunas
and tatthwas of the planet are reflected in the house opposite (the
7th). For example, the attributes of Ravi - Satthwaguna and Agni
tatthwa-which belong to the Simha rasi are found in the opposite
rasi, namely, Kumbha and the attributes of Sani-Tamoguna and
Vayu tatthwa-are found in the Simha rasi.

Diagram I] and III show the planets situated in their Moolatrikona
houses and in their houses of exaltation respectively. The interpre-
tation for each planet in the two positions is as follows:

Ravi:

Ravi represents the 'I’ ness or the ego (ahamkara). He is directly
facing Sani who symbolizes delusion (Diagram II). The very exis-
tence of ego is due to delusion. The planets in the trikonas are Guru
(Sth house) and Kuja (9th house) who reinforce the ego. Guru
stands for jeeva, the individuated soul without whom the ego
cannot exist. Kujarepresents the body which is the base for the ego.
Of the kendras 4 and 10 which receive the impact of Ravi, the
former is empty and the latter is occupied by Chandra. The ego
shapes the mind, which Chandra symbolizes. This is the first stage,
the birth of a being.

The next stage represents the individual in the transactional world
(Diagram III). Ravi is in Mesha encountering Sani in Thula; both
are in exaltation. The ego is embedded in the body (Kuja is the lord
of Mesha) and is face to face with desire or kama (Sukra stands for
kama or enjoyment) but is deluded because he finds Sani there.
Desires are rooted in delusion and delusions are founded on desires.
The trikonas are empty; the ego has no real foundation from the
stand point of Truth. Guru is in the 4th and Kuja in the 10th
(kendras). The ego guides the jeeva and steers the body.

159

Chandra:

Chandra symbolizes the mind. In the first stage, Chandra is
supported only by Budha (in the 5th house) who represents the
intellect. The mind becomes an effective tool for the ego only if
there is intellect; without intelligence, the mind is useless. The 9th
house is empty, the kendras are occupied by Ravi (in the 4th) and
Sani (in the 10th); the 7th house is empty. The mind influences the
ego by strengthening its delusions. The ego cannot function in the
world without the active involvement of the mind.

In the second Stage, Budhais in the 5th and Kujais in the 9th houses
respectively. The mind is anchored in the body and derives its
strength through the intellect; without the body and intelligence,
the mind cannot function. The kendras, the 4th, 7th, and 10th
houses are all empty. In the transactional world, the mind has no
power over anything; on the other hand, the mind is influenced by
the external world. Whatever power an individual wields is due to
his ego and his intellect and not due to his mind.

Kuja:

Kuja stands for the body. At the time of creation (in the first stage)
Kuja is supported by Ravi (in the 5th) and Guru (in the 9th). The
body comes into being due to the ego; but the ego by itself cannot
create anything. It has to unite with the individuated consciousness
or soul (jeeva) in order to assume a body, to take birth. Among the
kendras, only the 7th house is occupied by Sukra; the others are
empty. Desires are felt or produced because of the body; without
the body the mind cannot satisfy its desires.

In the transactional world (in the second stage) Kuja is supported
by Chandra in the 5th house and Budha in the 9th house. The
functioning of the body depends on the individual's mind and
intellect. Among the kendras, Ravi is in the 4th, Guru is in the 7th
and Sani is in the 10th. The ego of a person is boosted or beaten by
the vitality or weakness of the body respectively. It is the body
which is responsible for the masking of the real ‘Self’ and the

160

misconception that the body-mind complex is the jeeva. It is also
the root-cause of the delusion that the world we see outside is the
real world.

Budha:

Budha symbolizes the speech and intellect in man. At the begining
(in diagram II) there is no one in the 5th house; the 9th house is
occupied by Chandra. The existence of speech and intellect is
contingent upon the presence of the mind. Both mind and intellect
are the tools created by the ego for its activities in the world. They
are mutually dependent upon each other; the one cannot function
without the other. Among the kendras, only the 4th house is
occupied by Guru; the others are empty. The intellect moulds the
individual consciousness. The jeeva's world-view is coloured by its
intellect.

In the second stage (diagram III) there is Kuja in the 5th house and
Chandra in the 9th house. In the transactional world the intellect is
dependent on the brain which is a part of the body and on mind. The
impact of the intellect is felt in the 4th. 7th and 10th houses where
Kuja, Ravi and Guru are stationed. The body's activities are
dictated by the intellect; the ego is guided by the logic and
reasoning of the intellect regarding the reality of the world and this
approach colours the individual's consciousness also.

Guru:

Guru signifies the individuated consciousness of man. At the
beginning of creation (in the first stage) Kuja occupies the Sth
house and Ravi, the 9th house. The consciousness or jeeva emerges
only when the ego comes into existence encased in a material body.
Without a body there can be neither a sense of 'T' ness nor a personal
consciousness. As to the kendras, the 4th and 7th houses are
unoccupied but the 10th house is occupied by Budha. The effect of
consciousness is experienced only by the intellect.

161

In the second stage, the 5th house is empty and the 9th house is
occupied by Sukra. The jeeva is pressed into action only on account
of desires which seek satisfaction. But for desires and the need to
satisfy them there would be no action on the part of jeeva. The
kendras are occupied by Sani (4th house), Kuja (7th house) and
Ravi (10th house). The delusion of the ego that body 1s the ‘Self is
itself due to the presence of consciousness without which neither
the body, the ego or its delusions can survive.

Sukra:

Sukra is identified with ‘kama’ or desires. In diagram IT which
represents the stage of creation, Sani is occupying the 5th house and
the 9th house is empty. Desires arise because of the delusion that
the individual jeeva is independent and powerful; that the body-
mind system with its constituents (the ego, intellect, the sense-
organs and sense-functions) is the real ‘Self’. [f this delusion did not
exist, the jeeva would be in a state of bliss, there would be no
hankerings and frustrations. Out of the three kendras only the 7th
is occupied by Kuja. The other two are ¢émpty. The effect of kama
is on the body; the body is the vehicle through which all desires are
sought to be fulfilled.

Inthe second stage (diagram III), the 5th house 1s occupied by Guru
and the 9th house is empty. The basis for desires and their enjoy-
ment is the consciousness, which alone is the active principle. The
rest are inert. The mind is commonly associated with desires but
kama stands for enjoyment alone whereas the mind experiences
both pleasure and pain. Therefore, the mind is not the true basis for
enjoyment. It is consciousness which is the background for kama.
Among the kendras which feel the effect of Sukra, only the 7th
house is occupied by Budha. The desires influence the intellect
which strives for their satisfaction through various ways and
means.

162

Sankt

Sani is the personification of delusion. At the commencement of
creation, the Sih house is unoccupied and Sukra is stationed in the
9h house. Delusion is the result of desites and the p
pleasures, Chandra is in the 4th house, Ravi is in the 7th house and
the 10th house is enapty. The influence of Saniisteltin the kenek es
Mind (Chandia) and ego (Ravi) are driven by delusion (Sani).

aeult of

In the transacnonal world (diagram IHD) both the tikonas are
unoccupied. There is no basis or foundation for delusion. If there
was any reason or truth underlying it, it would no longer be a
delusion. The word ‘delusion’ means that which has no real basis 67
justification. As to the kendras, the 4th house is occupied by Kuja,
the 7th house is occupied by Ravi and the 10th house is occupied
by Guru. The effect of delusion is spread over the body, the ego and
the individuated consciousness. To identify oneself with the body
is a delusion, To believe that one is independent of one's creator is
a delusion and to be unaware of one's real nature due to the clouding
of consciousness is also caused by delusion.

The interpretation of the planetary aspects in terms of philosophical
concepts could be applied to individual horoscopes to judge the
personality traits of the native and to understand the dynamics of his
behaviour in the transactional world,

A
ive]

CEAPEIO REPRESS EME SEIONS OF NARSHATRAS
SCRIPT FROM MYSORE

sca POOR Se Iona

SHOR Vt
a aia :

ASHWINI

164

BHARANI

Leaerag Rysresrieytny re os]

\ of

f

o&

ey,

\ [the 00 eeurgyy,
See ey |

3
KRITTIKA

Sw Sore [le

Sao Coed

MRIGASHIRA

166

eg sen mi ENE
; .

$ Ty we
eh DM hath

pee one

WV

Rss &

SA BREE PPC RN aR RAR DRE CR BE 1H

%
nananiert i
Jenni Ante nteomannapinn sont nininnnan teagan
asennad debe NR . mewn

Roe Po ecya GTO SB he - Hentai (PN ASE SBN Ee a2 A Phe Bey
as ae etn nna ener ae mes - .
ce]

8
PUSHY A

sracersnmenn en wcrnmmerns =a ne
aroltr § Sipe 4 tho wy
SPOS Hon Bowe

Sort se crestnin vw ve

PR OTL RIES S SLE:

PRT HIE NI SSE

>
capone ate eiaeestane-sematemeie
~ . eee

; 9
7 a ml 1
PUNARVASLU AASLESHA

187 168

Ku SnGy, aa sae S GO Sass |
oe pice + seine

169

12

UTTARA
=o
TBI ws
i
t
13
HASTA

ee anes te et teccemmtece gman tamu: sien eect ee athe = aoe a. ti ec

dETA

|

ae ~
oie
pend
a
tod
poe
ton
Beem

4
4

y

eral

ron

:

ee ee

Cn Te mR San or SER ee Gn
2tsrere

SET eS

UTTARAASHAADA

174

JYESHTA POORVAASHAADA

‘gn Pe oD

,

> C norgt

So PA 6

2a aE MTS

jo) gaa P ce

aromas evlaw mettmenid

er

AOI Co BHT

2 eerie scaaeims ats tect Teta cia A RESTA Cnman ANE ahs naRanmucr nbn nininert tian. Satattteate

SH Din an 8 al

BELA oe
2%

REVATHI

177