Rämayana
1 
©2003 by Kåñëa Dharma däsa 
All Rights Reserved 
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form, by any means, including 
mechanical, electronic, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
 
This book is reproduced by permission of Torchlight Publishing who 
hold the copyright and copies are available at all major bookstores 
and web outlets.  
 
 Prologue 
 Part One 
 1.  King Daçaratha’s Longing 
 2.  The Birth of Räma 
 3.  With the Sage Viçvämitra 
 4.  The Trial of Strength 
 5.  Crooked Advice for Queen Kaikeyi 
 6.  The King’s Heartbreak 
 7.  Räma Agrees to Depart 
 8.  Grief and Fury 
 9.  Sétä’s Plea 
 10.  Sad Farewells 
 Part Two 
 1.  Into the Forest 
 2.  Devastation in Ayodhya 
 3.  Bharata’s Return 
 4.  ‘We Shall Bring Räma Back’  
 5.  Räma Remains Firm 
 6.  The Forest Sages 
 7.  The Räkñasé Shurpanakha 
 8.  Rävaëa’s Lust is Incited 
 9.  The Kidnapping of Sétä 
 10.  Räma’s Terrible Discovery

2 
 11.  Räma Meets the Monkeys 
 12.  The Search Begins  
 13.  Hanumän Leaps to Lanka 
 14.  Sétä is Found 
 Part Three 
 1.  The Army Sets Off 
 2.  Panic in Lanka 
 3.  Räma Confronts the Ocean 
 4.  Rävaëa’s Evil Trickery 
 5.  The War Begins 
 6.  Garuòa to the Rescue 
 7.  Rävaëa Enters the Fray 
 8.  The Colossal Demon 
 9.  Carnage Among the Räkñasas 
 10.  Räma and Lakñman Laid Low 
 11.  Lakñman Battles Indrajit 
 12.  Rävaëa Exhibits His Prowess 
 13.  The Final Battle 
 14.  Sétä’s Ordeal 
 15.  Back to Ayodhya 
 Epilogue 
 Appendix 1: The Story of the River Ganges 
 Appendix 2: The History of Viçvämitra 
 Appendix 3: The Birth and History of Hanumän 
 Appendix 4: The Benefits of Reading Rämayana 
 Glossary 
 Author’s Note 
 
Prologue 
Coursing through the sky in his celestial chariot, Rävaëa appeared like a

3 
blazing comet. His dark body shone with a brilliant aura. From his ten 
heads his reddish eyes darted about, scouring the mountains below. His 
twenty powerful arms hanging from his huge frame looked like five-
hooded serpents. Seated on a throne of gems he directed his golden 
chariot by thought alone and it moved swiftly over the Himälayan range.  
The demon was out on his conquests. All around him flew thousands of 
Räkñasas, clutching swords, barbed spears, spiked maces and iron 
bludgeons, all of those weapons smeared with blood. Some Räkñasas had 
the heads of tigers, some of donkeys and some of fierce fiends. Others 
appeared in their natural forms: large blackish bodies, fearful faces with 
tall pointed ears and rows of sharp fangs, with a mass of red hair on their 
heads. They wore iron breastplates studded with gems and were adorned 
with bright gold earrings and other shining ornaments. Surrounding 
Rävaëa they looked like dark clouds with lightning covering the sun.  
Rävaëa wished to defeat in battle even the gods themselves. Wanting to 
establish his supreme power in the universe, he had gone to the higher 
planets and conquered hosts of Gandharvas and Yakñas, powerful 
celestial fighters. Now he was returning from his victorious fight with 
Kuvera, his own brother and the treasurer of the gods. That lordly deity 
had been made to retreat by Rävaëa, losing to the demon his wonderful 
chariot, known in all the worlds as the Pushpaka.  
The fearless Rävaëa, overlord of all the demons, looked down from the 
Pushpaka at the forests below. It was a picture of tranquility. Amongst 
the trees were many verdant clearings covered with varieties of wild 
shrubs and forest flowers. Crystal waterfalls cascaded onto many colored 
rocks. Lakes filled with lotuses and swans shone from the mountain 
plateaus as the hordes of Räkñasas soared overhead.  
Sometimes the demons would see groups of åñis, ascetic Brahmins who 
dwelt in those high mountain ranges, practising austerities and 
worshipping the gods. They would see the columns of smoke rising up 
amongst the trees from the sacrificial fires tended by the sages. Using 
their powers of sorcery the Räkñasas dropped down volumes of blood, 
faeces and urine, defiling the sacrifices. They would then hurl huge 
boulders and blazing coals, crushing and burning the sages where they 
sat in meditation. Finally the demons would themselves descend, 
howling and roaring. They tore apart the bodies of the åñis, drinking

4 
their blood and devouring their flesh.  
Rävaëa admired the Pushpaka as it proceeded according to his will. His 
brother Kuvera would be sorry to lose such a splendid vehicle. It looked 
more like a city of the gods floating in the air than a chariot. Numerous 
cat’s-eye and crystal pillars ran along its sides, supporting golden 
mansions inlaid with coral. Large floors made entirely of gems stood 
upon gold statues of lions and tigers. Groves of artificial trees, shining 
with golden leaves and fruits, surrounded large ponds crowded with 
white lotuses. In those clear ponds stood ivory elephants and silver 
goddesses. Networks of pearls and wreaths of celestial flowers hung all 
over that car. It was encrusted with countless precious stones and 
emblazoned with gold carvings of wolves, sharks, and fierce bears. 
Sweeping through the skies it emitted the sounds of celestial music and 
the fragrance of the pärijäta flower, known only to the gods.  
As Rävaëa sat idly aboard the chariot, gazing around at the magnificent 
scenery below, he suddenly noticed a lady sitting in meditation. This was 
most unusual. Women were rarely seen in those mountains. Sometimes 
the åñis would have their wives with them, but this woman seemed to be 
entirely alone. Rävaëa slowed the chariot and moved down to look more 
closely. Perhaps there were more ascetics nearby. The Räkñasas could use 
a little entertainment. And, if this woman was as beautiful as she seemed 
at first glance, so could he. 
Ordering the Räkñasas to wait in the sky, Rävaëa himself rose up from 
the chariot and descended to the ground. He saw the young ascetic girl 
sitting on a flat piece of soft grassland surrounded by wild flowers. She 
glowed with a golden beauty. Her limbs were exquisitely formed and her 
full breasts were covered by a black deerskin. Rävaëa could see the 
contours of her tapering thighs through the thin cloth covering her 
crossed legs. Dark locks of thickly matted hair hung down to her waist, 
framing her white-complexioned face. Her red lips moved slightly as she 
intoned the sacred syllable Om. Her smooth golden arms were bared in 
front of her as she sat with folded palms, her long curling lashes covering 
half closed eyes.  
Rävaëa’s mind was overpowered by lust. Who was this youthful lady? 
What was she doing here in such a lonely place? Did she have a 
protector? Never mind. He would soon deal with that. The forest was no

5 
place for such a maiden. She would make an excellent addition to his 
other consorts.  
By his mystic power Rävaëa assumed a human form and approached the 
girl. He spoke loudly, disturbing her reverie. “O most beautiful maiden, 
who are you? Why are you practising asceticism in this lonely region? To 
whom do you belong? What fortunate man has you for his wife?” 
The demon was unable to resist the charms of women. As he gazed upon 
the alluring form of the girl he was possessed by increasing desire. He 
laughed and waited for her to reply. 
The girl fully opened her black eyes and looked at Rävaëa. Seeing him as 
a guest in her hermitage she spoke respectfully, telling him her name. 
She was Vedavati, the daughter of a powerful sage, who was himself a 
son of the gods’ preceptor, Båhaspati. Looking down in shyness she said, 
“I was born as an incarnation of the holy Vedas. My father was sought by 
numerous gods and other celestial beings who wished to have my hand 
in marriage. However, none but Viñëu, the Lord of all the worlds, can be 
my spouse. Thus I am seated here, absorbed in thought of the Lord and 
awaiting His favour.” 
Vedavati had meditated for thousands of years. Her body, like that of 
the gods, neither aged nor required any sustenance. She could 
understand by her own inner vision who Rävaëa was and what was his 
intention. In gentle tones she said that only Viñëu could be her husband. 
That inconceivable Lord was all powerful and all seeing and she had 
chosen Him alone. She could not belong to anyone else. Rävaëa should 
continue on his way as before. 
Rävaëa laughed again. He was not going to leave behind this jewel of a 
woman. Hearing the name of Viñëu, his sworn enemy, only made him all 
the more determined. The demon’s voice boomed like thunder. “Your 
resolution to practice austerity befits only old women, O lady of shapely 
limbs. Why do you waste your fleeting youth in this way? I am Rävaëa, 
lord of the Räkñasas, the very mighty race of demons. Become my wife 
and live with me in my capital, Lanka, the golden city I forcibly seized 
from the gods. Who is this Viñëu anyway?” 
Rävaëa spoke derisively of Viñëu, whom he knew to be the Lord of all 
the gods. The arrogant demon cared nothing for any universal authority. 
He had been granted boons by Brahmä, the creator of the universe, who

6 
had so blessed the Räkñasa that he could not be killed by practically any 
created being, neither god nor demon. Rävaëa could assume forms at 
will. Vedavati’s mention of Viñëu did not bother him in the least. He 
stood smiling before the maiden, his eyes full of lust. 
Hearing Rävaëa deride Viñëu, Vedavati flared up with anger and 
rebuked the demon. She told him to leave immediately for his own good, 
lest he incite the powerful anger of that Supreme Deity.  
Rävaëa smiled. This high-spirited woman would make a perfect consort 
for him. He stepped forward and grabbed hold of her long locks. 
Vedavati at once uttered a powerful Sanskrit mantra which momentarily 
checked the demon’s advance. She lifted a hand and by her mystic 
power cut through her hair. The Räkñasa fell back in surprise as she 
spoke furiously. 
“O evil one, I shall now quit this body defiled by your touch! As I have 
been insulted by you I shall take birth again only for your destruction. 
Appearing from the earth, I shall become the pious daughter of a 
virtuous man. You and your entire race will be destroyed as a result of 
that birth.” 
Vedavati closed her eyes and meditated on Viñëu, seeing Him within her 
heart. Before Rävaëa’s eyes she invoked fire from within herself. Her 
body was immediately consumed by flames and in a few moments 
Rävaëa stood looking at her ashes. Baffled by her words, the 
disappointed demon rose again to his chariot and continued on his way. 
The demon and his Räkñasa followers spent some time in the Himälayan 
mountains, wreaking havoc amongst the many ascetics living there. 
Gradually they approached the far northern region where there lay 
Mount Kailäsa, the abode of Çiva. As the Pushpaka began crossing that 
mountain, it was suddenly brought to a halt. Rävaëa was surprised and 
he descended to the ground, surrounded by his ministers who 
accompanied him on the chariot. As he gazed around at the brilliant 
scenery on the mountainside, he saw a strange being with a monkey’s 
head.  
The creature appeared dreadful, with a dark yellowish complexion and 
misshapen features. Although his body was large, he had a dwarfish 
stature. He was clean shaven and muscular and he stood holding a large 
glowing pike. As he gazed at Rävaëa, the demon called out to him. “Who

7 
are you and where is this region? Why have I been impeded?” 
“I am Nandi, the servant of Çiva,” replied the unusual being. “You have 
arrived at Çiva’s abode, which is inaccessible to all created beings. You 
will not be able to pass this mountain. Therefore turn back and go the 
way you have come.” 
Rävaëa looked at the strange body of Nandi and laughed out loud. He 
spoke in a derisory voice. “Why should I heed you, O monkey-faced one? 
Who is this Çiva anyway?” 
Hearing his master insulted infuriated Nandi. Raising his pike, which 
shot forth tongues of fire, he exclaimed, “O Räkñasa, I should kill you at 
once but I will not do so, as you already stand killed by your own sins. 
But I say this, as you disregard me in my monkey form, there shall be 
born on earth many monkeys of terrible strength who will annihilate 
your race.” 
As Nandi spoke the sound of heavenly drums reverberated in the sky 
and a shower of flowers fell. Rävaëa’s eyes flamed in anger. Disregarding 
the curse, he roared, “I shall remove this hill from my path. What do I 
care for you and your master?” 
The Räkñasa immediately plunged his twenty massive arms deep into the 
side of the hill. He began tearing it up and it slowly rose above the earth, 
shaking violently. As the hill shook, Çiva’s consort, Parvati, slipped from 
her position and clung to her husband. Çiva reassured her, “Do not be 
afraid. This is the action of the vain demon Rävaëa. I shall deal with 
him shortly. He cannot harm you.”  
Parvati’s eyes turned red as she replied to her powerful husband. “As this 
wretch has frightened a woman by his violence, his death shall be caused 
by a woman.” 
Çiva stood up and pressed down upon the hill with his toe. Rävaëa at 
once felt an unbearable pressure. His arms, which resembled huge pillars 
holding the hill, were crushed. He let out a tremendous cry that 
resounded throughout the three worlds of heaven, earth and hell, 
terrifying all beings. He was trapped by the weight of the mountain and 
could not move. 
The Räkñasa’s ministers at once surrounded him and advised him to 
appease Çiva. “We have heard how that all-powerful one is easily 
pleased. Offer him prayers and seek his compassion at once. Surely he

8 
will be gracious to you.” 
Rävaëa, who had made a study of all the scriptures, began reciting 
hymns from the Sämaveda in glorification of Çiva. But even after a 
hundred years had passed the Räkñasa still remained trapped. Although 
in great pain, he continued offering prayers to Çiva. Finally Çiva 
relented and relieved Rävaëa of the pressure. He appeared before the 
demon and spoke kindly. “O ten-headed one, your prayers have pleased 
me. Do not be so rash again. Leave now and go wherever you like.” 
Rävaëa bowed to the god, who stood holding his famous trident. The 
crescent moon shone from his head and a large serpent was coiled 
around his blue neck. He gazed at Rävaëa with his three eyes as the 
demon folded his palms to address him. “My lord, if you are actually 
pleased with me then please give me your weapon.” 
Çiva smiled. Rävaëa’s lust for battle would prove to be his destruction 
before long. Saying, “So be it”, Çiva raised his palm in benediction and 
immediately vanished from that spot. Rävaëa felt the mantras for 
invoking Çiva’s powerful Päçupäta weapon appear within his mind. He 
smiled. Who could resist such power? Even he had been unable to 
overcome Çiva. The great deity was surely worthy of his worship. 
Rävaëa mounted the Pushpaka, which had waited in the sky all the time 
he was trapped. Being unable to proceed further to the north he turned 
back southwards, still accompanied by his numerous Räkñasa forces. As 
he moved across the Earth, seeking further martial engagements, he 
came upon the city of Ayodhya. This was the capital of the world of 
humans. The emperor of the earth dwelt there and Rävaëa considered 
him as fit for a fight. If he conquered this king then the whole earth 
would be subjugated.  
Rävaëa had little interest in human affairs-the Räkñasas were a superior 
race of beings more on a level with the gods-but the demon wanted to 
establish his supremacy over all beings. His army of Räkñasas surrounded 
the city, challenging the emperor to battle.  
A fierce fight ensued between the two armies of Rävaëa and the 
Ayodhya king, Anaranya. Tens of thousands of chariots and elephants 
came onto the battlefield, along with hundreds of thousands of foot 
soldiers. Showers of arrows, like swarms of black bees, fell upon the 
demons. Anaranya’s army threw lances, darts, steel bullets and iron

9 
maces by the million. They swept towards the enemy, shouting 
courageously with their weapons raised. 
Rävaëa’s forces used sorcery to appear and disappear at will, flying in the 
sky and hurling down rocks and sharp weapons. The king’s army replied 
with showers of swift and deadly arrows. Using powerful catapults the 
warriors threw at the Räkñasas large iron darts which whistled through 
the air. But Anaranya’s fighters could not easily engage with the elusive 
demons. Although they rushed forward, slashing at the enemy with their 
blue steel swords, the soldiers found themselves cleaving the air as the 
Räkñasas rose into the sky. The Räkñasas, who towered over their human 
foes, would then suddenly descend behind the soldiers, cutting them 
down with razor-sharp scimitars. 
Gradually the demons overpowered the king’s army. The battlefield 
became strewn with the mangled bodies of Anaranya’s troops. Blood 
flowed in waves upon the ground. Heads rolled on the earth with their 
golden earrings flashing and their teeth clenched in fury. Large and 
well-muscled arms, still clutching broad swords and lances, lay severed 
amidst the entrails of slain warriors. The demons sent up great shouts as 
they hacked down the king’s army. 
Anaranya himself exhibited great prowess. He knew the secrets of the 
celestial weapons and by invoking those divine missiles he killed 
innumerable Räkñasas. When the demons hid using their sorcery, he 
released the Shabda weapon of sound, which found them wherever they 
were. As hordes of Räkñasas rushed at the emperor, he let go the wind 
weapon which lifted the demons and hurled them far away. Anaranya 
was difficult to look upon as he stood in his chariot releasing his 
weapons. They fell upon the Räkñasa forces like blazing meteors. But the 
demons far outnumbered the humans. Although hard pressed by the 
king, the Räkñasas responded with more and more sorcery, vanishing 
into the sky and entering the earth. Eventually Rävaëa’s hordes 
completely annihilated their enemies and Anaranya stood alone against 
the demons. 
Seeing all his forces consumed like so many moths entering a fire, the 
emperor became infuriated. He went towards Rävaëa, who had stood by 
in a war chariot as his Räkñasas fought with the soldiers. Anaranya took 
up his great bow and let loose eight hundred fierce arrows, which sped

10 
like flames of fire towards Rävaëa. By the incantations of Anaranya 
those arrows were imbued with the power of thunderbolts. The king 
fired them so swiftly that they flew in a long line, almost end to end. 
They struck Rävaëa furiously on his heads and chest, sounding like claps 
of thunder. But the demon did not flinch in the least.  
Angered by the king’s sudden attack, Rävaëa took up a terrible looking 
mace. He whirled it above his head with such force that it glowed bright 
orange and threw off tongues of fire. He flew with the speed of a tempest 
towards the emperor and struck him a great blow on the forehead. The 
king fell from his chariot and lay bleeding on the ground. The Räkñasa 
began laughing and deriding the fallen monarch. 
“What is the use of fighting with Rävaëa? There is none who can face 
me in battle and remain alive. Clearly you are a foolish man, too much 
addicted to wine and women. Thus you have not heard of my 
unassailable power.” 
Rävaëa continued insulting the dying king, mocking his ancestral line 
in which the earth’s emperors had appeared for thousands of years. 
Anaranya looked up at the demon with eyes red from anger. Gasping for 
breath as his life slipped away, he spoke with difficulty. “I have not been 
killed by you, O vile Räkñasa. Death is certain and comes to all beings 
according to their destiny. None can be killed before their fate decrees, 
nor can any be saved when their time has arrived. I am thus killed by my 
own fate. Do not indulge in self-praise, Rävaëa, for your own death will 
soon come.” 
The emperor possessed mystic power, gained by his long practise of 
austerity. He was loath to waste that accumulated power on Rävaëa, but 
the demon had to be checked. The dying king could at least do 
something before he departed. Anaranya fixed his fading gaze on the 
lord of Räkñasas and, concentrating his mind, he uttered a curse. “In the 
very line you now deride, O Rävaëa, there will soon appear a king who 
will kill you and all your race!”  
As Anaranya spoke the sound of kettledrums was heard resounding in 
the sky, and a shower of celestial flowers fell upon him. Heavenly voices 
were heard to say, “It shall be so.” Having delivered his curse the 
emperor slumped to the ground, his life spent. Before the eyes of the 
demon, Anaranya left his body and rose upwards to the heavens, his

11 
ethereal form glowing like fire. 
Rävaëa snorted derisively. Who cared for the curse of some puny being? 
What human could ever kill him? He only bothered fighting with them 
by way of idle sport. Anaranya’s curse was simply the insane words of a 
dying man. It could never come to pass. If any kings dared challenge him 
they would meet the same end as this one here. As for the celestial 
voices, well, he would soon deal with those arrogant deities. 
The demon again mounted the Pushpaka, which was stationed in the 
sky. Not being interested in pillaging the paltry wealth of a human city, 
he left and soared up into the heavens. Perhaps there were some gods 
around who could put up a better fight. 
Rävaëa went up to the heavenly planets inhabited by the principal gods. 
But the gods swiftly ran away, unwilling to encounter him in battle. 
They knew of the inviolable boons of Brahmä. It was pointless fighting 
the demon. The gods prayed to Viñëu, hiding themselves in fear. 
Rävaëa decided to rest for a while in heaven. He went to Amarävaté, the 
city of Indra, king of the gods. As the Räkñasa was seated in the celestial 
Nandana gardens, he saw an Apsarä, a heavenly nymph, named 
Rambha. The face of that celestial girl shone with incomparable beauty 
and she was adorned with bright garlands and jewels. Her soul-
captivating eyes glanced here and there and her fleshy hips swayed as 
she moved. Rävaëa gazed upon her large round breasts and shapely 
thighs. Her hands, soft like rose petals, pulled her shining blue dress 
tight around her body as she saw the demon staring at her. 
Rävaëa assumed a godly form of great splendor, concealing his terrible 
ten-headed body. He sprang to his feet and quickly went over to 
Rambha, immediately taking her by the hand. Completely overcome by 
lust, he smiled at the celestial girl. “Where do you go and whose are you, 
lovely lady?” he asked. “Who will today enjoy the nectar of your soft, red 
lips? Who will be blessed by the touch of your tender breasts? Which 
fortunate man will lie tightly embraced by you, his mind completely 
captured by carnal delights?” 
Rävaëa was not at all concerned whether she was married or not. He 
had stolen the wives of gods, Gandharvas and demons everywhere, 
taking them to Lanka to join his harem. The Räkñasa was accustomed to 
having his way and spoke only in an attempt to win over Rambha. He

12 
praised her divine beauty and told her of his own power and glory. What 
woman would refuse the opportunity to become the consort of the 
mighty Rävaëa? 
But the beautiful girl did not reciprocate his advances. She pulled away 
from him, her bright bracelets falling to the ground as she wrested 
herself from Rävaëa’s grasp. Folding her palms and looking down, she 
addressed the Räkñasa reproachfully. “Please do not speak in this way. I 
am as good as your daughter and I therefore deserve to be protected by 
you, O Rävaëa. Indeed I am the wedded wife of another.” 
Rambha told him she was married to a god, Nalakuvara, who was the son 
of Kuvera, Rävaëa’s own brother. She was thus related to Rävaëa and he 
should not make amorous advances towards her. 
Rävaëa laughed loudly. He had no regard whatsoever for any moral 
codes. He moved towards Rambha who ran behind a golden bush. 
Rävaëa pursued her, pulling off his red silk robes and revealing his 
immense, lustrous body. The maiden tried to evade him, dodging here 
and there with her garland and necklaces swinging, but it was useless. 
Taking hold of Rambha the Räkñasa forcibly laid her across a nearby 
rock. He snatched off her garments and began ravishing her, his eyes 
expanded in delight. Rambha cried out for help, but seeing the fierce 
Räkñasa no one dared intervene. The demon’s powerful hands pinned 
the white arms of the maiden against the rock. Her dark hair fell in 
disarray, its golden clasps and flowers dislodged. Rävaëa violently 
molested her in front of his demon followers. Although she begged him 
to desist, the Räkñasa took that struggling heavenly girl against her 
desire. 
After Rävaëa had sated his lust he stood up, fastening his waist cloth. 
Shedding tears, Rambha backed away from the demon and fled. Her 
clothes torn and her garlands crushed, she went before her husband. 
When he saw her in that condition Nalakuvara became infuriated. But 
when he heard it was Rävaëa who had raped her, he felt helpless. The 
demon had already defeated Nalakuvara’s powerful father, who was 
supported by innumerable Yakña warriors. There was no possibility of 
facing Rävaëa in a fight. Nalakuvara considered the situation carefully. 
Although he could not fight the demon, he could at least curse him as a 
result of his evil act. The righteous curses of the gods invoked the

13 
infallible power of Viñëu. Considering this the only means of punishing 
Rävaëa, Nalakuvara touched holy water and then uttered his 
imprecation. 
“This evil Räkñasa has violated a celestial lady. If he ever again rapes 
another maiden he will immediately fall dead.” 
Rävaëa soon heard of that curse. He had seen such curses, made by gods 
and åñis, come to pass many times. Once uttered they could not be 
retracted. Although he did not like to accept it, Rävaëa could 
understand that some powerful force maintained the universal order and 
laws. Thinking it possible that Nakakuvera’s words might just be 
effective, he decided not to again force himself upon another female. 
Better not to take any chances. After all, there were enough women who 
would willingly accept him. 
Being disappointed that no gods would fight with him, Rävaëa left the 
heavenly planets. He began heading for the southern quarter of the 
universe, where lived the Dänavas and Daityas, the most powerful 
celestial demons. Surely they would afford him battle. Who else was 
there left for him to conquer? 
As Rävaëa flew in the Pushpaka he suddenly saw ahead of him the 
celestial seer, Närada, shining brightly and holding his tamboura. The 
seer plucked the strings gently, singing the praises of Viñëu. Rävaëa had 
met him many times before and was pleased to see him. The Räkñasa 
usually had little time for sages, especially devotees of Viñëu. He 
preferred to kill and eat them rather than speak with them. The åñis and 
seers generally favored the gods, but Närada was different. He would 
often give Rävaëa good advice and seemed to be his well wisher. Rävaëa 
raised a hand in salute to the sage. 
The seer came before Rävaëa and greeted him. Närada could travel 
freely anywhere in the universe. It was even said that he could leave the 
material worlds and journey to Vaikuntha, the spiritual abode of the 
Lord himself, which knows no decay and is free of all suffering. Närada 
smiled at Rävaëa. His large eyes were like two shining sapphires. On his 
head his coiled golden hair was held in place by a jeweled silver band. 
Clad in the soft skin of a black renku deer, Närada stood in the air in 
front of Rävaëa, who invited him onto the chariot. Sitting cross-legged 
on a golden seat next to the demon, the seer began to address him in

14 
gentle and pleasing tones. 
“Why are you harassing this world of humans, O valiant one? It is 
already in the grip of death. These people do not deserve to be attacked 
by you, Rävaëa, who cannot be overcome by even the entire heavenly 
host united together. Who would destroy people who are wracked by 
numerous anxieties, surrounded by endless calamities, and are subject to 
old age and hundreds of diseases?” 
Närada told Rävaëa that everyone in the material world would in time 
go to the abode of Yamaräja, the great lord of death. There was no need 
for Rävaëa to kill them. Death conquers all. Even the gods would 
eventually succumb to death. If Rävaëa should conquer Yamaräja the 
entire universe would be conquered. 
The sage knew that Rävaëa could not overpower Yamaräja. But he 
wanted to distract the demon from his evil aim of killing more people 
and overthrowing the gods. He also wanted the Räkñasa to greatly 
increase his sinful actions by assailing the god of Death. Rävaëa would 
thus create for himself a karmic destiny which would soon result in his 
own destruction.  
The demon pondered Närada’s suggestion. This sounded interesting. He 
liked the idea of fighting with the immensely powerful Yamaräja. 
Perhaps this would be a battle worthy of him. And if Death himself were 
slain then the whole universal order would be cast into utter chaos! 
That appealed to Rävaëa, who wanted to assert himself over any and all 
powers in the universe. He nodded slowly at Närada, who sat smiling at 
him. Rävaëa told the sage he would leave immediately for Death’s abode. 
As Närada rose up into the sky, playing upon his tamboura, Rävaëa 
began heading towards the domain of Yamaräja, the god of justice. 
As Rävaëa approached the ethereal region known as Yamaloka, he saw 
everywhere living beings reaping the fruits of their actions. He also saw 
the millions of soldiers and servants of Yamaräja, known as the 
Yamadutas. They appeared fierce and unapproachable. Their bodies 
were powerful but hideously deformed, covered all over with black hairs 
that stood erect. In their hands they held nooses and terrible weapons. 
Their faces were contorted into frightful expressions and they yelled and 
shrieked in dissonant tones. Moving swiftly, they struck and tortured 
people who were running in all directions.

15 
Fearful screams and cries resounded everywhere in that dark and 
desolate place. Rävaëa saw in hundreds and thousands people being 
eaten up by fierce dogs, consumed by fires, or being hurled into vats of 
boiling oil by the Yamadutas. Other unrighteous men and women were 
running here and there on burning sands, being pursued by Yamadutas 
holding lances and tridents. Some were being dragged through trees with 
leaves like steel razors that shredded their bodies. Howling in terrible 
pain they would fall to the ground, but their bodies would again become 
whole. They would then leap up and race off, only to be quickly caught 
by the Yamadutas and put through the same suffering again. 
Rävaëa witnessed innumerable kinds of punishment being meted out to 
sinful souls. Searching for Yamaräja, he coursed on rapidly in the 
Pushpaka. In other parts of that mystical and indescribable region, 
Rävaëa saw people enjoying celestial delights by virtue of their own 
good deeds. It seemed as though they were situated in a separate 
dimension of space and time. Beautiful heavenly landscapes stretched 
out into the distance. Large shining mansions stood next to clear blue 
lakes. Young men and women with highly attractive forms were dressed 
in golden garments and ornaments, embracing one another and 
laughing. Excellent food and drink was laid out on gold and silver tables. 
Musicians played and young girls danced. Rävaëa saw countless people 
intoxicated with pleasure and entirely oblivious to the scenes of 
suffering elsewhere. 
Leaving behind that glowing region of happiness, Rävaëa continued 
deeply into Yamaloka. He crossed over the broad Vaitarani river, which 
flowed with blood and excrement, and came to another dark terrain 
where countless Yamadutas were relentlessly pursuing wicked persons. 
The terrible cackles of the Yamadutas echoed there, along with the 
howls of jackals and wolves. Everywhere stood people who appeared 
emaciated and pale, seized with unbearable thirst and crying out for 
water.  
Descending from his chariot, Rävaëa began to beat back the Yamadutas, 
freeing the people they were punishing. He felt no compassion for the 
pain of others, but he calculated that by oppressing the Yamadutas he 
would cause Yamaräja to appear. As the demon freed many thousands of 
wretched persons from their tormentors, he was suddenly attacked by a

16 
massed force of Yamadutas. They assailed Rävaëa with spears, iron bars, 
steel clubs, pikes, javelins and maces. They rose up and began 
demolishing the seats, daises, pillars and houses on the Pushpaka. But 
the indestructible chariot was immediately recreated by the power of 
Brahmä, by whom it had first been fashioned. 
Rävaëa’s Räkñasa forces fought back against the Yamadutas. Millions 
upon millions of servants of Yamaräja advanced in great waves. They 
rained down an unlimited number of arrows and other fierce weapons 
upon Rävaëa and his followers. The Räkñasas engaged with the 
Yamadutas, sending up their terrible war cries. The clash of weapons and 
the shouts of the warriors sounded like the roaring ocean tossed by a 
storm.  
Leaving off the other Räkñasas, the Yamadutas concentrated upon 
Rävaëa. Covered all over with their arrows and bleeding profusely, the 
demon king appeared like a great mountain giving forth streams of red 
lava. Using his knowledge of mystical weapons, the Räkñasa returned 
volleys of arrows, spears, maces, rocks and huge trees. This fearful and 
deadly shower fell upon the forces of Yamaräja who stood in front of 
Rävaëa.  
By whirling their maces and lances the Yamadutas repelled all Rävaëa’s 
missiles and surrounded him in thousands. They appeared like a mass of 
carnivorous ants around a large black beetle. Rävaëa became completely 
covered by darts and lances piercing every part of his body. He roared in 
anger and pain, quickly rising upwards from out of the midst of his 
assailants.  
Descending to the ground he held his bow and placed upon it a blazing 
arrow. The demon invoked the power of Çiva, imbuing the arrow with 
the divine force of that immortal god. As the weapon was released a 
sheet of fire rushed across the ground, consuming Yamaräja’s forces. 
Enormous orange and white flames leapt in all directions, burning the 
Yamadutas’ bodies to ashes. The ground itself became molten and the 
forces of Yamaräja fell back in a confused mass.  
In the flames’ wake came innumerable ghostly followers of Çiva, filling 
the earth and sky with their terrifying forms. They rushed about the 
battlefield striking fear into the Yamadutas’ hearts. By the power of 
Çiva’s weapon, waves of fearsome carnivorous beasts sprang up from the

17 
ground, howling horribly and tearing at the Yamadutas. 
Rävaëa sent up a victory cry, making the ground shake. Hearing that 
shout, Yamaräja, seated in his palace, could understand that Rävaëa was 
overpowering his forces. He ordered his chariot to be fetched and 
quickly mounted it. Yamaräja stood in his stupendous chariot with a 
lance and mace in his hands. Angered, the great god burned with a 
glaring radiance. By his side stood the personified form of Kaladanda, 
the infallible rod of Death, his body a brilliant black and his eyes blazing 
like two red fires. On the other side of Yamaräja stood the very Time 
Spirit himself, the destroyer of the worlds, fearful in appearance. 
Standing together those three deities could not be countenanced. On all 
four sides of the chariot, which looked like a dark mountain, hung the 
frightful nooses of Death. 
Drawn by a thousand red and black steeds shining with a bright luster, 
and having a thousand great wheels, the celestial chariot advanced with 
a terrible noise. Seeing that god moving off in anger, all the denizens of 
heaven trembled.  
In an instant Yamaräja ‘s chariot arrived at the spot where Rävaëa stood 
roaring. Rävaëa’s followers immediately fled in all directions simply 
upon seeing that awful chariot. Some of them fell unconscious on the 
spot. But Rävaëa himself was not afraid. Seeing his awful adversary he 
felt overjoyed, anticipating the fight. The demon stood firm as Yamaräja 
hurled at him many blazing javelins and iron clubs. They struck Rävaëa 
with tremendous force, piercing him and causing streams of blood to 
flow from his body. 
Rävaëa raised his bow to counter Yamaräja’s attack. Using sorcery, he 
fired thousands of straight-flying arrows imbued with the force of a 
thunderbolt. Those arrows struck Yamaräja all over his body, but the god 
remained unmoved. Again and again Rävaëa fired off his arrows and 
darts, charging them with celestial power. He struck all three deities 
with his fiery weapons, but they stood firm. Yamaräja sent back at the 
demon countless barbed lances which struck him violently on the breast. 
Stunned by those irresistible weapons, Rävaëa fell unconscious to the 
ground. Yamaräja, observing the rules of fair combat, did not further 
attack his overpowered enemy. 
After some time Rävaëa came back to his senses and saw Yamaräja still

18 
stationed before him. He contemplated his next move. This was indeed a 
formidable opponent. Rarely was the demon extended in a fight. Rävaëa 
rallied himself and stretched his bow to full length, releasing celestial 
arrows which filled the sky. They fell upon Yamaräja like fiery serpents. 
Being assailed by those arrows, and bleeding profusely, Yamaräja roared 
in anger. As he opened his mouth, fire covered by billows of smoke 
issued forth. The whole region was brilliantly illuminated by that fire, as 
if the sun itself had risen in that ever-dark place. 
Witnessing the astonishing battle between Yamaräja and the Räkñasa, 
the gods assembled above them. They feared that the dissolution of all 
the worlds was imminent. Yamaräja’s anger would surely annihilate the 
entire universe.  
Rävaëa continuously sent his furious weapons towards the three gods. 
Death personified, highly enraged by Rävaëa, then spoke to Yamaräja. 
“My lord, do not exert yourself further. Let me remain alone here with 
this Räkñasa. I shall make short work of him. None in the past, no matter 
how powerful, have been able to overcome me. Every god, åñi and demon 
has succumbed to my power. Indeed, all created beings must surely 
submit to me. There is no doubt about this, therefore you need not 
bother yourself with this wretch any longer. Leave him to me.” 
Yamaräja had become infuriated by Rävaëa’s insolence. He felt insulted 
and he told Death to stand back, for he personally would destroy the 
demon. The god lifted up his mace and gazed upon Rävaëa. As it was 
raised, that mace threw off a halo of blazing fire. Yamaräja held it in his 
hand like the globe of the sun and he fixed his red eyes on the demon. 
Just as he was about to release the mace to destroy Rävaëa, Brahmä 
appeared before him. He was seen and heard only by Yamaräja as he 
spoke to the angry god. 
“O immeasurably powerful one, this Räkñasa is not to be killed by you at 
this time. Indeed I have conferred upon him a boon that he cannot be 
slain except by a human. This cannot be falsified, lest the order of the 
universe be cast into chaos. Therefore hold back your mace. Rävaëa is 
not yet destined to die. If you release your infallible mace upon this 
demon, it will result in the death of all other created beings.” 
Long ago Rävaëa had pleased Brahmä by performing difficult asceticism 
and had won from the god a boon. Brahmä had granted Rävaëa

19 
immunity from being slain by any beings, except for humans or animals, 
whom Rävaëa utterly disregarded. 
Hearing that command of Brahmä, the chief of the gods, Yamaräja 
lowered his mace. Realising that nothing could be accomplished by him 
in that battle, he then and there disappeared from Rävaëa’s sight. When 
he saw Yamaräja depart, the Räkñasa considered himself victorious and 
roared in joy. Now he was surely the most powerful being in the 
universe. What was there left to prove? Even the great lord of death had 
run away from him.  
Rävaëa looked around and saw that the slain Yamadutas had been 
brought back to life by Yamaräja’s power. Ignoring Rävaëa they 
continued their grisly task of meting out punishment. Rävaëa felt he 
had no further purpose to achieve in Yamaloka. He had established his 
supremacy and that was all he desired. It was time to return to Lanka, his 
golden city. Getting aboard the Pushpaka he left that region, followed by 
his forces, and flew to the north, heading again for the earth planet 
where Lanka was situated. 
Part One 
Betrayed 
Chapter 1 
King Daçaratha’s Longing 
King Daçaratha paced his palace balcony. His handsome brow was 
furrowed. In a pensive mood, he surveyed the scene around him. People 
thronged the inner courtyard below. Feudal kings and princes came with 
their retinues to pay tribute. From his seventh-story terrace Daçaratha 
could see much of his city, which stretched to the horizon in all 
directions. Crowds of citizens moved along the well-planned roads, 
which were interspersed with mango groves and orchards. The broad 
central highway, built entirely of red stone, ran the full hundred-mile 
length of the city. Large white mansions lined that road, with many-

20 
colored pennants waving in the breeze on their roofs. The road was 
sprinkled with perfumed water and strewn with flowers. Above the city 
the king could see the golden airplanes of Apsaräs, the consorts of the 
gods. 
Looking out over his capital, Ayodhya, Daçaratha was plunged in an 
ocean of anguish. He entered the palace and walked slowly towards his 
inner chambers. As he descended the wide marble stairways, he heard 
his priests chanting sacred Sanskrit texts. The sound of mantras mingled 
with that of drums and lutes being beautifully played by royal musicians. 
Even that sound, which normally gave him so much joy, could not 
placate him. 
The king entered his rooms, leaving his personal guards at the door. 
Declining the food and drinks offered to him by his maidservants, he 
went over to the large latticed window. He moved aside the silk drapes 
and continued gazing out at his city. Ayodhya had been constructed by 
Manu, a son of Sürya, the all-powerful sun-god. Manu had been the first 
of the kings in Daçaratha’s line, all of them emperors of the globe. As he 
thought of his long ancestry, the king only felt more pain. He sighed and 
turned back into his rooms. 
Seeing the anxious king, his three queens tried gently to console him. 
They sat him on a large golden couch covered with silk pillows and 
studded with gems. His senior wife, Kaushalya, gently massaged his feet, 
while Sumitra and Kaikeyi fanned him with snow-white chamara 
whisks.  
The king sat lost in thought. He looked at the exquisite carvings of the 
gods lining his walls. All his life he had done so much to please those 
deities. Once he had even gone into battle against the celestial demons 
on their behalf. Surely they would help him now. Daçaratha silently 
prayed to them. 
While the king sat absorbed in his thoughts and prayers, a messenger 
came telling him that his chief priest Vasiñöha was now present in the 
assembly hall. Daçaratha had been waiting for this news. He rose up, and 
with the gait of a powerful lion went along the wide palace passageways, 
his large sword swinging at his side and his gold ornaments jangling as 
he walked. 
Near to the hall he was joined by his chief ministers. All of them were

21 
heroes who had been tried in battle, and all were learned and wise. The 
state ran smoothly under their expert administration. There were no 
citizens without employment and no criminals left unchecked. The 
ministers were devoted to Daçaratha’s service, and as they walked they 
considered the problem facing the king. 
Flanked by his bodyguards and ministers, Daçaratha entered his great 
hall. It vied in splendor with the assembly hall of Indra, the king of the 
gods. Massive marble pillars rose up to a roof which seemed to reach the 
sky. Balconies of alabaster and coral, worked with gold filigree, were 
gradually tiered all around the hall. Along the balconies were gold seats 
spread with white cushions. Large silk tapestries depicting the pastimes 
of the gods hung from the walls, which were lined with lapis lazuli and 
encrusted with jewels. The air was filled with the scent of incense. In 
the center of the hall sat numerous priests who continuously chanted 
prayers from the ancient scriptures, invoking the presence of deities. 
The great megha drum resounded deeply as Daçaratha strode towards his 
seat. Everyone stood and there was a cry of “Victory! All glories to 
Emperor Daçaratha!” The king, appearing like a god, took his seat on a 
large throne of refined gold bedecked with brilliant celestial gems.  
A hush descended on the assembly as Daçaratha prepared to speak. 
Everyone sat in expectation. The citizens knew of the king’s worry; they 
loved him like a father and shared his anxiety. They were grouped in the 
hall according to their class. At the front were the Brahmins, wearing 
simple cloth and holding their waterpots and prayer beads. On one side 
sat the warriors, their powerful bodies clad in silks and gold ornaments, 
with long swords hanging from their belts. Near to them were the 
tradespeople in their colorful dress, and behind them were the servants 
and workers, also beautifully adorned. All social classes were represented 
in that assembly. 
Daçaratha looked around the hall, smiling affectionately at everyone. 
Although the king was preoccupied with his worry, no one could detect 
in him any negligence or laxity in his duties. Seeing him smiling at 
them, the people felt reassured that Daçaratha would find a solution to 
his problem. They sat awaiting his speech. 
Placing his hand on his golden scepter, the king turned to his chief 
priest Vasiñöha, who sat on a raised seat near the throne. With a

22 
powerful voice that boomed around the hall, Daçaratha addressed the 
priest. “I have called this assembly to settle a great worry of mine. As you 
know, this wide earth has for a long time been held under the sway of 
victorious kings in my line. O jewel among sages, is that glorious history 
about to end? What can I do to ensure that our proud lineage will 
continue?” 
Daçaratha was perturbed that he had no son. Having ruled as the 
undisputed emperor of the earth for thousands of years, his retirement 
was now approaching; but there was no one to succeed him. Somehow, 
none of his wives had given birth to a son. The king had called for a full 
assembly to propose an idea he was considering. He needed the approval 
of the Brahmins and he wanted the consent of his people. Daçaratha 
looked anxiously at Vasiñöha, who was both his priest and preceptor. “O 
learned one, you know well the perils that attend a kingdom bereft of a 
monarch. How can I retire to the forest leaving this world without a 
protector?” 
Vasiñöha sat surrounded by many other Brahmin sages. His hand rested 
upon his staff as he listened to Daçaratha. The sun shone through the 
carved lattice windows of the hall, covering the king with golden light. 
Vasiñöha, shining with his own mystic power, appeared like a second sun 
as he replied to the king. “O emperor, I have no doubt that you will soon 
be blessed with a powerful son who can succeed you. Not long ago I 
heard this told by Sanat Kumar, the immortal sage who roams the 
universe. A divine arrangement is being worked by the gods for your 
everlasting benefit.” 
Vasiñöha lived in a hermitage outside the city. He was frequently visited 
by wandering sages and mystics. Some days previously the famous seer 
Sanat Kumar, who always appeared like a young boy, had spoken with 
Vasiñöha. He told him that soon four powerful sons would be born to the 
emperor. These sons would be divine incarnations, appearing to fulfill 
the purpose of the gods. Vasiñöha continued, “The Brahmins have all 
been praying to the Lord for your sake, O monarch. We have seen 
auspicious signs in the heavens. It is clear that some great plan of the 
Supreme will be achieved through you.” 
The king felt joy to hear his priest’s words. Like his forebears before him, 
Daçaratha had religiously pursued his duties as emperor. Under his

23 
benevolent rule, the world enjoyed prosperity and peace. The king 
desired not only the immediate material enjoyment of his people but 
their spiritual well-being as well. He kept everyone on the path of piety 
and truth, leading them towards freedom from the cycle of birth and 
death. Seeing all the people as his own children, he was concerned that 
their happiness would continue after his retirement. He spoke again. “I 
have been considering the performance of a horse sacrifice for the 
pleasure of the gods and Viñëu. O noble sages, will this be successful? 
Can I satisfy the Lord in this way and thereby attain my desired end?” 
Daçaratha knew that nothing could be achieved unless Viñëu, the 
Supreme Lord, was pleased. Although they controlled the universe, the 
other gods were but Viñëu’s agents. Many times in the past the king’s 
ancestors had performed great sacrifices for satisfying the Lord and 
achieving their purposes. The king now considered this to be his only 
means of deliverance. He looked hopefully at Vasiñöha, who had been 
speaking with the other sages at his side. Turning towards the king 
Vasiñöha said, “We are in agreement, O tiger among men. Let the 
sacrifice proceed! We shall immediately prepare a ground on the banks 
of the Sarayu. You will certainly get a son by this method.” 
The assembly erupted with joyful shouts. Everywhere were cries of “Let 
it be so! Let the sacrifice proceed!” 
The king, his eyes grown wide with delight as he anticipated the 
fulfillment of his desire, said to Vasiñöha, “Let the preparations begin 
today. Protected by four hundred of my best warriors, the sacrificial 
horse will roam the globe before returning for the sacrifice.”  
After Daçaratha had issued all necessary instructions the assembly was 
dismissed and the king retired to his inner chambers. Together with his 
wives, he worshipped Viñëu and the gods, praying that his sacrifice 
would succeed. 
* * * 
The whole city of Ayodhya was filled with excitement as the news of the 
king’s sacrifice spread. In the large public squares minstrels sang songs 
recounting the exploits of heroes in Daçaratha’s line, while troupes of 
female dancers depicted the tales with precise and beautiful gestures. 
The temples became crowded with joyful people praying for the success

24 
of Daçaratha’s sacrifice. From the balconies of  
houses lining the wide avenues, wealthy people threw down gems for the 
Brahmins and the jewels sparkled brightly on the clean, paved roads. 
The city resonated with the sound of lutes, trumpets and kettledrums. 
Augmenting the music was the chanting of Brahmins reciting the holy 
scriptures. With flags and pennants flying, festoons hanging between 
the houses and flowers strewn everywhere, Ayodhya had the appearance 
of a festival held by the gods in heaven. 
The priests of Ayodhya set about preparing for the sacrifice. Selecting 
and consecrating a purebred horse which was free from any blemish, 
they released it to range freely across the country. As it traveled, it was 
followed and protected by four hundred powerful generals from the 
king’s army. According to the ritual, wherever the horse went, the 
residing rulers were called upon to attend the sacrifice and pay homage 
to Daçaratha. Anyone refusing would be immediately challenged to a 
fight. If they were not subjugated, then the sacrifice could not proceed. 
None, however, wished the emperor any ill. The horse came back to 
Ayodhya without incident at the end of one year. 
Seeing the horse returned, Daçaratha called Vasiñöha. He touched his 
guru’s feet and asked him with all humility, “O holy one, if you deem it 
fit, please now commence the sacrifice. You are my dearest friend as well 
as my guru. Indeed, you are a highly exalted soul. Fully depending on 
you, I am confident of the sacrifice’s outcome.” 
After assuring the king, Vasiñöha spoke with the priests, instructing 
them to have the sacrificial arena built. Chief among them was 
Rishwashringa, a powerful Brahmin who had come from the kingdom of 
Aìga. It had long ago been prophesied that Rishwashringa would help 
Daçaratha obtain progeny. Along with Vasiñöa, he took charge of the 
arrangements for the sacrifice. 
Vasiñöa ordered that many white marble palaces be constructed for the 
monarchs who would attend. The very best food and drink was made 
available, and actors and dancers came to entertain the guests. Horse 
stables, elephant stalls and vast dormitories to accommodate thousands 
of people were built. Vasiñöha instructed the king’s ministers, “Everyone 
should have whatever they desire. Take care that no one is disrespected 
at any time, even under the impulse of passion or anger.”

25 
Vasiñöha spoke to the king’s charioteer and minister, Sumantra, who was 
especially close to Daçaratha. “We have invited kings from all over the 
globe. On behalf of the emperor you should personally ensure that they 
are all properly received. Take particular care of the celebrated king 
Janaka, the heroic and truthful ruler of Mithila. With my inner vision I 
can see that he will in the future become intimately related to our 
house.”  
Soon many kings came to Ayodhya bearing valuable gifts of jewels, 
pearls, clothing and golden ornaments. Upon their arrival they in turn 
were offered gifts at Vasiñöha’s command, who had instructed his 
assistants, “Give freely to all. No gift should ever be made with 
disrespect or irreverence, for such begrudging gifts will doubtlessly bring 
ruin to the giver.”  
The royal astrologers ascertained the most favorable day for the 
commencement of the sacrifice. Daçaratha, headed by Vasiñöha and 
Rishwashringa, and accompanied by his three wives, then came to the 
sacrificial compound, which resembled an assembly of the gods. Many 
fires blazed, each dedicated to a different deity and attended by 
numerous Brahmins. The great compound was crowded with sages 
absorbed in prayer and meditation. On all sides stood warriors equipped 
with every kind of weapon, fully alert to any danger. The king sat 
surrounded by Brahmins, who consecrated him for the sacrifice. He and 
his wives made offerings into the fires and joined in the chanting of 
prayers. 
After some days the horse was brought before the sacrificial fire 
dedicated to Viñëu. Learned priests constantly poured into it oblations 
of clarified butter along with handfuls of grains. Taking the horse by its 
reins, Vasiñöa uttered a powerful mantra and the animal fell unconscious. 
It was immediately placed upon the fire. As the horse was consumed by 
the blazing fire, those with divine vision saw the soul of the creature rise 
from the fire, glowing brilliantly, and ascend towards heaven. 
As the sacrifice concluded, Daçaratha was delighted. He said to the 
priests, “According to the ordinance it is fitting that I now bestow upon 
you proper charity. Therefore, O holy ones, take this entire earth as a 
gift. This is the only appropriate offering for great souls like yourselves.”  
The priests replied, “You alone are able to protect this earth with its

26 
countless people. As ascetics we having nothing to do with the world, 
nor are we able to maintain it; therefore we leave it with you, O 
monarch.” 
The Brahmins had no interest in wealth but wished only to live simply, 
unencumbered by material possessions. However, Daçaratha understood 
that unless charity were given to the priests the sacrifice was not 
complete. Falling at the Brahmins’ feet, he implored, “If you refuse my 
gift, then the success of my endeavor is most uncertain.” 
The priests quickly raised up the king. They understood the scriptural 
injunction to which the king alluded. “If it so pleases you, then you may 
give to us a little wealth. We have no use for the earth.” 
The king distributed to the Brahmins hundreds of millions of gold and 
silver coins, as well as millions of milk-bearing cows. He supplied tens of 
thousands of Brahmins present at that sacrifice with enough wealth to 
last their entire lives.  
Vasiñöha and Rishwashringa then arranged for one final ritual to be 
performed. They called the gods by name to come and accept the 
sacrificial offerings made to them. The celestial smoke from the 
offerings, sanctified by Vedic mantras, rose upwards to the skies and was 
received by the gods. With the universal creator Brahmä at their head, 
they personally assembled in sky above Daçaratha’s sacrificial compound. 
Unseen by everyone, the gods began to address Brahmä:  
“Because of a boon granted by you, O lord, the king of the Räkñasas 
Rävaëa is constantly harassing us and is extremely difficult to 
overpower. Having begged from you that he be made invincible to us as 
well as to practically all other created beings, that evil-minded one now 
seeks to overthrow us. He profanes even great saints and has no regard 
for anyone at all.” 
Brahmä, was concerned that his boon to Rävaëa had created such 
problems, listened as Indra, on behalf of the gods, continued: “Rävaëa 
sought invincibility but did not ask for immunity against humans, whom 
he considered of no consequence. Thus his death must come at the 
hands of a human. Please, therefore, beseech the Lord to appear as 
Daçaratha’s son.”  
Although Rävaëa could still be killed by a human, the gods knew that no 
ordinary man could slay him. It could only be done by the all-powerful

27 
Viñëu himself, if he came to the earth as a man. And here was the ideal 
opportunity. The emperor of the earth was praying to Viñëu for a 
powerful son. Surely the Lord would consent to appear in Daçaratha’s 
family, especially if Brahmä, Viñëu’s devoted servant, also prayed to him 
to appear. 
Brahmä assented to the gods’ request. He knew that the time for the 
Lord’s appearance had come. Seated in meditation, Brahmä thought of 
the Lord within his heart. At that moment Viñëu appeared in the sky. 
Only the gods saw Him as He descended upon the back of His eagle 
carrier, Garuòa. His beautiful body was blackish and He shone with a 
brilliant luster. He was dressed in yellow silk with a garland of blue 
lotuses. A necklace of bright celestial gems hung around His neck. 
Adorned with numerous gold ornaments and jewels, He held in His four 
hands a conch shell, a mace, a discus weapon and a lotus flower. 
Gracefully descending, He sat amid the gods as they worshipped Him 
with hymns and prayers.  
Brahmä addressed Viñëu in a reverential tone. “O Lord, here is the 
worthy Daçaratha praying for a son. All the worlds are sorely afflicted by 
the evil Räkñasa Rävaëa, who must be slain by a man. Be pleased, 
therefore, to take birth as Daçaratha’s son. Appearing in a human form, 
please dispatch Rävaëa in an encounter and save the worlds from their 
suffering.” 
Viñëu smiled at the gods. He spoke reassuringly in a voice deep like the 
rumbling of thunderclouds. “O gods, give up all fear. Along with My own 
expansions I shall soon be born as four sons of Daçaratha. I Myself shall 
appear as his eldest son, and My personal weapons will incarnate as My 
brothers. After annihilating Rävaëa and his demon hordes, I will remain 
on the mortal plane, ruling the globe for eleven thousand years.” 
The inconceivable Viñëu then disappeared even as he was being 
worshipped. The gods felt their purpose was accomplished and, after 
accepting Daçaratha’s offerings, they returned to the heavens.  
In the sacrificial compound the rituals were almost over. Daçaratha sat 
expectantly, hoping for some sign of success. He was apprehensive. If he 
could not obtain a son by this method, then he would surely be lost. He 
looked at the blazing fire as the last offerings were being made. 
Suddenly there arose from the sacrificial fire a shining and beautiful

28 
personality form. Everyone watched in wonder as he descended near the 
king, remaining slightly above the ground. In his hands he held a golden 
bowl filled with celestial ambrosia. He spoke to Daçaratha in a voice 
resounding like a kettledrum. “O king, know me to be a messenger of the 
Lord of all created beings, Viñëu.”  
“Please accept my heartfelt welcome, O divine one,” replied the king 
with his palms joined. “What shall I do for you?” 
“By worshipping the gods in sacrifice you have received this reward,” 
said the messenger. “Take now this ambrosia prepared by the gods which 
will bestow upon you the offspring you desire. Give it to your wives and 
through them you will soon secure four celebrated sons.” 
Accepting the ambrosia with his head bent low and saying, “So be it,” 
the king felt a surge of joy as he took the golden vessel, even as a pauper 
would feel happiness upon suddenly gaining great wealth. 
As a mark of respect, the king walked with folded hands around the 
messenger, who, having discharged his duty, immediately vanished into 
the fire from which he had appeared. The king stood in amazement 
holding the bowl. All around him the Brahmins cried out, “Victory! 
Victory!” After offering his prostrate obeisances to Vasiñöha, Daçaratha 
left the sacrifice along with his wives and returned to his palace. 
The king gave half of the ambrosia to Kaushalya. He gave the other half 
to Kaikeyi, the youngest wife, who was especially dear to him. Both of 
these wives each gave a part of their share to the king’s third wife, 
Sumitra. 
All those noble wives of the emperor felt honored and immediately ate 
the ambrosia. In a short time they felt within themselves the presence of 
powerful offspring. Their minds were enlivened by the divine energy of 
the children inside their wombs, and they felt elated. Daçaratha, who 
had at last attained his desired object, felt as delighted as Indra, the king 
of the gods in heaven. 
* * * 
Having decided to incarnate in Daçaratha’s family, Viñëu summoned the 
gods and commanded them, “Soon my advent upon earth will occur. 
Assisted by all of you, I will crush the despicable Rävaëa. Foolishly, that 
evil one did not ask immunity from humans or animals, considering both

29 
to be entirely powerless in the face of his strength. As promised, I will 
descend as a human. O gods, without leaving your posts as universal 
controllers, you are capable of expanding yourselves onto earth. You 
should therefore appear in the world as powerful monkeys.” 
Viñëu’s plan for the protection of the worlds was unfolding. The gods 
took birth as monkeys who had strength equal to their godly power. 
They could assume various forms at will, they were gallant, as swift as 
the wind, highly intelligent and practically invulnerable in battle. 
The earth became populated with millions of huge monkeys who, in the 
way of the gods, grew up as soon as they were born. As haughty and 
strong as lions and tigers, they roared loudly and sprang about fearlessly. 
They were headed by Vali, the expansion of Indra, and by Sugréva, the 
expansion of Sürya. Fearful in appearance, they thronged the peaks of 
mountains and resided in great forests. When they came together they 
appeared like masses of clouds moving about on the surface of the globe.  
Chapter 2 
The Birth of Räma 
Daçaratha, his desire fulfilled, dwelt happily in Ayodhya awaiting the 
birth of his sons. The Brahmins and kings who had assembled for the 
sacrifice left for their various abodes, sent on their way with kind words 
and gifts by the emperor. Four seasons passed. Then, at a time when 
favorable stars were visible in the heavens, Kaushalya gave birth to a son 
named Räma.  
Though Räma was the Lord of creation, Kaushalya saw Him simply as 
her own dear child. She held Him tight to her bosom, overwhelmed with 
motherly affection and unable to recognize His divinity. Coming out of 
the delivery room, Kaushalya shone brilliantly with that baby boy, who 
had eyes like lotus petals. 
Next, a son named Bharat was born from Kaikeyi; and from Sumitra, 
who had received two portions of ambrosia, were born twin sons, 
Lakñman and Shatrughna. All three boys resembled celestials and they

30 
seemed to blaze with their splendor. 
In the heavens Gandharvas, heavenly musicians, began to sing 
melodiously while bevies of Apsaräs danced. Kettledrums resounded in 
the sky and showers of flowers fell upon the earth. In Ayodhya, the 
streets quickly became crowded with rejoicing citizens. Minstrels, bards 
and chanters of sacred hymns gathered in every quarter, glorifying the 
birth of Räma and His brothers. The city, decorated all over with 
colorful flags and garlands, looked beautiful. 
King Daçaratha, overwhelmed with happiness, gave a large heap of 
shining jewels to the Brahmins and arranged for a feast to be distributed 
to his entire kingdom. Vasiñöha joyfully performed the name-giving 
ceremony and all the other rites of passage for the brothers.  
Of all the brothers Räma was especially glorious. His attractive body had 
the hue of a celestial emerald. Dressed in the finest silk and adorned 
with golden ornaments, he captured the mind of all who saw him. Räma 
was devoted to his father’s service. He took delight in the science of 
archery and quickly mastered the arts of horseback and elephant riding, 
as well as the various methods of driving a chariot.  
Lakñman was deeply attached to His elder brother Räma from His 
infancy. He was like a second self to Räma, and He pleased Him in every 
way. Unless Lakñman was present, Räma would neither sleep nor eat. 
Whenever Räma went out to the forest to hunt, Lakñman would follow 
at His heels, guarding Him on all sides. 
Shatrughna was just as dear to Bharata, and These two brothers were 
also inseparable. 
Daçaratha felt as pleased with his four sons as Brahmä feels with the four 
gods presiding over the four quarters of the universe. Those princes were 
tigers among men yet they were modest, wise, far-sighted and glorious in 
every way. They were attached to Their studies and soon became well 
versed in all aspects of kingship. 
As the princes’ studies neared completion the king began to think about 
Their marriages. One day, while lost in such thoughts, the powerful 
mystic Viçvämitra arrived at his palace. The sage instructed the 
gatekeepers, “Tell the king that Viçvämitra, the son of Gadhi, is at his 
door.”  
Upon seeing the lustrous åñi, the gatekeepers were struck with awe. They

31 
ran to Daçaratha’s quarters to inform him. 
Daçaratha quickly went with his ministers to greet the sage, even as 
Indra might greet Brahmä. As soon as he saw Viçvämitra standing at his 
door, the king respectfully brought him in, sat him down and personally 
washed his feet. Standing with folded palms before the sage, Daçaratha 
was thrilled with joy as he spoke. “I consider your arrival here to be as 
welcome as the obtaining of celestial nectar in one’s own hands, as 
rainfall arrived in a desert, as the birth of a child to a childless couple or 
as the recovery of a lost treasure. What can I do for you today?” 
Daçaratha was aware of Viçvämitra’s glory. The sage was famous all over 
the world for his performance of difficult austerities and his virtuous 
behavior. He was also well known for his almost limitless powers. Once, 
by his own ascetic power, he had created an entire constellation of 
planets which still shone in the southern sky. The king felt honored to 
see him and wondered what had brought him to Ayodhya. Sitting at 
Viçvämitra’s feet, Daçaratha continued to address him. 
“You are worthy of my service in every way and it is by great good 
fortune that you have called at my door. My night has ended in a 
splendid sunrise as I see here before me the best of the Brahmin sages. 
Simply by seeing you I have received a blessing equal to the results of 
visiting every place of pilgrimage. I wish now to perform some pleasing 
work for you, O noble sage, and you may consider it already completed. 
As a guest, you are as good as God to me, and I shall not hesitate to do 
anything you desire.” 
Addressed in such a delightful way Viçvämitra felt joy as he replied to 
Daçaratha. “Your speech has pleased me in every way, O tiger among 
kings. You are descended from proud ancestry and have been instructed 
by the god-like sage Vasiñöha. Make a firm resolve to satisfy my desire 
and prove true to your promise, O virtuous one.” 
Viçvämitra had walked for three days without eating or sleeping, his 
mind fixed on his purpose. His body was lean and powerful, golden 
colored and covered by a black deerskin. He held in his hands a staff and 
a waterpot, his only possessions. He had come to ask something from 
Daçaratha which he knew would be hard for the king to grant. The sage 
gazed steadfastly into Daçaratha’s eyes as he spoke. 
“I stand here this very day consecrated for a sacrifice. However, two

32 
powerful Räkñasa demons named Maricha and Subahu constantly 
impede its performance. These demons are avowed enemies of both gods 
and humans. They are capable of ranging the skies and assuming any 
form they like. Every time my sacrifice is close to completion, these 
Räkñasas appear overhead and drop down volumes of flesh and blood, 
ruining it entirely. Thwarted in my attempts, I have left that sacrifice 
feeling dispirited, having accomplished nothing other than exertion.” 
Daçaratha listened intently as the sage spoke. He knew that Viçvämitra 
would not have come to him, the emperor of the earth, unless there was 
some difficult task at hand. The Räkñasas were dangerous beings who 
hated sages. The king knew they had been increasingly disruptive, and 
this was now confirmed by Viçvämitra. 
“Although capable of destroying those Räkñasas with a curse, O king, I 
will not do so, as a condition of my sacrifice is that I do not give way to 
anger. My mind must remain steady and controlled. Nor is it the sacred 
duty of Brahmins to attack an enemy. This is always the duty of kings 
and warriors. Please, therefore, give to me your eldest and most heroic 
son, Räma. Although a youth, Räma is possessed of true prowess and is 
more than a match for any Räkñasa.” 
The king’s mouth fell open. He gazed in horror at Viçvämitra. Was he 
serious? Send Räma? The prince was just a boy! He had never seen 
action on the battlefield. Of course, there was no doubting His bravery 
and prowess, but how could He face the Räkñasas? Those vicious beings 
knew every kind of sorcery. They could contend with even the gods. 
What chance would a youth like Räma stand against them? 
Seeing the king’s reaction, Viçvämitra tried to reassure him. “You need 
entertain no fear on Räma’s account. Accompanied by me He will 
proceed safely to the sacrificial arena. Immediately upon encountering 
those Räkñasas, who are overly proud of their strength, I am sure He will 
quickly dispatch them. Therefore, release Räma and let Him remain 
with me for a period of but ten days. Do not allow your parental 
affection to prevail. I shall confer upon Räma boons by which He will 
attain fame in all the worlds. I will then return Him unharmed. O king, 
you should not have any doubt.” 
Viçvämitra fell silent. He was aware of Räma’s true identity. By his 
meditations the sage could see in his heart the Supreme Lord, and he

33 
knew Räma to be that same person. Viçvämitra understood that the 
annihilation of the demons was a part of Räma’s plan on earth. The sage 
was acting only as an instrument of the Lord’s desire. 
Daçaratha stood mortified, oblivious to the divinity of his young son, 
overpowered by grief at the prospect of losing his young son Räma. 
Trembling all over, the king felt pained at heart and fell unconscious to 
the ground. Remaining senseless for some time, Daçaratha finally came 
round and said to the sage, “My lotus-eyed son is less than sixteen years 
old. How then can He fight with the Räkñasas? I myself, marching at the 
head of hundreds of thousands of highly trained soldiers, shall personally 
come to wage war on the demons. Do not take Räma!” 
Daçaratha sought desperately to change Viçvämitra’s mind. For as long 
as he breathed, he said, he would stand with bow in hand and beat back 
any Räkñasas who came to attack Viçvämitra’s sacrifice. The sage need 
have no doubt. Daçaratha wailed piteously, “The Räkñasas are given to 
treacherous fighting. The inexperienced Räma is still not fully trained. 
He is yet unable to estimate the strength or weakness of the enemy, nor 
is He familiar with the use of the celestial weapons necessary for 
dispatching such powerful enemies as Räkñasas.” 
Daçaratha knelt before the sage. He looked up at him with tears in his 
eyes. Seeing Viçvämitra’s resolute expression he took hold of his feet and 
implored him to relent. He tried to think of life without Räma. It was 
unimaginable. After such a long time and so much prayer he had finally 
obtained a son worthy to succeed him. And such a son! It seemed that 
with each passing day Räma endeared Himself more to his elders with 
his virtuous behavior. Now He was just attaining maturity and could 
soon be installed as Prince Regent. How could he lose Räma now? He 
continued his plea, “Separated from Räma I doubt I shall survive for 
even an hour. Please do not take Him or, if you really must, then please 
also allow me to go with Him. Taking my entire army I shall station 
myself on the battlefield and ward off the demons. Tell me all that you 
know about those Räkñasas, O sage, and I shall make every preparation.” 
Viçvämitra replied, “There is a Räkñasa named Rävaëa to whom Brahmä 
has granted a boon of invulnerability. Possessed of extraordinary 
strength and followed by numerous other Räkñasas, he has oppressed 
both heaven and earth to the utmost degree. When this mighty demon

34 
cannot himself be bothered to assail the sacrifices of sages, he sends out 
his two lieutenants, Maricha and Subahu.” 
Hearing Rävaëa’s name, the king became alarmed. He stood up 
suddenly. “Even the gods and Gandharvas united with the entire 
heavenly host cannot defeat that demon. How then shall I, a mere 
mortal, stand before him? What then of Räma? Brahmä has made 
Rävaëa unslayable. I with all my troops will prove incapable of 
overcoming Rävaëa, who deprives even the most powerful fighters of 
their prowess on the battlefield.” 
The king had heard numerous accounts of Rävaëa’s exploits. Many years 
ago the demon had slain Anaranya, his ancestor. The demon had 
defeated the gods and had even once fought and overcome the mighty 
Yamaräja. To confront him in battle was more or less suicide. The king 
clasped his hands together. “How can I permit my gentle son to go out? 
Under no circumstances can I allow Räma to risk his life against 
Rävaëa. Rather, I shall go out myself with my army to protect your 
sacrifice, even if it means my death. Räma shall remain here.” 
Hearing Daçaratha’s faltering speech, Viçvämitra blazed up with anger. 
Did Daçaratha have no faith in him? How dare he refuse his request! 
Kings and warriors must always respect and obey Brahmins, for this was 
the sacred law. And Daçaratha had already promised to satisfy him. The 
sage’s eyes opened wide with fury as he spoke. 
“After giving your solemn pledge to fulfill my desire, you now decline! 
This refusal shames your royal lineage and will bring ruin to your race. If 
you care not about this infamy, then I shall return the way I came. With 
your promise falsified you may remain peacefully among your relatives.” 
Seeing Viçvämitra seized with fury, the gods themselves became fearful 
and the earth shook. The wise Vasiñöha, perceiving the imminent danger 
from Viçvämitra’s curse, spoke to the king. “Born in the line of the sun-
god, you are like virtue personified. It does not befit you to abandon 
righteousness. You always remain firm in your vows and are famed as 
being fixed in truth. Summon strength from within yourself now. If you 
fail to redeem your promise, you will lose all the merit that has accrued 
to you from the performance of pious acts. Send Räma with Viçvämitra. 
Whether or not Räma has mastered archery is of no consequence, as He 
will be protected by the sage.”

35 
Vasiñöha, who also knew Räma’s divine plan, looked at the agonized 
king. He told him how Viçvämitra had inconceivable power and great 
learning. Formerly, while ruling over a kingdom, he had received from 
Çiva the knowledge of every celestial weapon. He would undoubtedly 
give this knowledge to Räma. Although quite able to punish the 
Räkñasas himself, Viçvämitra had asked for Räma only to do good to the 
prince. 
Daçaratha still appeared doubtful. His hands shook as he folded them, 
imploring Viçvämitra to relent. Tears streamed from his eyes.  
Vasiñöha then took the king aside and spoke in confidence. He told him 
of Räma’s identity. He also said that the arrival of Viçvämitra had been 
arranged by Providence for the good of the world. The king should 
therefore have no fear in sending Räma with the sage. 
Daçaratha was astonished. To him, Räma was his beloved child in need 
of protection. How could he possibly be the Supreme Lord? Daçaratha 
looked at Vasiñöha, who stood silently gazing into the king’s eyes. The 
sage could not possibly tell a lie. Accepting the words of his preceptor 
and feeling somewhat reassured, Daçaratha agreed to send his son with 
Viçvämitra, who permitted the king to send Lakñman as well, for 
Daçaratha knew that Lakñman would never let Räma go out alone for a 
fight. Daçaratha personally called for his two sons and embraced them 
both. As his tearful wives watched, the king committed the boys to 
Viçvämitra’s care. “Render service to this sage as you would to myself. 
My dear sons, I shall pray for your safe return. Go now with my 
blessings.” 
As they parted at the city gates, Vasiñöha uttered benedictory hymns and 
prayers. Flowers rained from the skies. Loud blasts of conches and the 
beating of kettledrums resounded everywhere. Led by the smiling 
Viçvämitra, Räma and Lakñman went out from the kingdom, watched by 
Their parents and the citizens until They disappeared into the distance. 
Chapter 3 
With the Sage Viçvämitra

36 
Viçvämitra walked ahead of the two princes, who each carried a bow in 
hand and had swords strapped to Their waists. Wearing on Their 
shoulders two large quivers of arrows, the princes looked like a pair of 
three-headed serpents following behind the sage. Their brilliant jewels 
set off Their dark complexions. The two resplendent boys added luster 
even to the shining sage Viçvämitra, as the two gods Skanda and 
Ganapati adorn the immortal Çiva. 
After covering about twelve miles along the beautiful southern bank of 
the Sarayu, they arrived at a stretch of soft grass, sheltered by trees. 
Viçvämitra stopped and turned towards Räma and Lakñman. “Sit here 
comfortably and sip a little sanctified water for purification. I will now 
tell you the mystical mantras known as Bala and Atibala. These hymns 
will confer upon You freedom from all fatigue and fever. Indeed they 
will release You from hunger and thirst and will even prevent 
decrepitude. While You mutter these sacred spells, none on earth will be 
Your equal in either battle, intellectual judgment or argument. Bala and 
Atibala are the sources of all wisdom, being the daughters of the self-
born creator, Brahmä.” 
Viçvämitra looked upon the brothers’ faces and he felt a deep affection 
for Them. Although he knew They were not ordinary men, out of love 
he wanted to serve Them, acting as their teacher and guide. For Their 
part the princes felt an equal affection for the sage, and They gladly 
reciprocated his love, accepting him as Their guru. The sage positioned 
himself near the seated princes and, after sipping holy water for 
purification, held up his right palm and began chanting the mantras.  
With a cheerful expression Räma and Lakñman received the two hymns 
from the sage. When the instruction was complete, They rested for the 
night on the bank of the river, enjoying the cool breeze that wafted 
gently across the water. 
Shortly before dawn Viçvämitra, who had remained awake in meditation 
all night, awoke the two princes, calling out to Them. “O Räma and 
Lakñman, O tigers among men, the sun approaches the eastern horizon! 
Rise up now and perform Your ablutions. We must proceed.” 
The brothers immediately rose and bathed in the river. After Their 
prayers and meditations They approached Viçvämitra and bowed at his 
feet. The sage, having bestowed blessings upon the boys, again led the

37 
way as the sun rose upon another cloudless day. 
Soon they saw the river Ganges where it met the Sarayu. On the bank of 
the Ganges were many simple dwellings made from leaves and mud, in 
which there lived a community of ascetics. The princes asked Viçvämitra 
about the hermitage. The sage, remembering the history of the site, 
laughed heartily and told them the story of how Cupid had once come to 
assail Çiva here.  
A very long time ago the god of love had a human form. On one 
occasion he had been bold enough to fire his arrows of love at the 
unconquerable Çiva. The powerful Çiva, who had been absorbed in deep 
meditation at the hermitage, became infuriated and gazed at Cupid with 
his third eye. A searing flame shot out, reducing Cupid’s body to ashes. 
From then on Cupid became known as Ananga, the bodiless one, and 
the land there became known as Aìga.  
Finishing the tale Viçvämitra said, “All these sages are disciples of the 
glorious Çiva. Let us halt for the night here and converse with these 
mystics, O princes.” 
While Viçvämitra spoke, the ascetics dwelling in the hermitage sensed 
from a distance the approach of the sage and the princes. Realizing who 
they were, those worshippers of Çiva, who himself always worships 
Viñëu, felt happy in heart and came out quickly to greet their exalted 
guests. 
Having been graciously received, the three travelers performed their 
evening rituals and took a simple meal of forest fare. Viçvämitra 
entertained the assembly with ancient tales of heroes and sages of the 
past.  
The following morning, after crossing the Ganges in a boat provided by 
the ascetics, Viçvämitra and the princes came to a vast, desolate region. 
On all sides were huge trees stripped of their foliage. The ground was 
laid waste and a wind gusted, carrying sand and debris which lashed 
their faces. The cries of wild animals and vultures resounded there and 
even the sky above was dark and overcast.  
Räma and Lakñman looked around. What had happened? The land so far 
had been beautiful and verdant. Räma asked Viçvämitra, “This forest 
ahead appears inaccessible and foreboding. What is this land inhabited 
with fierce beasts of prey and presenting such a terrible aspect?”

38 
Smiling even in the face of that fearful scene, Viçvämitra replied, “My 
dearest Räma, a long time ago this was the site of two prosperous 
kingdoms built by the gods. It came to pass one day that Indra became 
afflicted with the sin of killing a Brahmin. Overcome with impurity, 
Indra sought the powerful åñis, the most exalted of the Brahmins, as his 
refuge. They performed rituals of purification and bathed his body with 
Ganges water which fell here on this tract of land. Pleased with this land 
for receiving his impurities, Indra blessed it saying, ‘Here will rise two 
great kingdoms which will flourish for many years and will be known as 
Malada and Karusa.’” 
The party had stopped at the edge of a forest of bare trees as Viçvämitra 
spoke. The way ahead was virtually enveloped by darkness. Terrible 
sounds emanated from the forest. The sage continued telling the 
brothers about the land. Some time after Indra had founded the cities, 
there came to that region a Yakña woman named Tataka, as powerful as 
a thousand elephants and able to assume any form she desired. She was 
the mother of Maricha, who now assailed Viçvämitra’s hermitage. 
Fearsome and filled with malice towards all beings, Tataka constantly 
ravaged that land and thus no one lived there. Although it was once the 
site of flourishing cities, it was now almost impossible to even approach. 
Turning towards the princes, Viçvämitra said, “The time has now come 
for the demise of the evil Tataka. You two princes should follow me to 
the place where she resides. Search her out and end her life 
immediately.” 
Räma replied with a smile, “Being a woman, O sage, how can Tataka 
have such power?” 
Viçvämitra knew that the virtuous Räma was hesitant to attack a 
woman, but Tataka was no ordinary woman. The sage described her 
background. She had been born as the beautiful daughter of a great and 
powerful Yakña named Suketu. As a youth she was given a boon by 
Brahmä that she would possess the strength of a thousand elephants. She 
married the famous Yakña, Sunda, who was eventually killed as a result 
of a curse made by the sage Agastya. When Tataka learned of her 
husband’s death, she became infuriated with Agastya and, along with 
her son Maricha, she rushed towards the sage desiring to kill him. The 
sage stood his ground. He said to the two advancing Yakñas, “As you act

39 
so wickedly may you both become demons! O Tataka, you shall lose your 
attractive form and instead become an ugly man-eating Räkñasé!” 
Agastya then vanished from the spot. 
Viçvämitra raised his hand and indicated the path ahead of them. 
Tataka had turned the entire region into a desolate forest by her 
malevolent presence. She was always angry and would attack anyone 
who approached the area. 
Having told the brothers Tataka’s history, the sage reassured them: 
“Although the scriptures state that a woman should always be protected 
and never attacked, in this case You need not fear any sin. The killing of 
Tataka is necessary for the good of society. One wishing to protect the 
afflicted must sometimes perform even a seemingly sinful act. This is the 
eternal duty of kings. O Räma, You should not hesitate.” 
Citing other historical examples of kings and gods who had killed evil 
women, Viçvämitra urged Räma to quickly kill Tataka. 
Räma accepted the sage’s order and grasped His golden bow. Standing 
ready for combat, He said to Viçvämitra, “My father instructed Me on 
leaving Ayodhya that your order should be followed without hesitation. 
In obedience then to both his and your command I shall now face the 
fierce Räkñasé. I wish to do good to the Brahmins and cows in this region, 
as well as to satisfy your holy self. Please point out to me the 
whereabouts of that wicked demon.” 
Viçvämitra led Them a little further into the wilderness. Räma twanged 
his bowstring, which produced a terrific sound, filling the four quarters. 
All the forest animals were terrified by the noise.  
Tataka herself was stunned and overcome with anger. Who had dared to 
challenge her? Whoever it was, they would soon regret their foolishness. 
She came out from her cave and ran towards the source of the sound, 
screaming horribly. 
Seeing her at a distance emerging from the forest in a terrible fury, 
monstrous in size and awful in appearance, Räma said to Lakñman. 
“Behold, My dear brother, this formidable and fearful Yakña woman. The 
very sight of this sinful wretch would break the hearts of the timid. 
Watch Me put her to flight with My sharp arrows. In truth, I do not 
really want to kill her, as she is a woman. I shall put an end to her 
strength by rendering her immobile and powerless, cutting from her

40 
body her hands and feet.” 
As Räma spoke, Tataka rushed towards him roaring, with her arms 
upraised. Uttering a powerful mantra, Viçvämitra checked her progress, 
calling out, “May victory attend the Ayodhya princes!” 
Creating a swirling cloud of dust, Tataka confounded the princes and 
disappeared. With her mystic powers of illusion she employed numerous 
conjuring tricks. She assumed many forms, one after another. Sometimes 
she appeared in front of the brothers. Then she would be above Them. 
Then again she would suddenly appear behind Them. One moment she 
appeared as a furious horned animal. In the next moment she became a 
terrible looking fiend. Then she swooped down upon Them as a great 
clawed bird. Hurling upon the brothers huge rocks and boulders, she 
screamed fearfully. 
Räma flew into a rage. He parried the rocks with a shower of shafts from 
His bow. He shot arrows with blinding speed. His bow appeared to be 
always bent into a circle. Taking razor-headed arrows He severed 
Tataka’s two arms, even as she came running towards him. Lakñman also 
became furious. He released sharp arrows with deadly accuracy and 
sliced off her nose and ears. 
The Yakña woman disappeared and rose up to the sky. Even though 
deprived of her arms, she used her sorcery to throw down more massive 
trees and boulders. Remaining invisible, she moved hither and thither, 
screaming all the while. Viçvämitra saw the boys mystified by the 
Räkñasé’s illusory powers. He realized They were holding back because 
Tataka was a woman. The sage called to the brothers. “Have done with 
Your tenderness! This woman should not be spared! Sinful and wicked, 
she thoroughly deserves death at your hands. Act swiftly to end her life 
before nightfall, as the demons are always more powerful after sunset!” 
Räma then showed His skill at archery. He released arrows capable of 
striking an invisible target by seeking out sound. Reciting mantras as He 
let them go, Räma covered Tataka in a network of arrows. Those arrows 
reduced the falling stones to powder. They pierced the Räkñasé and she 
screamed in pain. She quickly came down to earth again. Tataka then 
assumed a vast form and rushed with the force of a tempest towards the 
two brothers. Räma decided that she should be killed. He quickly fired 
an arrow imbued with the energy of a thunderbolt. It hit the Räkñasé full

41 
in the chest. Tataka’s heart was ripped apart and with a hideous cry she 
fell down dead.  
Having watched Räma slay the demoness, the gods, headed by Indra, 
assembled in the skies and applauded. Celestial flowers rained down on 
the two princes. Acknowledging the gods’ pleasure, Räma and Lakñman 
modestly bowed Their heads. The thousand-eyed Indra said to 
Viçvämitra, “All the gods are gratified with Räma’s feat. O holy 
Brahmin, show Räma your affection by giving to Him your knowledge of 
the celestial missiles. A great objective of the gods will soon be 
accomplished by Räma with the use of these weapons.” 
Indra was considering Viñëu’s desire that Rävaëa and his Räkñasa hordes 
be annihilated. As he looked upon the mighty Räma he knew that the 
time for the destruction of the Räkñasas was imminent. 
After Indra had spoken, the gods returned to the heavens and twilight 
fell. Embracing Räma and Lakñman, Viçvämitra said, “Let us remain for 
the night in this forest. Freed from the curse of Tataka, it is now 
rendered so very peaceful and attractive. In the morning we shall 
continue on to my hermitage.” 
The three of them rested for the night, praised by heavenly bards and 
singers who had assembled in the canopy of the sky. 
The next morning Viçvämitra remembered Indra’s words. He sat the two 
princes down and faced them. “Steady Your minds, O heroes, for I shall 
now tell You the knowledge of the gods’ mystic weapons, including even 
those presided over by the invincible Brahmä, Çiva and Viñëu. Equipped 
with this knowledge You will be able to forcibly bring under Your 
control even the hosts of gods and demons, including the Gandharvas 
and Nägas, the powerful celestial serpents.” 
Viçvämitra sat facing the rising sun and, after purifying himself by 
sipping water and intoning sacred hymns, he began to repeat to Räma a 
string of mantras capable of invoking the celestial weapons. Calling each 
weapon by the name of its presiding deity, Viçvämitra delivered to Räma 
all those divine missiles, thousands in number and difficult for even the 
gods to remember in their entirety. As they were called they came before 
Räma in their shining ethereal forms. Some appeared like glowing coal, 
others were smoky while others were brilliant like the sun or moon. 
Filled with joy at being called to Räma’s service, they stood before Him

42 
with folded hands and asked for His command. 
Räma accepted them with affection and asked them to personally appear 
within His mind whenever He thought of them. The personified missiles 
replied, “It shall be as You say.” Taking leave of Räma, the weapons 
circumambulated Him with respect and returned to their own heavenly 
abodes. 
After teaching the brothers the full knowledge of firing and recalling 
the weapons, Viçvämitra finally said, “The instruction is complete. O 
glorious princes, we should now continue towards our destination.” 
They moved on from that spot and soon saw in the distance a great 
cluster of trees, appearing like a mass of dark clouds on the horizon. As 
they came closer they saw it was a beautiful copse containing varieties of 
flowering and fruit-bearing trees. Sweetly singing birds filled the air and 
graceful deer moved about next to rivulets of clear water. Looking at 
Viçvämitra, Räma inquired, “What is the name of this place so pleasing 
to the mind? It seems we have arrived at the site of some holy hermitage. 
Can it be that we have now reached your own abode, O learned 
Brahmin?” 
Although possessed of infinite knowledge, Räma had fully assumed the 
role of Viçvämitra’s student. He listened attentively as the sage smiled 
and told Him the ancient story of Bali and Indra. Once the immensely 
powerful King Bali, lord of the demons and enemy of the gods, seized the 
seat of Indra and began to rule over the universe. Becoming famous 
throughout all the three worlds of heaven, earth and hell, he remained 
in that position for a long time.  
The gods had become perturbed and with Indra at their head they 
sought out Viñëu. The Lord then appeared as Vämana, accepting the 
form of a Brahmin boy. On the plea of charity, He took from Bali the 
three worlds, restoring them again to the gods. Vämana then remained 
for some time at this hermitage, known as the Siddha-ashrama, 
sanctifying it by His presence. Viçvämitra concluded, “It is here that I 
have my dwelling, O Räma. Let us go there now.” 
Taking the two princes by the hand, the sage entered his hermitage. As 
he walked into the large compound he resembled a full and cloudless 
moon accompanied by two brilliant stars. There were numerous hermits 
moving about in that grassy enclosure. Some tended sacred fires, while

43 
some of the younger ones chopped wood or worked on constructing the 
large central altar meant for the main sacrifice. In some places groups of 
sages sat reciting the Sanskrit hymns of the Vedas, while elsewhere 
other sages cleaned and prepared sacrificial paraphernalia. Räma and 
Lakñman looked with interest upon the busy scene that greeted Them. 
Despite the bustle, an atmosphere of tranquility prevailed and the 
hermits glowed with ascetic power. 
Seeing that Viçvämitra and the princes had arrived, the hermits sprang 
up and paid their respects. They offered water and forest fruits to the 
two princes. It was late in the evening and long shadows stretched across 
the ground. The sacrifice would begin the next day. On Viçvämitra’s 
order the hermits showed the two boys to a secluded cottage. One of the 
sages said, “Rest now for the night, and tomorrow, led by Viçvämitra, we 
will go through the ceremony to consecrate our sacrifice. Surely our 
success is now certain because we see you two princes before us, 
equipped with every weapon and shining like the sun.” 
The sages gazed with gratitude at Räma and Lakñman. They had been 
afflicted by the Räkñasas for a long time and had prayed for deliverance. 
In his prayers and meditations, Viçvämitra had understood the Lord’s 
plan. The sage had thus gone to Ayodhya, looking for Räma. Now the 
divine prince had actually come to personally deliver the ascetics from 
their suffering. As they watched the two boys lie down to sleep, the sages 
were struck with wonder. In their hearts they offered worship and praise 
to Viñëu. 
Before dawn the next morning the princes rose and went through Their 
daily rituals. After offering obeisances to Viçvämitra, They sat down by 
the side of the sacrificial altar. Facing the sage with folded hands, Räma 
asked, “O venerable sir, please tell Us when and where We can expect 
the evil Räkñasas to appear?” 
Viçvämitra remained impassive, but the other hermits applauded the 
boys, seeing their readiness to tackle the demons. One of them replied, 
“Viçvämitra is now observing a vow of silence, which he will keep for the 
next six days and nights, remaining awake throughout. At the end of 
that period, close to the completion of the sacrifice, the two demons will 
assail this area with all their force. But be ready, for the treacherous 
Räkñasas could appear at any time!”

44 
The princes were eager for a fight. They stood vigilantly by Viçvämitra’s 
side as he sat silently meditating upon the sacrificial hymns. Räma 
leaned on his great bow, which stood almost as tall as Him. Lakñman 
held in His hand a shining blue sword, its golden handle impressed with 
bright gems. 
As the sixth night approached and the final rituals were being 
performed, the sacrificial fire suddenly blazed forth furiously. A loud 
clamor came from the sky, which was covered over by clouds. Swooping 
down upon that sacrifice, the two Räkñasa demons Maricha and Subahu, 
appeared from the sky. They were accompanied by their fierce and 
terrible looking followers. As they spread their sorcery, torrents of blood 
and pus, as well as large pieces of flesh, fell upon the altar. Blazing fires 
sprang from the earth and hot coals flew everywhere.  
Shrieking horribly, the Räkñasas danced about, wreaking havoc. The 
hermits fell back, but this time they were not fearful. Viçvämitra quickly 
stood up. It was time for these evil beings to receive their just deserts. 
They had defiled his sacrifice once too often. They would not do so 
again. Gathering the other ascetics, Viçvämitra moved aside and ordered 
Räma to attack the Räkñasas. 
Räma became infuriated upon seeing the scene of devastation. He 
rushed forward toward the Räkñasas, calling to His brother, “Watch now 
as I scatter these wicked demons who feed on raw flesh.” 
Even as he spoke, Räma continuously worked His bow. He sent swift 
arrows in all directions. The Räkñasas were stunned; they had not 
expected any resistance. Some of them closed quickly on Räma, covering 
Him on all sides. Räma released arrows with deadly accuracy and speed. 
The Räkñasas were cut to pieces. Räma looked for Maricha. Seeing his 
huge form nearby, tearing at the sacrificial altar, Räma invoked a 
celestial weapon. He placed it on His bow and, although still feeling 
furious, he calmly said to Lakñman. “I shall release the Manava weapon, 
presided over by the father of the gods, Manu.” 
Räma angrily fired His weapon at the fearsome, roaring Maricha. The 
demon was struck by the mighty missile and he was lifted and flung a 
distance of eight hundred miles, landing in the ocean. Although reeling 
and struck senseless by Räma’s arrow, Maricha was not killed. Räma 
looked at Lakñman. “See the force of that weapon, My brother. It easily

45 
hurled the demon to a vast distance.” 
Räma and Lakñman continuously discharged flaming arrows at the other 
Räkñasas. Imbued with mystic power one arrow expanded into 
thousands. It appeared as if a continuous line of shafts was leaving 
Räma’s bow, so fast was His movement. The Räkñasas screamed in pain. 
Some of them vanished and others fell dead on the ground. Some 
entered the earth while others flew into the sky.  
Regrouping, a large number of the demons rushed down from the sky 
towards the princes. They hurled lances, iron maces, massive rocks and 
blazing coals. Räma and Lakñman stood firm, parrying that shower of 
weapons with Their arrows. Tightly grasping His golden bow, Räma said 
to His brother, “Fear not Lakñman, for I shall now swiftly deal with these 
blood-sucking demons. They are wicked and merciless and always given 
to sinful acts. This indeed shall be the last sacrifice they defile.” 
Having said this to His brother, Räma moved with agility, evading the 
rocks thrown by the demons. He invoked the weapon presided over by 
the god of fire, Agni. Fired from Räma’s fully extended bow, the weapon 
hit the Räkñasa Subahu full upon the chest. His heart torn apart, he fell 
dead on the ground like an uprooted tree. Räma then invoked the Väyu-
astra, the powerful wind weapon. He fired it and a roaring gale went 
towards the Räkñasas. They were blown away like so many pieces of dust 
and debris. Those who were not killed by that weapon fled for their 
lives. 
As the clamor of the battle died down, Räma and Lakñman felt their 
anger subside. They stood holding Their bows and looking at Viçvämitra. 
The sage was delighted. He approached the princes. “I have 
accomplished my purpose, O mighty-armed heroes. You have perfectly 
followed your preceptor’s order. We can now continue the sacrifice for 
the good of the people.” 
With tears in his eyes Viçvämitra gazed for some time at the two 
handsome brothers. He thought of Viñëu’s cosmic arrangement. The 
Lord always protected his worshippers and, for the well-being of the 
world, ensured that sacrifices could proceed. Overwhelmed with love the 
sage finally said to the boys, “Rest peacefully now, for tomorrow we shall 
leave this place.” 
The many ascetics in the hermitage gathered around to congratulate the

46 
brothers. They led Them to a spacious cottage near the river. After 
showing the princes Their accommodation, the hermits offered Them 
forest fruits and cooked wild vegetables. Räma and Lakñman graciously 
accepted their offerings and then laid down for sleep, exhausted by the 
day’s events. 
The next morning the princes came before Viçvämitra and respectfully 
asked, “What other order of yours should we now carry out, O best 
among the Brahmins?” 
The sage told them of a sacrifice about to be performed by Janaka, the 
king of Mithila. He wanted to take the princes there, where they would 
see a magnificent bow owned by Janaka. The strength of that bow was 
inestimable. It was formerly held by Çiva himself and it could not be 
bent by either gods, Gandharvas or demons-what to speak of humans. 
Janaka kept it enshrined in a hall where it was worshipped daily by his 
priests. 
“Indeed,” said the sage, “the bow can hardly even be gazed upon except 
by the mighty. The king has declared that any man who bends this bow 
will win the hand of his daughter Sétä, a veritable jewel among women 
who was born from the earth itself. Let us leave for that place 
immediately.” 
Viçvämitra gave orders to the sages to make ready for the journey. A 
hundred carts were filled, largely with sacrificial paraphernalia, and 
yoked to strong asses. At the head of a thousand åñis, who were all 
reciting auspicious texts from the scriptures, Viçvämitra and the two 
princes set off towards Mithila, traveling in a northerly direction along 
the bank of the Ganges. 
As they left, herds of beasts and flocks of birds dwelling around the 
hermitage began to follow them out of affection. Viçvämitra and other 
sages addressed the creatures in their own speech and persuaded them to 
return.  
They walked for some days. Having covered a long distance and arriving 
at the bank of the Sone river, the sages stopped to rest just before 
nightfall. The lowing of cattle and the cries of cowherds could be heard 
all around. As they settled down the travelers looked across the smooth 
waters of the river, which glowed orange under the setting sun. During 
the day they had passed many flourishing villages and settlements and

47 
seen that the land was farmed and well managed. Räma, seated 
comfortably among the ascetics, asked Viçvämitra where they were.  
Viçvämitra, who had lived thousands of years and knew the history of 
the entire earth, smilingly began to narrate the story of that land. It was 
called Kushanabha after an ancient king of the same name who was a 
son of a åñi named Kusha. Kushanabha was Viçvämitra’s grandfather. 
Having descended in the line of Kusha, Viçvämitra was also known as 
Kauçika and he had an elder sister named Kaushiki. After unfailingly 
serving her åñi husband, she had ascended bodily to heaven and later 
become the holy river Koshi. Viçvämitra had for a long time led a life of 
asceticism on the bank of that river, by the side of the Himälayas. 
Because of his desire to perform a sacrifice, he came down to the plains 
and it was soon after that he had secured Räma’s assistance. 
The evening passed as Viçvämitra told this and other tales. Seeing the 
onset of night the sage at last said, “The beasts and birds are buried in 
sleep and all the quarters stand enveloped in darkness. The firmament 
shines brightly with stars as though covered with innumerable eyes. 
Here rises the moon, dispelling the darkness of the world and spreading 
his soothing rays all around. Fearful hosts of nocturnal fiends are freely 
roaming here and there. Let us rest, ready for our renewed journey 
tomorrow.” 
Glorifying Viçvämitra, the brothers lay down and courted sleep, awed at 
the sage’s stories. 
Chapter 4 
The Trial of Strength 
A beautiful sunrise over the Sone heralded the dawn. The sounds of 
birds and forest animals filled the air as the sages and the princes bathed 
in the river. After performing their morning rituals and prayers, the 
boys came before Viçvämitra. The sage pointed to the river and said, 
“Here we should cross this river and make our way northwards to the 
Ganges.”

48 
The boys looked around and saw nearby a line of sages, holding their 
waterpots and staffs, wading through the water at some shallow point. 
Räma and Lakñman fastened Their silk garments up around Their waists 
and placed Their bows across Their shoulders. Then, with Viçvämitra 
going immediately before Them, they followed the sages through the 
clear, cool waters of the Sone.  
After some time they sighted the Ganges shining in the late afternoon 
sun, appearing in the distance like a line of gold running across the 
landscape. Upon reaching the riverbank, they broke their journey and 
prepared to rest for the night. After worshipping the river with libations 
of water and lighting the sacred fire, the boys sat before Viçvämitra and 
inquired, “O holy sage, we wish to hear of the origin of this great river, 
which arrives at the Himälayas from the heavens, flows across the earth 
and, it is heard, courses even through hell itself. How has this river 
become so holy and why does she spread her influence through all the 
three worlds?” 
Moved by this question Viçvämitra called to mind the glories of the 
Ganges and began to speak. [See Appendix One, The Story of the River 
Ganges.] In flowing and beautiful Sanskrit verse, Viçvämitra narrated at 
length the history of the sacred river. When he was finished, the princes 
were wonderstruck. Asking the sage again and again to continue 
speaking, the brothers listened all night as Viçvämitra recounted various 
other stories of the gods and demons.  
The following morning they went towards the northeast, heading for 
Mithila. Gradually the forest paths gave way to roads laid with stone 
that led to the city. The forest opened to fields of crops. As they came 
closer to Mithila they saw well-planned gardens and groves with seats 
and fountains. The sounds of wild animals were replaced with the 
clamor of people in the city.  
Shouts of children and the rumbling of horse-drawn chariots greeted 
them as they entered the gates of Mithila. Huge elephants swayed along 
majestically, with smiling people waving from the howdahs on their 
backs. Gazing about them, the travelers saw the golden domes of 
innumerable temples along with many mansions of brilliant white stone. 
Along the roadside were shops displaying countless varieties of fruits, 
vegetables and all kinds of sweetmeats. Other vendors displayed rows of

49 
shining gems looking like numbers of rainbows. Everyone called out 
respectful greetings as the party moved slowly past. As they went along 
the wide, smooth road they were met by the king’s ministers, who had 
already been informed of their arrival. 
Headed by Viçvämitra and the princes, the party was led along the main 
highway to Janaka’s palace. People thronged the sides of the road to gaze 
upon the famous sage and his two illustrious charges. As they looked 
upon the powerful princes, some of them guessed that they might be the 
sons of Emperor Daçaratha. The people wondered what had brought the 
princes to Mithila. Were they going to attempt to string the king’s great 
bow? As Räma smiled at the people they were filled with a desire to see 
this handsome, powerful prince win Sétä’s hand. 
Janaka personally came out to greet them, accompanied by his priests 
and counselors. He immediately fell at Viçvämitra’s feet and had him 
brought into the palace, where he offered him and the two princes 
golden seats. The king had water fetched for washing their feet and 
personally performed the ceremony.  
Once the formalities were complete, a meal was offered to the sage and 
the princes. As they sat on the floor on silk rugs, ivory tables were placed 
in front of them. Gold and silver dishes were fetched containing choice 
foods of every description. They ate heartily and when they were 
finished, Janaka said to Viçvämitra, “Great indeed is my good fortune 
today for I see before me your holy self. I am blessed by your presence. 
Tell me who are these two boys accompanying you? They appear like two 
powerful tigers and They rival the gods in beauty and grace. What brings 
you here to my house, along with these boys equipped with weapons?” 
The king had waited until the travelers were rested and refreshed before 
making his inquiries. Viçvämitra told him all about the boys and how 
They had disposed of the Räkñasas in the forest. They had come now to 
see the famous bow. Janaka was thrilled to hear that They were princes 
from Ayodhya. Nothing could be better than an alliance with 
Daçaratha’s line. If only Räma could pass the test of the bow. 
At that point Satananda, Janaka’s head priest, spoke to the princes. 
After welcoming them he began to narrate the history of Viçvämitra. 
Satananda was himself a great ascetic. He knew Viçvämitra well, having 
previously spent time with him in his hermitage. Seeing the famous sage

50 
again, Satananda felt inspired by affection to speak of his glories. 
Looking upon the beautiful faces of Räma and Lakñman, who sat 
enraptured by his speech, the priest told the story of Viçvämitra, who 
had performed difficult asceticism for thousands of years. [See Appendix 
Two, The History of Viçvämitra.] 
He told them how the sage had once been a great king and, after 
practicing tremendous austerities, had been blessed by Brahmä to 
become a powerful åñi. When Satananda finished his astonishing tale, 
everyone gazed with awe at Viçvämitra, who sat flanked by the princes, 
his mind absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme Lord. Janaka approached 
the effulgent åñi and spoke to him with joined palms. “I stand blessed by 
your appearance, O holy sage. This account of your many glories has 
filled my mind with wonder. Indeed, I could go on hearing it again and 
again. But dusk has now fallen and I beg your leave. Let us meet again in 
the morning and it will be my very great delight to satisfy your every 
desire.” 
Janaka, along with his ministers and priest, circumambulated Viçvämitra 
in respect and then departed. After performing their evening rituals and 
prayers, Viçvämitra and the princes rested for the night in the king’s 
palace. 
The following morning Janaka again came before Viçvämitra. He bowed 
low before the sage and touched his feet, asking in a pleasing voice, 
“Please instruct me what I should do for you today, O sinless one. You 
are worthy in every way of receiving my service.” 
Hearing these words from the virtuous and gentle king, Viçvämitra 
asked that they now be shown the bow. Janaka assented, but before 
taking them to see the bow he described its history. 
Long past, in a former age the bow had belonged to Çiva. That deity had 
become angry with the other gods when they had denied him a share of 
the sacrificial offerings made by the sages. Çiva had threatened them 
with the bow saying, “I shall now sever your worshipable heads from 
your bodies. Stand ready on the battlefield if you have any valor.” 
But the gods relented and quickly worshipped the infuriated Çiva. They 
had managed to appease him, whereupon he gave the bow to them. The 
famous bow was then given by the gods to Janaka’s ancestor, Devarata, 
after he had fought for them in a battle against the demons. It had since

51 
been kept in the king’s family, being worshipped as if it were Çiva 
himself. 
Janaka continued speaking to the sage and the princes, who listened 
with great curiosity. “Once I was performing a sacrifice to please the 
gods in order to get a worthy successor in my line. As the sacrificial 
ground was being prepared with a golden ploughshare, a wonderful child 
appeared from out of the earth itself. This female child, who became 
known by the name of Sétä, grew up in my palace as my daughter. Her 
beauty is matchless. I have raised Her with love and will give Her in 
marriage to whoever can show exceptional prowess. Various rulers and 
princes have approached me and sued for Her hand. Seeing these kings, 
I set a standard for winning Sétä, saying, ‘Whosoever can hold and string 
the mighty bow of Çiva will win this princess.’ 
“Many proud kings thought they would easily bend the bow. However, 
coming before that bow they were soon shorn of their valor and pride. 
They were hardly able to move the bow even slightly, far less lift and 
string it. Angry at their failure, numerous kings together besieged 
Mithila for one full year. When my resources were exhausted I prayed to 
the gods for support. I then received from them a vast army equipped 
with every kind of weapon. That celestial army quickly dispersed those 
bellicose kings in all directions. Thus this bow remains here, 
unconquered and awaiting some truly powerful king.” 
Janaka looked at the two royal brothers. Räma’s fame had reached him 
and he felt sure that the prince would win his daughter’s hand. As the 
king beheld Räma’s beautiful features, His powerful physique and noble 
bearing, he longed for the prince to pass the test and become his son-in-
law. He stood before Viçvämitra with folded palms. “Come now, O sage, 
and bring these boys with you. If any can string the bow, then the hand 
of the divinely born Sétä will be won.” 
Janaka led them to the part of his great palace where the bow was kept. 
It was stored in an iron chest which was adorned with gold engravings 
and covered over with numerous flower garlands. Three hundred 
powerfully built men somehow managed to move the chest to the center 
of the hall where it lay. Janaka turned towards Räma. “Here is the 
wonderful celestial bow. It has been kept and worshipped by the Janakas 
for many generations. Not even the gods, demons, Yakñas, Gandharvas

52 
or Kinnaras can string it; how then could any ordinary man? Gaze now 
upon this bow, O Räma.” 
Janaka ordered that the chest be opened. As the lid was lifted the 
brilliant bow was revealed. It spread a golden glow all around. 
Constructed of pure horn, it was skillfully worked with gold and silver 
images of the pastimes of the gods. Hundreds of golden bells and 
ornaments hung from the bow, which was studded with diamonds and 
other gems.  
Seeing the bow the two princes gasped in appreciation. Räma bowed 
down in respect and then walked slowly around it. He looked towards 
Viçvämitra who nodded slightly. Understanding Viçvämitra’s indication, 
Räma stood with joined palms at the bow’s center. He turned to Janaka. 
“I wish to attempt your test. I shall now try to lift this heavenly bow to 
gauge its weight and strength.” 
While being extolled by Viçvämitra and other sages, who uttered 
“Victory! Victory!” Räma placed his hand upon the bow. There was 
complete silence in the hall. Janaka held his breath as Räma stood 
motionless. Viçvämitra, knowing the extent of Räma’s power, smiled 
slightly. 
In the balcony of the hall stood Sétä. She looked at Räma, feeling a 
natural attraction for the prince. Until then She had never been 
interested in any of Her suitors, although the most powerful kings from 
all around the world had come there. To the gentle Sétä they were all 
arrogant and overly proud of themselves. Sétä was deeply religious. All 
Her life She had prayed that Viñëu might become Her husband. As She 
watched Räma approach the bow She felt Her love for the Lord being 
awakened. Was this Viñëu himself? Becoming absorbed in Her loving 
sentiment, Sétä felt anxiety. Would Räma string the bow and become 
Her husband? She held the matrimonial garland with trembling hands. 
Suddenly Räma seized the bow by its middle part and raised it high 
above His head. A gasp of astonishment filled the hall. It was 
inconceivable. Räma tossed the bow slightly to gauge its weight. Placing 
one end of the colossal bow on the ground, Räma then moved to the 
other end and strung it. He pulled the string and bent the bow round 
into a semi-circle. It broke suddenly and a sound like the crash of 
thunder reverberated around the hall. The earth shook as if there were

53 
an earthquake. Everyone was stunned and rendered senseless for some 
moments.  
Janaka was amazed. He turned to Viçvämitra. “I have now witnessed 
Räma’s strength. His achievement is incredible. Having secured Räma as 
Her husband, Sétä will bring undying fame to my family.” 
Janaka’s eyes were filled with tears. Surely Räma was a divine 
personality. There could be no doubt. Till then no king had been able to 
move the bow even slightly; some could hardly even look upon it. But 
Räma had handled it as if it were a piece of bamboo. The king looked up 
to Sétä in the balcony. She was filled with delight upon seeing Räma’s 
feat and Her breast heaved with excitement. Awaiting Her father’s 
indication to come down, She stood surrounded by Her many female 
attendants. Janaka turned to speak to Räma, who stood peacefully, 
having replaced the broken bow in its chest. “I shall now fulfill my 
pledge to give Sétä’s hand to whoever could string this bow. Sétä is dearer 
to me than my own life, but I gladly offer Her to You.” 
Sétä came down from the balcony with a garland of golden flowers in 
Her hands and stood by Her father. She was resplendent in a silk sari of 
deep maroon, a necklace of pearls shining on Her breast. As She walked 
Her golden anklets tinkled and her diamond earrings swung to and fro. 
Smiling gently, she shyly lifted her eyes a little and looked at Räma, who 
caught Her glance. Both felt Their hearts moved by love. In that 
moment Their union was forged. Sétä’s father signaled and She went 
before Räma. She placed the garland around His neck, indicating Her 
acceptance of Him as Her husband. She blushed slightly and kept Her 
eyes down. Walking slowly, She went back to her father, who felt as if 
his heart might burst with happiness. 
The king wanted to perform the marriage ceremony as soon as possible. 
He asked for Viçvämitra’s permission, and when the sage agreed, the 
king arranged for swift messengers to go to Ayodhya to inform 
Daçaratha.  
The ministers of Janaka left immediately and arrived at Ayodhya after 
three days. They quickly went to the palace and were ushered into the 
presence of Daçaratha, who appeared to them like a powerful god. Put at 
ease by the emperor’s benign expression and gentle words of welcome, 
the ministers politely told him of the events in Mithila. The emperor

54 
was delighted to hear the submission of Janaka’s envoys. Räma and 
Lakñman were well! They had conquered over the demons, and more 
than that, Räma had now won the beautiful Sétä for His bride.  
Daçaratha recalled how he had been contemplating the marriage of his 
son even as Viçvämitra had arrived at his palace. The sage must have 
been sent by Providence, by whose arrangement this union had surely 
been made. After consulting with his counselors, Daçaratha made up his 
mind to leave the next day for Mithila. 
Taking with him his ministers and preceded by a party of priests, 
Daçaratha went the next morning towards Mithila, with his army 
marching close behind. They arrived after five days. Daçaratha 
approached Janaka, who graciously received the abundant riches 
brought as gifts. Janaka embraced the emperor, and the two old friends 
sat together discussing the wedding. Janaka told Daçaratha how Sétä had 
appeared from the earth. He also told him of a prophesy he had heard. 
“Once the celestial seer Närada informed me that Sétä is Viñëu’s eternal 
consort and that he would one day become Her husband in this world. I 
thus devised a test which would only be possible for Viñëu to pass. Your 
son has now passed that difficult test and must therefore be Sétä’s 
eternal husband.” Daçaratha was again astonished to hear of Räma’s 
divinity. He still found it hard to believe, having raised Räma as his 
child. He looked at the son who stood before him modestly with bowed 
head and folded palms. Daçaratha was overpowered by love. His loving 
sentiments overcame any thoughts of Räma’s divinity. The emperor 
looked again at Janaka and said, “I approve this marriage in every way. 
Perform the ceremony under the guidance of learned Brahmins. O king, 
the success of a gift depends upon the way it is given. Therefore be sure 
that all the necessary rites are properly observed without loss of time.” 
Daçaratha wanted to ensure that the marriage ceremony was performed 
carefully according to scriptural codes. He did not want any ill fortune 
created by neglect of sacred rituals. Such errors would blight the 
marriage and create future difficulties for the couple. 
Janaka issued instructions to his ministers and then sat with Daçaratha 
in his great palace hall. Both of them listened as Vasiñöha recited Räma’s 
family lineage. After hearing of Räma’s ancestry, beginning with the 
sun-god, Janaka recited Sétä’s genealogy, describing his own ancestry,

55 
which began with Brahmä. 
When Janaka finished, Viçvämitra spoke. He suggested that Sétä’s sister, 
Urmila, wed Räma’s brother Lakñman. The sage also advised that 
Janaka’s brother Kushadhvaja allow his two daughters to marry Bharata 
and Shatrughna. Then there could be one ceremony for all four 
marriages. 
Rising from his seat with joy, Janaka said, “Let it be so!” again and again. 
He fell prostrate before Viçvämitra and said, “I am ever your servant. 
Your words are worthy of my worship and I stand commanded by you. 
Let the wedding take place tomorrow, a day marked by favorable stars.” 
As the two kings sat talking together, the sun gradually set. Janaka took 
his leave from Daçaratha and departed for his personal quarters, flanked 
by his ministers and a hundred warriors. Thousands of golden oil lamps 
lit up the hall as the crowds of Brahmins made their way out, all of them 
constantly uttering auspicious Vedic hymns. 
* * * 
The following morning Daçaratha rose early and performed the first 
ritual for invoking good fortune. He had his four sons brought before 
him and then gave to the Brahmin priests a hundred thousand cows on 
behalf of each of them. The emperor also distributed gold and gems to 
the thousands of åñis assembled in Mithila to witness the wedding. The 
four princes shaved their heads and dressed in silk robes, putting on 
brilliant jeweled ornaments. Surrounded by the four handsome and 
effulgent youths, Daçaratha shone like Brahmä surrounded by the 
celestial guardians of the four quarters. 
A great pavilion had been erected for the ceremony. Its walls were 
constructed of marble and it was supported on numerous pillars studded 
with sparkling gems. Fragrant and brightly colored flower garlands were 
draped everywhere and the air was filled with the scent of black aloe 
incense. Large stands constructed of mahogany inlaid with coral and 
pearl, holding rows of golden seats, surrounded the sacrificial area. Kings 
from all around the world along with their ministers filled the stands, 
eager to see the wedding.  
The entire pavilion was crowded with jubilant people who cried out, 
“All glories to Räma and Sétä!” Hundreds of elderly Brahmins wearing

56 
simple loin cloths, with clean white threads hanging from their left 
shoulders, were seated around the sacrificial arena. They recited Vedic 
hymns continuously and the melodic rise and fall of their metrical 
chanting filled the pavilion. Musical instruments played while expert 
singers sang the praises of Räma and Sétä. The whole assembly appeared 
like an exuberant festival held in the heavens by the gods. 
Daçaratha and his four sons approached the sacrificial fire, which was 
tended by Vasiñöha. When they were seated, the princes saw Sétä and 
the other three princesses enter the arena. The princes’ minds were 
captivated by the beauty of their wives-to-be. Adorned with shining silk 
garments, jewels and gold ornaments, the princesses appeared like four 
goddesses descended from the celestial realm. They sat down opposite 
their intended spouses, glancing down shyly, and Vasiñöha immediately 
began the wedding ceremony. 
Janaka stepped forward, speaking in a voice choked with emotion. “My 
dear Räma, I now give to You Sétä, my own beloved daughter, to be Your 
assistant in all Your religious duties. She will always remain exclusively 
devoted to You and will follow You like Your own shadow. Take Her 
hand in Yours and accept Her. I bless You both.”  
Janaka took Räma’s hand and placed it over Sétä’s. Vasiñöha sprinkled 
sanctified water over Their clasped hands, signifying the confirmation 
of the gift of Sétä. Holding Sétä’s hand, Räma led Her slowly around the 
sacred fire. 
From the upper reaches of the pavilion the gods were heard to exclaim, 
“Excellent! Bravo!” Celestial flowers rained down upon Räma and Sétä. 
The entire assembly of onlookers erupted with a shout of joy. Both 
Daçaratha and Janaka looked with tearful eyes at the newlywed couple. 
Räma’s complexion, resembling a celestial emerald, contrasted the pure 
white features of Sétä. They were both covered with golden flower petals 
and Their many jewels shone brilliantly. As They walked hand in hand 
around the fire, Sétä looked down in shyness while Räma smiled at the 
loudly cheering crowds in the pavilion. 
Each of Räma’s three brothers, one after another in order of their 
seniority, took the hand of one of the other three princesses. Lakñman 
was united with Urmila, Bharata with Mandavi and Shatrughna with 
Srutakirti. The three effulgent princes, holding Their brides’ hands,

57 
went around the sacred fire along with Janaka and the many sages. 
Cries of happiness filled the pavilion. While the gods played their 
celestial drums, bevies of Apsaräs danced and Gandharvas sang. The 
sages recited Vedic texts and the blast of conch shells was heard 
everywhere. All those present in the assembly were lost in ecstasy.  
The ceremony ended at midday and the kings and princes gradually 
retired to their tents, headed by Daçaratha, Janaka and the four newly 
married couples. 
The following day, Viçvämitra, after taking permission from both 
Daçaratha and Janaka, left for the northern Himälayan ranges, his mind 
intent on the performance of asceticism. Janaka bestowed upon his 
daughters a dowry consisting of hundreds of thousands of cows and an 
equal number of elephants, horses, chariots and foot soldiers. The king, 
whose wealth was virtually unlimited, gave away millions of pieces of 
silken and cotton textiles, tens of thousands of handwoven carpets, 
heaps of gold, silver and jewels, and hundreds of richly adorned maids 
for each of the brides. 
* * * 
After a few days Daçaratha left for Ayodhya, proceeding at the head of a 
large army. As the king, surrounded by his sons and the host of sages, 
was traveling along the broad road that led to Ayodhya, he suddenly saw 
a strange omen. Birds began to cry out fearfully and swoop low over their 
heads. Witnessing this foreboding sign, Daçaratha’s heart quivered and 
his mind became fearful. The king asked Vasiñöha if he knew the cause 
of those omens. 
“These signs portend some grave danger,” replied the åñi, “but here are 
groups of deer crossing our path from left to right. This indicates our 
deliverance from that danger. You should not fear.” 
A fierce tempest blew up. The sun was enveloped in darkness and the 
sky became black. Trees crashed to the ground and the earth shook. A 
dreadful dust storm swirled around the travelers, confounding their 
senses. They were rendered virtually unconscious. Suddenly, from out of 
the darkness, appeared the terrible sage Paraçuräma. He was dressed in 
tiger skins and had matted locks coiled at the crown of his head. 
Daçaratha and his followers immediately recognized him. Although a

58 
Brahmin, Paraçuräma was famous for his prowess as a fighter. In former 
ages he had single-handedly overcome the world’s warriors, annihilating 
them by the millions. The sage had become enraged when his father was 
killed by warrior kings, and he wreaked an awful vengeance. He had 
ranged the globe massacring the entire warrior class. He now stood 
before Daçaratha holding a battle-ax in one hand and in the other a 
fierce arrow which resembled a streak of lightning. He was as tall as two 
men and he had upon his shoulder a great bow. Appearing as irresistible 
as the fire of universal destruction, he blocked the path like an 
impassable mountain. 
The sages in Daçaratha’s party quickly gathered together. They took 
water to wash Paraçuräma’s feet and hands and offered him gentle words 
of welcome. 
Accepting the honor offered by the sages, Paraçuräma looked at Räma 
and said in a grave voice, “O Räma, I have heard of Your strength. By 
breaking Çiva’s bow You have performed an incredible feat. How can I, 
who has formed a great enmity with all warriors, tolerate hearing of such 
prowess existing in a king? I have here another sacred bow, that of 
Viñëu. Let us see Your power now. Fit this celestial arrow upon this bow 
and simply draw it to its full length. If You are able to accomplish this 
task, then I shall challenge You to single combat. When You stand on 
the battlefield and are swept away by the force of my weapons, You shall 
earn undying fame.” 
Daçaratha threw up his hands in horror. Knowing well of Paraçuräma’s 
power, he feared for Räma’s life. He approached the sage with joined 
palms and entreated him to spare Räma. Paying no heed at all to the 
king, Paraçuräma continued to speak only to Räma: “Both the bow 
broken by You and this one here were constructed by the architect of 
the gods, Viçvakarmä. The one you sundered formerly belonged to Çiva. 
However, this one here was Viñëu’s property. It is thus more powerful 
than the one you broke, for Viñëu is always Çiva’s superior.” 
Paraçuräma took the bow from his shoulder. With furrowed brows, he 
gazed at Räma with bloodshot eyes, not immediately recognizing the 
prince’s divine identity. “The bow has been passed down from Viñëu to 
my ancestors and finally to me. I now offer it to You, O Räma. 
Considering Your sacred duty as a warrior to always accept a challenge,

59 
exhibit now the strength of Your arms!” 
Paraçuräma held out the enormous bow. Räma, smiling slightly, stepped 
forward. “I have heard of your tremendous feat in fighting and killing all 
the world’s warriors twenty-one times. You have fully avenged your 
father with this commendable action.” 
Even as a child Räma had been told the story of Paraçuräma. The many 
kings killed by that sage had become debauched, and it was by divine 
arrangement that they had been annihilated. As a sage Paraçuräma had 
performed much asceticism and had finally been personally empowered 
by Viñëu himself. By dint of Viñëu’s own desire and power Paraçuräma 
had been able to exterminate the warrior class. Now Viñëu, appearing as 
Räma, again stood before the sage. He continued to speak: “You are a 
Brahmin sage and are therefore worthy of My worship. However, since 
you despise Me, seeing Me to belong to the warrior class, I shall now 
display to you My personal prowess.” 
Räma seized the bow along with the blazing arrow from Paraçuräma’s 
hand. He strung the bow in an instant and drew the arrow back to His 
ear. Looking angrily at Paraçuräma, He asked, “Where shall I discharge 
this deadly shaft, O sage? As you are My superior I dare not aim it at 
you.” 
Hosts of gods had assembled in the sky. Seeing the celestial bow drawn 
in anger by Räma, and fearing that He may destroy the heavens, they 
cried out, “Viñëu! Save us, save us!” 
Räma, standing with the bow, blazed as brilliant as the sun and 
Paraçuräma fell back in astonishment. He felt his own power completely 
eclipsed by Räma. Suddenly realizing Räma’s identity, the sage spoke in 
faltering tones. “You appear invincible and I can understand that You 
must surely be the imperishable Viñëu himself. I accept defeat but I am 
not shamed, as You are indeed the Lord of all the worlds.” 
Paraçuräma recalled how Viñëu had long ago said He would come again 
to take back the divine energy He had given to the sage. The warrior-
sage folded his palms and said, “O Räma, O all-powerful one, You have 
already divested me of my power and my pride. Please release this arrow 
upon my desires for heavenly pleasures and thereby burn them all to 
ashes. I wish only to serve You. With all my material aspirations 
destroyed by You, I shall be fit to become Your eternal servant. This is

60 
my deepest desire.” 
Paraçuräma bowed low before Räma, who then fired the fearful shaft. 
The sage immediately vanished along with the arrow. Then Varuëa, the 
god of the waters, appeared and Räma gave him the celestial bow to keep 
on behalf of the gods. 
The exchange between Räma and the sage was heard and understood 
only by Vasiñöha and a few other spiritually powerful Brahmins. The 
king and the others present had been wholly confounded by the events 
that had occurred. They were amazed and relieved to see that Räma had 
somehow appeased the sage. Everything again became calm and the 
party resumed their journey, soon approaching Ayodhya. 
Word had already reached Ayodhya of the approach of Daçaratha’s 
party. Thousands of Brahmins and citizens had come some miles out of 
the city to greet them. They stood along the wide roads throwing rice 
grains and fresh green leaves in front of Daçaratha. Seated aboard his 
chariot, the emperor and his sons waved at the people. They moved 
slowly through the crowds and entered the city in state. It was decorated 
with flags and festoons and strewn all over with flowers. Trumpet 
fanfares sounded and joyous people thronged around the king’s party as 
it went slowly along the main thoroughfare. 
Daçaratha entered his own white marble palace, which resembled Mount 
Himavat. He was greeted by his wives, who had organized a ceremonious 
reception for their sons and new daughters-in-law. After the greeting 
the princes and princesses went to their respective palaces and began to 
enjoy life in Ayodhya exactly like the gods in heaven. 
After a few weeks, Daçaratha asked Bharata and Shatrughna to go to the 
kingdom of their father-in-law, Kushadhvaja, who himself had no sons. 
The emperor instructed the princes to assist Kushadhvaja in the affairs 
of state. Along with Their wives and a large army, Bharata and 
Shatrughna therefore soon left the capital and went to Rajagriha, where 
Kushadhvaja lived. 
Chapter 5

61 
Crooked Advice for Queen Kaikeyi 
The aging Daçaratha, thinking of his retirement, gradually entrusted 
more and more of the state affairs to Räma and Lakñman. Those two 
princes, along with Their wives, served the king in every way. They 
always thought of the welfare of the people. Everyone became pleased 
with Their disposition and conduct. They were gentle and kind, but firm 
when necessary. They demonstrated complete mastery of the military 
arts and, having slain the powerful Räkñasas even while boys, were 
respected as great heroes. 
Räma was especially dear to the king and the people. He was always 
tranquil and soft-spoken, not retorting even when someone spoke 
harshly to Him. He recognized the smallest of services rendered and did 
not take to heart any wrongs against Him. Räma had conquered anger 
and was full of compassion. Making all arrangements to protect the 
people, he surrounded Himself with intelligent advisors and never made 
a decision without due consultation. Despite His power and ability, He 
always remained humble, mild and self-controlled. He was not 
influenced by envy or hatred, did not engage in frivolous talks and 
always sought the good in others. Free from sloth, He was ever vigilant 
to carry out His duty.  
Räma gave delight to even the gods, who would frequently grace 
Ayodhya with their presence. He was as tolerant as Mother Earth, as 
wise as Båhaspati, and as valorous as Indra. His personal beauty was as 
resplendent as the brilliant sun-god.  
Daçaratha, seeing his son endowed with so many virtues, longed to see 
Him installed as the Prince Regent. The king discussed his desire with 
his ministers and priests. They all unanimously agreed that Räma, as the 
eldest son, was the rightful heir to the throne and that He would be the 
most popular choice of the people. However, when the royal astrologers 
were calculating a favorable time for the coronation, they discovered 
dreadful signs in the heavens, portents that indicated that some calamity 
would soon occur. 
Daçaratha became concerned. The omens must surely foretell of his own

62 
impending death. He decided to perform the ceremony quickly at the 
earliest opportune moment. Having set a date for Räma’s installation, he 
summoned to Ayodhya rulers and important men from around the globe. 
But the gods so arranged that Daçaratha, in his haste, neglected to invite 
King Kushadhvaja. Thus neither Bharata nor Shatrughna came for the 
ceremony. Daçaratha realized too late his omission, for it was a journey 
of some days to Rajagriha. Nevertheless, he considered that his two 
absent sons would soon receive the delightful news of Their elder 
brother’s installation. He felt sure They would be overjoyed and would 
not take offense. 
Soon a large gathering of kings and Brahmins appeared in Ayodhya and 
Daçaratha had them assembled in the royal court. Sitting in state in the 
assembly, the emperor blazed forth like Indra in the midst of the gods. 
He spoke in a pleasing and melodious voice, which was at the same time 
sonorous and grave. 
“All of you know how the earth has long been protected by me and the 
kings who previously appeared before me in my line. To the best of my 
ability I have ruled the people, giving protection even at the expense of 
personal comforts. My body has become worn out in the shade of the 
royal umbrella. Carrying on my shoulders the burden of governing the 
globe, I have become old. I wish now to bestow this kingdom upon one 
well suited to take my place. Here is my beloved and eldest son Räma, 
who vies with the king of the gods in all virtues. With the agreement of 
my closest advisors and in accordance with custom and law, I desire to 
place Räma at the head of the state. With your permission, therefore, 
the ceremony will take place tomorrow morning.” 
Daçaratha looked around the vast assembly of kings and sages. All of 
them gazed at him intently as he spoke. The kings saw Daçaratha as the 
leader of the entire earth. They all had affection for the old emperor, 
who always administered the law with justice and compassion. They 
willingly paid him tributes and sought his guidance in the affairs of state 
management. Daçaratha oversaw the world situation, ensuring that the 
different kings and leaders all ruled according to the codes of religion. 
All the assembled kings felt that Räma was the perfect choice to succeed 
Daçaratha. As the emperor looked at his obedient and gentle son, he was 
moved by love. He continued to speak with tears running from his eyes.

63 
“Räma, who possesses every desirable quality, will be your worthy 
protector and even the universe will be better ruled with Him as 
emperor. If my plan finds favor with you, then be pleased to give your 
consent. Otherwise, if you consider that some other course should be 
taken, then speak out. Perhaps you may find me overly attached to 
Räma, choosing Him when a better choice could be found. The views of 
the dispassionate are always to be sought when deciding a difficult 
issue.” 
The whole assembly was filled with delight upon hearing Daçaratha 
speak. They erupted with loud acclamations of joy, even as a crowd of 
peacocks would acclaim the appearance of a large rain cloud. The sound 
echoed all around Ayodhya, seeming to shake the earth. “Let it be so! 
Let it be so!” was heard everywhere, and every man was in agreement. 
Stepping forward, a leader of the Brahmins said, “You have long 
protected us with love, O king. Now you have a worthy son and can 
retire peacefully. Pray install Räma as the Prince Regent, for He alone 
deserves to be your successor. We long to see Räma riding upon the great 
royal elephant, His head shielded by the white umbrella.” 
Upon hearing the assembly voice their unanimous agreement to Räma’s 
installation, Daçaratha stood up, his eyes flooded with tears of joy. “It is 
fortunate for me and indeed the world that you all wish to see Räma 
succeed me as king. This confirms my decision. I shall begin the 
arrangements for Räma’s installation immediately.”  
Daçaratha came down from his throne and approached Vasiñöha, 
touching his feet. “With your permission, O holy Brahmin, we shall 
proceed with the ceremony tomorrow. If you are agreeable, then please 
make all preparations.” 
“So be it,” Vasiñöha replied, and he immediately commanded the king’s 
ministers to set about making ready all of the items required for the 
installation the following day. The assembly then dispersed with a loud 
clamor, and shouts of “Victory to Räma!” were heard everywhere.  
That night, however, Daçaratha remembered the astrological 
predictions. He became fearful and called for Räma. Speaking with Him 
in private, Daçaratha said, “I have enjoyed a long life and have always 
protected the people to the best of my ability. In thousands of religious 
ceremonies, I have bestowed abundant charity. By sacrifice, worship and

64 
charity I have repaid my debt to the gods, the Brahmins and the 
forefathers. I have also fully satisfied myself through the enjoyment of 
numerous pleasures. All that remains for me to do is to install You as my 
successor.” 
Daçaratha clasped Räma close to his bosom. The king’s body trembled 
and his eyes shed tears. He desperately longed for his son to succeed him. 
At last it was imminent. Surely no evil destiny could prevent it now. 
Would not even the gods desire to see this magnificent prince become 
the king? Daçaratha revealed his concerns to Räma, telling Him of the 
malefic stars. He also told his son of the many bad dreams he had 
recently experienced. 
“My dear Räma, due to seeing all these omens, Your installation has 
been sought swiftly by me before any problems arise. With Your good 
wife, Sétä, make offerings into the sacrificial fire tonight. At sunrise 
tomorrow we shall commence the installation ceremony.” 
Räma nodded in agreement and then bowed and took His leave from the 
king. He went back to His palace and, along with Sétä, sat before the 
sacrificial fire making offerings to Viñëu. 
* * * 
The news of Räma’s installation quickly spread around the city, 
delighting everyone. The temples were thronged with people offering 
gifts and worshipping the gods. As evening fell the city streets were 
filled with a flurry of joyous citizens. The large crowds of men moving 
about Ayodhya resembled the tossing waves of the ocean. Everyone 
spoke only of the installation. Poets and bards composed songs about the 
occasion. Flags were hoisted high on the housetops and garlands of forest 
flowers were draped everywhere. Colorful festoons hung across the 
streets, which were swept and sprinkled with perfumed water. Shining 
lamps hung from every tree lining the streets. The city echoed 
everywhere with the loud chanting of Vedic hymns. Elephants and bulls 
roared on all sides and the whole atmosphere throbbed with excitement. 
No one could wait for sunrise, when the ceremony would commence. 
In the palace of Kaikeyi, the king’s youngest queen, there was a 
hunchbacked maidservant called Manthara. Upon seeing the 
celebrations, Manthara approached Räma’s former nurse and inquired,

65 
“What occasion gives rise to this display of delight on every side? Is the 
emperor going to perform some great sacrifice?” 
The nurse, her face blooming with happiness, told Manthara about the 
king’s decision to install Räma as the heir-apparent. “Tomorrow, under 
favorable stars, our lord Daçaratha will give to the sinless Räma the 
office of Prince Regent. What greater occasion for joy could there be?” 
Manthara’s mind recoiled at this news. She was immediately seized with 
anger. Surely this was a disaster! With Räma installed as king her 
mistress Kaikeyi would soon fall out of favor, her own son Bharata being 
left as nothing more than Räma’s servant. Manthara raged within 
herself. She had long enjoyed special privileges as Kaikeyi’s senior 
maidservant. The emperor particularly liked her mistress, who had given 
Manthara the esteem she desired. As a hunchback she had always been 
the butt of jokes and abuse among the other servants. But as her mistress 
became more influential, the other servants, even those of the senior 
queen Kaushalya, had been obliged to pay her respect.  
Sighing with anxiety, Manthara ran to Kaikeyi’s room where she found 
the queen lying upon a couch. With her face flushed she began 
addressing her bemused mistress in harsh tones. “Get up, foolish woman! 
How can you lay there when calamity stares you in the face? You 
languish here at ease even as a flood of misery sweeps towards you. 
Thoroughly neglected by your husband, you are threatened now with 
utter ruin.” 
Kaikeyi looked affectionately at her servant. Manthara had been her 
childhood nurse and Kaikeyi saw her like her own mother. The queen 
had not heard the news about Räma and she inquired from Manthara, 
“Pray tell me what causes you sorrow at this time? You seem sorely 
afflicted.” 
Manthara became even more incensed upon hearing Kaikeyi’s question. 
She replied in a low voice trembling with anger. “There is no doubt that 
disaster now threatens us both. With your destruction will come mine, as 
much as with your good fortune rests mine. I am therefore saying this 
only for your benefit.” 
She grasped Kaikeyi’s hand, trying to impress upon her mistress what 
appeared to her to be the obvious facts. “Although born in a royal line, 
you seem ignorant of the ways of kings. A king will speak sweet words to

66 
a person while at the same time planning their destruction. The emperor 
has acted as your beloved spouse while performing deeds which will ruin 
you to the very roots.” 
Kaikeyi sat up and looked at her servant curiously. Manthara’s eyes 
blazed as she continued. “Having sent your own son Bharata away to a 
distant kingdom, this wicked king now plans to install Räma as Prince 
Regent. What greater misfortune could there be for you?” 
Kaikeyi smiled. She loved Räma as much as her own dear son, while 
Räma for His part looked upon Kaikeyi as being equal to His own 
mother Kaushalya. She felt a surge of joy upon hearing Manthara’s 
report. She could not understand why Manthara was disturbed. Why was 
she so vehement? If anyone else had spoken about Daçaratha and Räma 
in such a way, she would have had them punished, but Kaikeyi was 
accustomed to her servant’s sullen temperament. She felt there was no 
malice in Manthara, despite her often angry expressions.  
Taking from her bosom a necklace of brilliant diamonds set in gold, 
Kaikeyi handed it to her servant and said, “My dear Dhätré, this is surely 
the best news you have ever brought me. My heart swells with pleasure 
at hearing your words, which seem to me like nectar. I wish to reward 
you. Take this gift and tell me if there is anything else I can do for you.” 
Manthara threw down the necklace and began rebuking Kaikeyi. “This 
is no occasion for joy, foolish lady! What strange frame of mind has 
seized you? An ocean of grief threatens to overwhelm you and yet you 
stand here smiling. Your stepson Räma will become king while your own 
son Bharata is left aside. Bharata’s claim to the throne is the same as 
Räma’s and thus Räma will see Him as an enemy. Lakñman serves only 
Räma, and Shatrughna serves your son. Therefore it is only Räma or 
Bharata who may be crowned as the sovereign of this world. My mind 
quakes with fear to think of the danger to your son from the powerful 
Räma once He is king.” 
Manthara’s eyes grew bloodshot with fury and her face whitened as she 
spoke. Why was Kaikeyi not understanding? Kaushalya had long been 
snubbed by the king in favor of Kaikeyi. When Räma became the king 
that would all change. Kaushalya would be exalted to the highest level, 
while Kaikeyi would lose her special position as the king’s most favored 
consort. Kaushalya would certainly exact her revenge for her long

67 
suffering. Kaikeyi would become Kaushalya’s maidservant and Bharata 
would at best be Räma’s servant-more likely he would be exiled. Where 
would that leave Kaikeyi’s servants? Praying to the gods to help her, the 
hunchbacked maid became more ardent in her plea. 
“You must do something! This is a great disaster. Once the crown has 
passed to the other side of your family, you will in time see your own side 
sink into oblivion, bereft of all royal fortune.” 
Hearing this strong submission from her servant, the beautiful Kaikeyi 
thought of Räma. She could not imagine him bearing any ill will toward 
Bharata. Manthara’s fears were quite groundless. Räma always acted in 
perfect accord with religious principles. He was devoted to truth, 
disciplined and always kind. He doubtlessly deserved to be king. After 
He was crowned He would surely look after His younger brothers like a 
father. Manthara had no reason to feel such distress. Kaikeyi chided her 
gently.  
“When such an occasion for rejoicing has come, you should by no means 
give way to grief, my dear maidservant. Nor should you think ill of 
Räma. My son Bharata will be in no danger from Räma, and in the 
future He may well succeed Him to the throne. There is no need for 
lamentation.” 
Manthara would not be placated. In order to improve her own position 
she wanted her mistress to be the mother of the king. Blinded by her 
own greed and envy, Manthara considered the emperor to be acting 
from similar motivations. She continued to beseech Kaikeyi in 
increasingly rancorous tones.  
“Surely it is due only to stupidity that you fail to see your impending 
doom, O deluded one. Räma will be crowned king and after Him will 
come His son. Where then will Bharata be left? Not all the sons of a king 
can assume the throne; it falls only to one among them. Having taken 
hold of the throne, Räma will ensure that it goes to His own son, if 
necessary by banishing Bharata, or perhaps even by sending Him to the 
next world. You and your line will be lost and forsaken. I am here to 
awaken you to a great peril now arrived at your door. Do not disregard 
me.” 
Manthara’s lofty position in the palace had gone to her head. She was 
furious at the prospect of losing her status and she continued to present

68 
many arguments to her mistress. She played upon the natural rivalry 
existing between the king’s co-wives. Kaikeyi’s affection for Räma was 
deep and the discussion went back and forth for some time, but gradually 
Manthara began to change her mistress’s mind. By the gods’ 
arrangement, her arguments swayed Kaikeyi’s mind and the queen’s 
intelligence became confused. Although she loved Räma, she began to 
consider that His installation was an injustice.  
Manthara saw in Kaikeyi’s face that her mind was wavering. She grasped 
the queen’s hands. “There is a way by which we may not be ruined. If 
Räma can be sent to the forest and Bharata installed in His place, then 
the sovereignty may be secured in your line.” 
This idea had entered Manthara’s mind by the sudden inspiration of the 
gods. Kaikeyi, intrigued, looked at her servant. “How can this be 
accomplished?” 
Manthara recalled a story she had heard from her mistress many years 
earlier. “Some time ago you told me how you once went with your 
husband when he was assisting Indra in a battle against the demons. 
Having fought hard one day, your husband lay unconscious on the 
battlefield, his body severely wounded. A grave danger beset him then 
from a demon who would come at night to devour the bodies of the 
warriors still on the field.” 
Kaikeyi remembered the incident. Many years back the emperor had 
gone to the heavens, taking Kaikeyi with him. He was famed as an 
invincible warrior and the gods had asked his assistance in a fight. At 
that time he had fought so powerfully that his chariot appeared to be 
facing ten directions simultaneously and the gods had therefore named 
him Daçaratha, or “ten chariots.” 
Manthara continued, “At that time, seeing the danger to Daçaratha, you 
rode out in a chariot and rescued your lord. Upon recovering he offered 
you a couple of boons, but you deferred them to a time when you might 
need them most. Surely that time has now come. Go to Daçaratha and 
ask that he banish Räma and install Bharata in His place as the Prince 
Regent. In this way we shall both be saved.” 
Despite her love for her husband and her attachment for Räma, Kaikeyi 
became convinced by Manthara’s arguments. She was upset. How could 
the king have treated her in such a way? He was always so kind and

69 
loving. Was all that just a show to win her favor? She began to feel 
angry. The king might have spoken so many sweet words to her, but by 
his behavior it was obvious that he favored Kaushalya. They had 
probably even conspired together to have Bharata sent away. Why had 
she not realized it before? It was obvious! Now the whole situation was 
revealed. Daçaratha had shown his real feelings by completely neglecting 
her and favoring Kaushalya’s son instead. 
Kaikeyi heaved a doleful sigh. “Your suggestion finds favor with me, 
Manthara. I shall this very moment go before the king and ask of him 
these boons.” 
Manthara’s mind was full of cunning. Her eyes narrowed. “You should 
ask that Räma be banished for no less than fourteen years. Within that 
time your son Bharata will become dear to the people and He will be 
firmly established on the throne.” 
Manthara intelligently knew that Bharata could never become the king 
in Räma’s presence. The people would not allow it to happen. Even the 
humble Bharata Himself would almost surely not accede to such an 
arrangement. Räma had to be banished. The maidservant continued, 
“Do not allow Räma to remain in the kingdom. By his power and 
influence He will seize the throne, even if Bharata is crowned. Your son 
has long been away while Räma has been here, winning the hearts of the 
people. It is imperative that Räma be sent away for a long time.” 
Kaikeyi listened with full attention as her maidservant revealed her 
insidious plan. “Listen as I tell you the means of approaching the king. 
Putting on soiled garments, you should go to the sulking chamber and lie 
down on the bare floor. With your ornaments cast about and your hair 
in disarray, lay there weeping.” 
Manthara knew that her mistress was guileless by nature. The queen 
would not have acted politically, even though angered, but her servant 
led her along. She spoke of Daçaratha’s special affection for his youngest 
and most beautiful wife. “The king will never be able to tolerate your 
sullen mood. He cannot ignore your order. For your sake he would enter 
fire and even lay down his very life. Using the power of your charms you 
will easily achieve your ends, O beautiful lady.” 
Clenching her fists, Kaikeyi sat on her bed, spread with a pure white silk 
sheet. Manthara was right. The king obviously liked her for something,

70 
if only her beauty and charms. Every evening he spent time with her. 
Tonight he would be in for a surprise! Kaikeyi came fully under the sway 
of anger as Manthara continued. 
“When the king sees you distraught, he will take you up and offer you 
anything. He will present priceless gems and pearls in order to pacify 
you. Do not be distracted from your goal of banishing Räma. Insist upon 
the two boons long ago given by your lord. Take those boons now, O 
queen. Demand the exile of Räma and the coronation of Bharata.” 
Although Manthara showed her mistress an evil course disguised as 
good, Kaikeyi accepted her advice. Kind, gentle and wise by nature, 
Kaikeyi nevertheless lost her good sense under the influence of her 
envious maid. Considering her husband and Räma as enemies, she spoke 
with hot, heavy breaths. “You have given me good counsel, O wise 
woman. I have been cheated by the king. You have acted as my well-
wisher by pointing this out. When my son is installed on the throne, I 
shall confer upon you numerous boons and much wealth.” 
Manthara smiled and urged Kaikeyi to make haste. “Let us go quickly to 
the inner rooms, for the king will shortly come for his evening visit with 
you. You should by no means stand by as Räma is made Prince Regent. 
Act swiftly for the interests of your son and your own self.” 
Kaikeyi was pierced again and again by Manthara’s sharp words. The 
servant repeatedly spoke against the king and Räma, stoking Kaikeyi’s 
anger more. Arriving at the sulking chamber, the queen threw herself on 
the floor and said to Manthara, “Either Räma is exiled and Bharata 
made king, or I shall remain here in this state, taking neither food nor 
water. If my desire is not fulfilled, then you shall see me depart from this 
spot for the region of the dead.” 
With her ornaments scattered and her garland crushed, Kaikeyi lay on 
the beautiful mosaic floor, appearing like a goddess fallen from the 
heavens. Her face dark with rage, she tossed about and sobbed. 
Chapter 6 
The King’s Heartbreak

71 
Daçaratha, having seen that all the arrangements for the installation 
were underway, made his way toward Kaikeyi’s rooms for his evening 
rendezvous. The glorious monarch entered Kaikeyi’s excellent 
apartment as the moon might enter the sky at night, spreading its 
beautiful rays. Peacocks, parrots and other species of colorful birds 
crowded the palace, their cries augmenting the sounds of various musical 
instruments. Hundreds of well-dressed maids moved about in the great 
halls and rooms, in which were hung flowing silk drapes and numerous 
fine paintings. Along the outer walls grew trees filled with blossoms and 
fruits. Tall seats of ivory burnished with gold stood everywhere, along 
with expansive couches covered with soft cushions. Costly handwoven 
carpets covered the floors. First-class food and drink of every variety 
were provided in gold and crystal dishes laid out on golden tables.  
Daçaratha swept through the palace, which rivaled paradise itself. The 
armed guards at the outer doors bowed low as he passed, while at the 
inner doors the female servants folded their palms in respect. Coming at 
last to Kaikeyi’s personal quarters, the king did not see her lying on her 
bed as expected. Daçaratha was surprised to find that his beloved spouse 
had failed to meet him at the usual time. He called out for her. When 
there was no reply the king was dismayed. What had happened? He 
searched about and, finding Kaikeyi’s doorkeeper, inquired of his wife’s 
whereabouts. With a dejected expression the portress told the king that 
Kaikeyi had entered the sulking chamber in an angry mood. 
Even further dismayed upon hearing this strange report, the king 
quickly made his way towards his wife. He entered the sulking room and 
saw her there fallen on the floor in a sorry and unseemly state. 
Daçaratha looked sadly upon his youngest queen, who was dearer to him 
than his life, but who now held in her heart a wicked and sinful desire. 
Lying on the ground she looked like a rose creeper violently torn from 
its tree, or like an Apsarä dropped from heaven, or a doe caught in a 
hunter’s snare. Daçaratha looked upon her as the lord of elephants might 
look upon his mate lying pierced by a poisoned arrow. Fondly stroking 
her tear-streaked face, the agitated emperor spoke to her softly. 
“Your anger is surely not meant for me, who only wishes for your 
unending happiness. Tell me, O gentle lady, by whom you have been 
insulted or rebuked so that you now lie here rolling in the dust? Who

72 
deserves punishment today at my hands? Or do you wish me to release 
someone who deserves to be punished? By whom have you been offended 
or whom would you seek to oblige?” 
Kaikeyi said nothing and did not even look at the king. Daçaratha felt 
tormented as he sought at length to appease her. “If you are ailing, then I 
shall call here the royal physicians, who will quickly heal your pain. 
Speak out whatever is amiss and allow me to make amends. I can by no 
means tolerate your distress and will quickly perform any work which 
pleases you. This earth with all its wealth belongs to me. What shall I 
bestow upon you today? What can you gain by torturing yourself in this 
way, my beloved queen? Please rise up and tell me the source of your 
sorrow.” 
Kaikeyi was comforted and encouraged by her husband’s entreaty. He 
was ready to do anything to please her. She prepared to put forward her 
terrible proposal. Seeing Daçaratha deeply moved by love for her, 
Kaikeyi spoke in strained tones. “I have not been insulted or offended by 
anyone, O king. There is, however, something I wish you to accomplish. 
Make me a solemn vow that you will fulfill my desire and then I shall tell 
you what it is.” 
Daçaratha placed her head upon his lap and straightened her disheveled 
hair. He smiled at her and said, “Save for my son Räma, there is none in 
this world more dear to me than you. I swear then by that invincible 
high-souled Räma, dearer to me than life, that I shall satisfy your 
cherished desire. By that very Räma, from whom separation would surely 
end my life, I swear to carry out your order. Indeed, by Räma, whom I 
would have in exchange even for my own self, my other sons and the 
entire earth, I promise to do your bidding. Please, therefore, reveal your 
mind to me, O good lady.” 
Kaikeyi saw that her husband had bound himself completely by this 
thrice-spoken vow. She inwardly rejoiced and felt that her ends were 
practically achieved. She then said to him what would have been 
difficult to say even for an enemy, and which was like death arrived at 
Daçaratha’s door. “Let all the gods headed by Indra witness your promise. 
Let the sun, the moon, the sky, fire, day and night, the four quarters 
with their presiding deities, the universe itself and the indwelling Lord 
in everyone’s heart take heed of your great vow. The highly glorious

73 
emperor, who is always true to his word and who knows what is right, 
has given me his promise.” 
Looking intently at her bemused husband, Kaikeyi said, “Remember 
now, O king, how in former times you fought with the gods against the 
demons and how I saved your life. Surely you recall your offer to me 
then of two boons. Having kept those with you all this time, I now wish 
to take them. Grant me those boons, O lord, or see me give up my life 
this very day.” 
Held under the powerful sway of passion and bound by his infallible 
promise, the king, like a deer stepping into a snare, made ready to accord 
the two boons to his queen. Kaikeyi continued, “For my first boon, let 
my son Bharata be installed as the Prince Regent in Räma’s place. For 
the second, let Räma be exiled to the forest and remain there for 
fourteen years. Be true to your promise, O king of kings, and cover both 
yourself and your race with everlasting glory.” 
For some time Daçaratha gazed at his wife in utter disbelief. He was 
seized by an agonizing anxiety when he heard her cruel utterance. Surely 
this could not be happening. Was he really hearing this or was it a 
dream? Had something experienced in a former life suddenly returned as 
a vivid hallucination? Maybe he was simply losing his sanity. How could 
Kaikeyi have made such a request? She had always shown a deep 
affection for Räma. 
As he considered her words again and again, Daçaratha became 
overpowered by grief and fainted away. Upon regaining consciousness 
he saw before him his wife, sitting with a stern expression, and he 
remembered again her terrible request. As distressed as a deer at the 
sight of a lion, the king sat upon the bare floor. He sighed like a 
poisonous serpent transfixed by the mystic spells of a charmer. Crying 
out, “Alas, what a calamity!” he swooned once more. 
As he again came back to consciousness the king began to feel furious. 
This was entirely unexpected from Kaikeyi. She was revealing a side of 
her nature he had never seen before. He thundered at his queen as if 
about to consume her with his blazing wrath. “O cruel and wicked 
woman, it seems you are set upon the destruction of my race. What harm 
have Räma or I ever done you? Why then are you bent on bringing ruin 
to me and mine at such a time? By harboring you all this while I have

74 
held to my bosom a venomous snake. When practically the whole of 
humanity extols Räma’s virtues, how shall I forsake Him? I might give up 
my wives, my kingdom and indeed my life, but I can never part with 
Räma.” 
Daçaratha broke off, too shocked to continue. Had he not always shown 
kindness to Kaikeyi? How could she hurt him in this way? Surely she 
realized that her request would kill him. Deeply impassioned, he spoke 
with tears in his eyes. “The world may exist without the sun, crops may 
grow without water, but in no event can life remain in my body without 
my seeing Räma. Therefore give up your sinful desire, O beautiful lady! 
Placing my head upon your feet, I beseech you to be gracious to me.” 
Daçaratha held his wife’s feet and gazed into her face, but Kaikeyi sat 
looking at him impassively, without saying a word. In plaintive tones the 
king continued. “If you feel I have slighted your son Bharata, then let 
Him indeed be installed in place of Räma. But what need is there to send 
away the lotus-eyed and gentle Räma? I cannot believe that you have 
alone developed a dislike for Räma. On so many previous occasions you 
have told me of your love for my beloved son. Surely you are now 
possessed of an evil spirit.” 
Daçaratha could not imagine how else his wife could behave in this way. 
She had never been harsh towards him before. He remembered the 
astrological omens. Surely his wife’s strange request was the work of 
some malevolent influence. He spoke more gently. “I have seen myself 
how Räma serves you even more than does your own son Bharata. Have 
you not always told me so yourself? How then have you come to desire 
Räma’s exile to the dreadful forest for a full fourteen years? Let Him 
remain here and let Bharata be king. What objection could you have to 
that?” 
Kaikeyi did not waver. She had lost her trust in Daçaratha and she 
seethed with anger. He was simply trying to win her over with empty 
words. But she was not going to be fooled any more. She remembered 
Manthara’s warning. The king and his beloved Kaushalya were not going 
to cheat her this time. She would get her boons no matter what 
Daçaratha said. She sat in silence. 
Daçaratha could not think clearly. He was torn by his love for Räma and 
his promise to his wife, who had now seized him violently by the heart.

75 
Realizing that he could never order his son to enter the forest, 
Daçaratha feared he would bring infamy to his royal line. No king in his 
line had ever been known to break his word at any time.  
Daçaratha implored his wife. “What will you gain by banishing Räma? 
He will always render you every service and remain entirely devoted to 
your welfare. I have never received a single complaint against Räma 
even from his subordinates, let alone elders like you. Truthfulness, 
charity, asceticism, self-control, kindness, non-duplicity, learning and 
service to his elders—all these are ever-present in Räma. How could you 
wish harm to that guileless prince?” 
Daçaratha could see that Kaikeyi was unmoved. It was obvious her 
feelings towards Räma had changed. The king decided to try a different 
approach and he invoked his own love for her. “O Kaikeyi, you should 
show mercy to me in this, my great misery. An old and worn man, I am 
fast approaching the end of my days. I have now been subjected to an 
unbearable grief in the shape of your harsh words. What do you wish to 
possess? I can offer you anything that may be had in all of this world. 
Only ask for your desire and consider it done. Joining my palms I fall at 
your feet. Do not banish Räma. Accept my piteous plea and save my 
life.” 
Kaikeyi looked coldly upon her husband. He had fallen weeping to the 
floor and was tossing about, gripped by an overwhelming agony. He 
prayed again and again for deliverance, but Kaikeyi felt no pity. With 
her heart hardened by Manthara and her intelligence confused by the 
gods, she was fixed in her evil determination. Looking contemptuously 
at Daçaratha, she spoke fiercely. “After granting boons and failing to 
fulfill them, how will you again proclaim your piety in the world, O 
noble king? When in an assembly of sages you are asked about your 
promise, how will you reply? Will you admit that you proved untruthful 
to your own dear wife, to whom you owe your very life? Having once 
granted boons, and having again sworn three times to fulfill those boons, 
will you now falsify your word?” 
Kaikeyi was standing, her face flushed with anger. She felt cheated by 
her husband. He had promised her anything. Now he was trying to back 
out. This simply confirmed her doubts about his sincerity. He had no 
intention of giving her what she wanted. Her voice became cold. “What

76 
honor will you bring to your line by this action, O king of kings? Do you 
not recall the many occasions when your forebears were prepared to 
sacrifice everything, including their own lives, in order to protect the 
honor of your race? O foolish king! It seems that at the expense of 
anything you wish to install Räma as your successor and enjoy life with 
Kaushalya eternally!” 
Kaikeyi was furious. The king was prepared to sacrifice anything for the 
sake of Kaushalya’s son, but he cared so little for Kaikeyi that he would 
deny her rights even if it meant bringing infamy upon himself. She went 
on, her voice rising to a shout. “Whether your promise was righteous or 
otherwise and whether you made it sincerely or not, it cannot now be 
withdrawn. If Räma is installed as Prince Regent I shall swallow poison 
and give up my life before your eyes! I would prefer death to seeing 
Kaushalya become the mother of the king. I swear by Bharata and by my 
own self that I shall not be appeased by anything less than Räma’s exile.” 
The king’s body trembled. Consumed by grief, he gazed with unwinking 
eyes upon the face of his beautiful wife. He was stunned by her words, 
which struck him with the force of a thunderbolt. He suddenly dropped 
to the ground like a felled tree, calling out Räma’s name. Like one 
insane, he lost his mental balance and lay motionless on the cold floor 
for a considerable time. Gradually gathering his senses about him, the 
king stood up and spoke in a choked and anguished voice. “I cannot 
believe you are now speaking your own mind. Who has perverted you 
towards this evil course? As if possessed by some demon you speak 
shamelessly that which should never be spoken. What has inspired in 
you this great yet groundless fear? Why are you suddenly seeing Räma as 
your enemy, uttering such cruel words? What do you expect to gain by 
Bharata’s becoming my successor instead of Räma? I expect that Bharata, 
whose virtues compare with those of Räma, will not even reside in 
Ayodhya without Räma, far less accept the throne.” 
The king had so many times seen Bharata serving Räma with love. 
There was no question that Bharata would accept the kingdom, leaving 
Räma aside. What had made Kaikeyi imagine this to be possible? Could 
it be the hand of the gods? But what purpose of theirs would be achieved 
by denying Räma the rulership of the world? And even if Bharata should 
be king, why should Räma be exiled for fourteen years? It was

77 
unthinkable. Daçaratha spoke aloud his thoughts. “Having said to Räma, 
‘Go to the forest,’ how shall I look upon his crestfallen face, which will 
exactly resemble the eclipsed moon? Surely the kings assembled from 
every quarter will say, ‘How has this foolish man ruled the world all this 
while?’ When asked by wise and learned men about Räma, how shall I 
say that I sent Him away to the forest, being pressed by Kaikeyi? If I say I 
was supporting the cause of truth, then what about my declaration that 
Räma would be installed as my successor?” 
Daçaratha fell back onto a couch. His arms were outstretched towards 
Kaikeyi, who had again fallen to the floor on hearing her husband’s 
arguments. The king wailed in agony. “What reply can I make to 
Kaushalya when she asks why I rendered her such an unkind act? I have 
always neglected that godly lady in favor of you. Remembering my acts 
now gives me great pain.” 
Daçaratha’s mention of Kaushalya only made Kaikeyi more furious. 
What a blatant untruth! How did he expect her to believe that she was 
more favored than Kaushalya? In his desperation the king was ready to 
say anything. Kaikeyi stared at her husband, her eyes red with anger. 
The king continued to speak, his passionate words lost on his implacable 
queen. “Seeing Räma departed for the forest and Sétä weeping, I shall 
soon lose my life. You may then carry on all the affairs of state along 
with your son as the undisputed ruler. I have always seen you as my 
devoted and chaste wife. That was my mistake! Inveigled by your empty 
inducements, I have long held you close. Now you have finally killed me, 
even as a hunter kills a deer after enticing it with melodious music.” 
Daçaratha saw that Kaikeyi was not to be swayed from her purpose. His 
anxiety intensified. In his anger and confusion he began to blame 
himself. Surely the whole world would condemn him for sacrificing his 
sinless son for the sake of a sinful woman. This terrible turn of events 
could only be the result of his own wicked acts in some previous life. He 
sat with his head in his hands, crying softly as he spoke.  
“I lament only for the sake of those who will suffer for my sake when I 
perform the evil act of exiling Räma. For having deprived a son like 
Räma of fatherly affection, all honest men will rightly revile me in the 
following words: ‘Alas, this old and foolish king, being bound by lust for 
his favorite queen, could even reject his dearest son!’”

78 
Unable to contain his grief, Daçaratha lamented loudly for a long time. 
Censuring Kaikeyi and calling upon her to have compassion on her 
fellow queens, on Sétä and on the citizens of Ayodhya, he tried in many 
ways to change her mind. Kaikeyi remained adamant. The king then 
began to realize the inevitability of Räma’s departure. He spoke to his 
queen in complete dismay. 
“The very moment I ask Räma to depart He will leave, being fully 
obedient to my order. I shall then be left, cast into the deepest despair 
with my life’s breath quickly expiring. Upon reaching heaven I shall be 
censured even by the gods for my vicious behavior. You too will earn 
unending infamy, O lady of wicked resolve. None shall praise you for 
causing the virtuous and highly popular Räma to be sent into the 
wilderness.” 
Daçaratha practically writhed in pain as he thought of Räma leaving for 
the forest. That gentle prince was accustomed to ride upon the finest 
chariots and elephants. How would He roam the forest on foot? Every 
day Räma was served by numerous royal cooks, competing to offer Him 
every fine dish. How could he subsist on wild fruits and roots? How 
could his son put on the coarse garments of the forest dwellers, having 
always been clad in the costliest of robes? The emperor, devastated, 
shook with grief. He felt his life slipping away.  
Gazing at Kaikeyi, who he now saw as his mortal enemy, Daçaratha said, 
“O wicked woman, it is a wonder that on speaking such cruel and vicious 
words your teeth do not shatter into a thousand pieces and fall from 
your mouth. When Räma goes to the forest, Death will surely take me. I 
will be condemned by all men. Kaushalya and Sumitra will then be cast 
into abject sorrow and will likely follow me to Death’s abode. Having 
inflicted such miseries upon us, and being left alone with your son to 
rule over this world, what other indescribable pains will you give to the 
remaining people, who are all so loved by me?” 
Although Daçaratha had no intentions of asking Räma to leave, he knew 
his devoted son would depart immediately upon realizing his father’s 
predicament. The king tried one last desperate plea to Kaikeyi. “Even if, 
upon my failing to exile my son, you are ready to swallow poison, throw 
yourself into fire or hang yourself, I shall by no means banish Räma. You 
have disgraced your family and are intent upon destroying mine. I shall

79 
never accede to your ruthless request. O malicious queen, abandon now 
your evil desire! I fall helpless at your feet. Come to your senses and be 
gracious to me, who has always been your well-wishing protector.”  
Exhausted by grief, Daçaratha sank to the floor like a man gripped by an 
illness, his hands stretched out to the feet of his queen. 
The unflinching Kaikeyi, who had given up all affection for her 
husband, saw that her ends were still not achieved. Convinced by 
Manthara of the king’s ill intentions towards her, with her intelligence 
further confused by the gods, Kaikeyi could not accept Daçaratha’s 
entreaties. In a disdainful and harsh voice, she addressed the fallen 
monarch. “Where now is your honor, O king? Your claim that you 
adhere to truth is simply an empty boast! Are you to withdraw the boons 
previously promised to me and further sworn on this very spot? Fulfill 
my boons as you vowed and protect your far- reaching fame!” 
Daçaratha, unconscious, could not reply. After some time he revived and 
looked upon his queen’s face. From her cold expression it was obvious 
that she was not in the least assuaged. The grief-stricken monarch gazed 
up at the clear night sky. He prayed to Nidra, the night goddess, to stay 
for-ever. How could he face the dawn, bringing as it would Räma’s 
departure? Daçaratha sat weeping, continuously repeating Räma’s name. 
Kaikeyi spoke impassively. “I have only asked you to fulfill your promise 
to me, O king. Why then do you now lie down dejected? The path of 
morality has been clearly shown by your ancestors. Proceed upon that 
path now, O truthful one, and send Räma away!”  
The educated Kaikeyi, knowing her husband to be devoted to religion 
and piety, invoked the codes of morality. “Those men who understand 
right from wrong declare truthfulness as the highest virtue. I simply urge 
you to act upon truthfulness alone, O king, and do your duty. Truth is 
the support of all the worlds, the eternal Vedas represent truth, virtue 
itself is rooted in truth and truth sustains all beings. By following truth 
one attains the supreme. Therefore set your mind on truth, O king, and 
grant my prayer: banish Räma to the forest.” 
Kaikeyi stood up amid her strewn ornaments. Her eyes flashed as she 
made her final demand to the king. “Three times you promised and 
therefore three times I ask you. Fulfill my wish to see my son installed on 
the throne and send Räma away to the woods. This alone will satisfy me

80 
and save me from giving up my life, after seeing you abandon your 
honor.” 
As the unscrupulous Kaikeyi maintained her pressure on him, Daçaratha 
could see no means to escape from his avowed word. With great 
difficulty he controlled himself, drawing upon his reserves of fortitude. 
His heart burned with unbearable anguish as he looked through tear-
dimmed eyes at Kaikeyi. How could he any longer consider her his wife? 
She was fit to be rejected. Her name should never again be associated 
with his. No one should call her the queen of Daçaratha.  
The king spoke fiercely. “O perverted woman, here and now do I disown 
your hand, which I formerly clasped in the presence of the sacred fire 
and with the utterances of holy mantras. Now the night has passed and 
soon the people will joyfully urge me to install Räma. However, as at 
your insistence I shall this day surely breathe my last, Räma should be 
made to offer the last rites to my departed soul. O woman of evil 
conduct, you should make no offerings to me, for I fully reject you 
today.” 
Kaikeyi fumed. What use were these empty words? Her husband had 
already rejected her when he favored Kaushalya. She addressed the king 
in piercing words. “Why do you say such scathing and hurtful things, O 
monarch? I merely ask that you give me what you have already promised. 
Summon now your son Räma and give up this needless agonizing. Do 
your duty and stand fast to virtue!” 
Like a first-class horse lashed with a whip, Daçaratha controlled his 
mind and righteously responded to Kaikeyi’s words. “Bound with the 
strong cords of morality, I am helpless. My judgment fails me, and in this 
evil hour I seek the refuge of Räma. Bring my gentle son before me.”  
The king fainted away, exhausted with grief and his futile efforts to 
change his wife’s mind. 
Chapter 7 
Räma Agrees to Depart

81 
Towards the end of night, Vasiñöha, accompanied by numerous disciples, 
hastily entered Ayodhya from his hermitage outside the city. He went 
along the well-swept and watered streets, all thronging with citizens 
eagerly awaiting Räma’s installation. Crossing the outer courtyard of the 
king’s palace, which was decorated all over with rows of flags, he 
approached Daçaratha’s inner chambers. The åñi saw the courtyard 
crowded with large numbers of Brahmins reciting sacred hymns from the 
Vedas. Upon reaching the palace gate he was met by Sumantra, who 
prostrated himself before the sage and then immediately left to inform 
Daçaratha of his arrival. 
As he passed through the palace and approached the inner chambers, 
Sumantra was entirely ignorant of his master’s present plight. He 
composed in his mind pleasing prayers with which to greet the king, who 
was dearer to him than his own father. The guards informed Sumantra 
that the king was in Kaikeyi’s chambers and, as he arrived at her door, 
he began to loudly recite those prayers. “Even as the sun, which sustains 
all beings, arouses the world, arise now, O Emperor, like the sun rising 
from the eastern hills. As Mätali, the minister of Indra, extolled his 
master who then rose up and conquered the demons, so do I now extol 
you to rise up and do your duty, O lord. All of us await you with joined 
palms. The glorious sage Vasiñöha has arrived with other sages and stands 
ready to perform the sacred installation ceremony of Räma. Order us 
now to proceed, O mighty monarch.” 
Hearing Sumantra speaking at the door, Daçaratha became 
overwhelmed with sorrow once more. He went to his charioteer and 
embraced him. The king looked at Sumantra with eyes reddened with 
grief. “Today, O Sumantra, your well-chosen words only pierce my heart 
with pain.” Daçaratha’s happiness had ended. He could not say anything 
more and simply stood with tears flowing down his face. 
Sumantra was unable to fathom the cause of the king’s sadness. He 
stepped back with tightly joined palms. This was strange. Surely this was 
the happiest day of Daçaratha’s life. For so long he had desired a 
successor. At last his desire was about to be fulfilled. 
Seeing the mystified Sumantra, Kaikeyi said, “The king has remained 
awake the entire night, considering Räma’s installation. Sleeplessness 
has made him unwell. He wishes now to see his son. Therefore bring

82 
Räma here.” 
The intelligent minister looked at Daçaratha. Something was surely 
wrong. On such a momentous occasion why was the king not himself 
going to fetch Räma? Daçaratha saw his minister’s confusion. Reassuring 
him, the king told him to fetch Räma. Sumantra considered then that 
his master might just be exhausted from the preparations for the 
installation. Saying “It shall be done,” he bowed low and left for Räma’s 
palace. 
Meanwhile the priests were making ready all the items required for the 
ceremony. Around a beautifully carved and adorned wooden seat were 
arranged many gold pitchers filled with water from all the sacred rivers, 
ready to anoint Räma. Above the seat was a large white umbrella which 
shone like the full moon on a clear night. Excellent musicians played 
melodies appropriate to the mood, while Brahmins chanted Vedic texts 
meant to invoke good fortune. The brilliant sun rose in a clear sky and 
everyone eagerly awaited the arrival of the king and his son. 
Sumantra reached Räma’s palace, which was as splendid as Mount 
Kailäsaa. Secured with oak doors fifty feet tall, and embellished with 
hundreds of balconies, its main facade was adorned with gold images 
studded with innumerable gems. The outer gateway was constructed of 
coral worked with gold and embedded with large precious stones of every 
description. As Sumantra passed through that gateway he was greeted by 
delightful music and the aroma of various incenses. Peacocks and cranes 
crowded the courtyard, which was graced with blossoming trees and 
bushes.  
Sumantra descended from his chariot and entered the palace, which was 
in no way inferior to the palace of Kuvera, the god of riches. Enlivened 
by simply seeing that palace, Sumantra passed through three entrances, 
each guarded by powerful young warriors wielding spears and bows. 
Räma was as dear to him as his own life and his heart pounded with joy 
as he approached the inner chambers. The corridors through the palace 
were cool and delightful, decorated with fine wood carvings and lit by 
the luster of thousands of celestial gems. Arriving at the gate to Räma’s 
personal quarters, Sumantra asked the doorkeepers there to inform 
Räma of his arrival. Räma, who was alone with Sétä, immediately 
instructed that Sumantra be shown into His room.

83 
Sumantra went before Räma, whom he found seated upon a gold couch, 
being fanned gently with a whisk by Sétä. Richly adorned with costly 
garments and smeared with crimson sandal-paste, Räma seemed to shine 
like the midday sun. He smiled affectionately at Sumantra, who fell 
prostrate on the ground, offering prayers. Rising up with folded hands, 
the minister said, “Most blessed is Kaushalya for having had You as her 
son. Your father, along with Queen Kaikeyi, now desires to see You. Be 
pleased to go there without delay.” 
Räma looked at Sétä and said, “Surely My father is speaking with his 
queen about My installation. I think the blessed Kaikeyi, always 
favorable to My father, must even now be urging the king to make haste 
with the ceremony, knowing as she does how much the emperor longs 
for its completion. As he has sent his most trusted messenger to fetch 
Me, the king along with his most beloved queen undoubtedly wish to 
bless Me that My installation will proceed without impediment.” 
Räma rose to leave and the dark-eyed and lovely Sétä invoked divine 
blessings upon Him. Following Her husband to the gate She said, “After 
installing You as Prince Regent, the king should, in course of time, 
consecrate You as the ruler of this world, even as Brahmä installed Indra 
as the ruler of the gods. I wish to serve You in that state. May the great 
deities Indra, Yamaräja, Varuëa and Kuvera, the guardians of the four 
quarters, guard You from every side.” 
Along with Sumantra, Räma went out from His palace quarters as a 
mighty mountain lion might emerge from his cave. Räma saw Lakñman 
standing at the first gate, bent low with joined palms. At the middle gate 
Räma met His friends and relations and He greeted them all according 
to their status, offering obeisances or embracing them.  
Within the courtyard Räma mounted upon a golden chariot, which 
shone like fire and was covered over with white tiger skins, and had 
thousands of small golden bells hanging from its sides. The charioteer 
spurred on the tall steeds, which were as powerful as young elephants, 
and the chariot moved away swiftly with a deep rumbling. As the outer 
gates swung open, Räma’s chariot came out from the palace like the 
moon emerging from behind a cloud. 
Räma went along the main road, preceded by a platoon of mailed 
warriors wearing swords and carrying bows. The prince sat peacefully

84 
while Lakñman fanned Him. He smiled at the people who thronged the 
streets in the thousands. His chariot was followed by great elephants 
resembling moving mountains. Thousands of horsemen brought up the 
rear. Poets and singers chanted Räma’s praises to the accompaniment of 
divine music echoing in the heavens. Mixed with these sounds were the 
shouts of the warriors, which resembled the roaring of lions.  
On the balconies and at the windows of the mansions lining the roads 
stood women who showered Räma on all sides with flowers. The ladies 
also praised Sétä, saying, “Surely that godly lady has performed the 
highest penances to have been blessed with this great hero Räma as Her 
husband.” 
The citizens, seeing Räma pass by, uttered blessings. “May victory attend 
You!” they cried out. Others were heard to say, “Here goes Räma, who 
will today inherit the royal fortune. Fortunate too are we who will soon 
be ruled by Him.”  
Being extolled everywhere, Räma rode down the highway, which was 
lined with white houses appearing like clouds and with shops filled with 
abundant produce of every variety. The streets were strewn with jewels 
and with grains of rice and blades of sacred kusha grass. Brahmins made 
offerings of ghee lamps and incense to Räma as He passed, invoking 
divine blessings and saying, “We would renounce every worldly 
happiness simply to see Räma coming out of the palace as Prince Regent 
today. Indeed, even liberation itself is not so desirable.” 
None could turn away their eyes or mind from Räma as He went along 
the road in Ayodhya. Everyone looking upon Räma also felt that He was 
glancing at them. Gradually Räma and His entourage arrived at 
Daçaratha’s palace. Räma passed through the three outer gates on His 
chariot and then got down and passed through the last two gates on foot. 
He politely sent back all those persons who had followed Him, even 
though they found it difficult to part from Him. At last Räma reached 
the inner chambers alone and approached Kaikeyi’s rooms. 
As He entered the rooms, Räma saw the afflicted king seated with 
Kaikeyi on a golden couch. He bowed at His father’s feet, then laid 
himself low before Kaikeyi, His mind fully composed. Daçaratha 
appeared dejected and distressed, his face streaked with tears. He sat 
burning with agony and repeatedly sighing, appearing like the eclipsed

85 
sun or like a holy Brahmin who has told a lie. Seeing his son standing 
before him with a modest demeanor and folded palms, the monarch said 
only, “Räma,” and could not say another word, being overcome by grief.  
Räma was seized with apprehension to see His father in that unusual 
state. Like the ocean at the rising of the full moon, Räma became 
agitated. He was devoted to the king and was saddened to see him so 
sorrowful. How was it that on such a day His father did not greet Him? 
Even when angry he would always rise to bless his son. Why was he now 
remaining seated, looking downwards and weeping silently? Räma went 
before Kaikeyi, who sat at a distance from the king, and addressed her 
alone.  
“O godly lady, pray tell Me the reason for My father’s distress,” Räma 
asked gently. “Even though always affectionate to Me, why does he not 
greet Me today? Have I unwittingly committed some offense? Is the king 
angry with Me for My having failed in some way to respect him?” 
Kaikeyi remained silent and Räma continued. “I hope no suffering 
caused by illness or mental anguish has afflicted My father. Truly it is 
said that everlasting happiness cannot be had in this world. I hope I 
have not offended anyone dear to the king. If I were unable to please My 
father or if I failed to do his bidding and thus angered him, I would not 
survive even for an hour. What wretched man would not devotedly 
serve his father, a veritable god to him on earth, to whom he owes his 
own birth in this world?” 
Understanding from Kaikeyi’s taut expression that there was tension 
between her and His father, Räma said, “Perhaps My father has been 
hurt by some utterance of yours, O fair-faced queen, made out of vanity 
or anger. My dear Kaikeyi, please inform Me of the cause of this 
unprecedented disturbance to the emperor, for I am very curious.” 
Upon hearing this question from the high-minded Räma, Kaikeyi, who 
had become impudent and was thinking only of her own interests, 
replied boldly, “The emperor is neither angry nor anguished, O Räma. 
However, there is something on his mind which he will not disclose for 
fear of hurting You, his beloved son. Having made a promise to me, the 
king now repents and wishes to retract his word, just like any other 
common man. The ever-truthful monarch wants to build a dam across a 
stream whose waters have already flowed away. Truth is the root of

86 
piety. This is known to the righteous. O Räma, take care lest the king 
loses now his piety for Your sake, angry as he is with me.” 
Looking into Räma’s apprehensive eyes, Kaikeyi said, “If You will 
undertake to do whatever the king may ask, be it good or bad for You, 
then I shall explain everything. I shall speak out the king’s promise only 
as long as it shall not fail because of You; but the king himself will not in 
any event tell You.” 
Räma was distressed to hear Kaikeyi speaking in this way. Within the 
hearing of the emperor He replied to her, “Alas, how shameful it is that I 
should hear words expressing doubt about My devotion to My father! 
You should never think this, O glorious lady. At My father’s command I 
would this very moment leap into blazing fire, swallow a deadly poison or 
plunge into the depths of the ocean. Therefore tell Me, My dear mother, 
what is on your mind? By My avowed word I shall without doubt do 
whatever is desired by the king. Know that Räma’s word is always truth!” 
Seeing the king mute and the guileless Räma prepared to carry out her 
desire, Kaikeyi felt her purposes all but accomplished. In an unkind 
voice she revealed her wicked intentions to Räma.  
“It is well known how I once saved the king’s life and how, as a result, he 
granted me a couple of boons. Against those boons I solicited today a 
promise from the king to fulfill my desire. I wish for Bharata to be 
installed in Your place and for You to go to the forest, remaining there 
for fourteen years. O descendant of emperors, prove true to Your word 
and to that of Your father. Indeed, rescue the king from the ignominy of 
impiety and leave without delay. Let Bharata be duly consecrated with 
all the paraphernalia arranged for You. While He remains here to rule 
this wide and prosperous earth, You shall remain for fourteen years in 
some distant forest, wearing matted locks and the barks of trees.” 
The king cried out in pain as Kaikeyi spoke. Räma stood by without 
showing any emotion as the queen continued. “Overcome by compassion 
for You, this monarch cannot even look at Your face. O Räma, 
ornament of Your line, make good his promise and deliver him from his 
difficult and awkward situation!” 
Even though Kaikeyi uttered such cruel words, Räma did not yield to 
grief. The king, however, felt increasing agony as he thought about his 
impending separation from Räma. He listened in silence as Räma replied

87 
to Kaikeyi, “So be it! To honor My father’s promise I shall put on the 
dress of an ascetic and depart forthwith for the forest. You need 
entertain no doubt in this regard, O queen. Why, though, does not My 
father greet Me as before? I could never transgress his order, even as the 
ocean, by the order of the Supreme Lord, can never transgress its 
shores.” 
Räma looked across at His father, who could not return His glance. The 
king kept his head down and wept softly. Räma turned back to Kaikeyi. 
“Ordered only by you, O Kaikeyi, I would joyfully part with, in favor of 
Bharata, not only the kingdom but also all My personal property, My 
wedded wife Sétä and even My own beloved Self. How much more gladly 
would I part with these things when ordered by My father, the emperor 
himself, in order to please you and honor his pledge? Please reassure My 
afflicted father, for seeing him sitting there shedding tears pains Me 
greatly. He may feel assured that I shall immediately enact his desire 
without feeling any sorrow at all. Let swift horses be sent for Bharata. 
Without questioning My father’s command I shall now quickly proceed 
to the forest!” 
The ignoble Kaikeyi then rejoiced at heart. Confident that Räma would 
soon leave, she urged Him to hurry. “Let it be so!” she exclaimed. 
“Messengers may leave immediately to fetch Bharata from His uncle’s 
kingdom. You should not wait a moment, O Räma, lest some impediment 
presents itself. Keen as You are to depart, leave right now. Do not be 
concerned for the king’s silence, for he is too shy to ask You himself. Let 
this apprehension be banished from Your mind and make haste. As long 
as You have not left, the king will take neither food nor water.” 
Drawing a deep sigh with the words, “Alas, how very painful,” the king 
collapsed unconscious on the couch. Räma gently placed His cool hands 
on His father’s forehead and raised him up. The prince was again urged 
on by Kaikeyi. Turning towards her, Räma said, “I have no desire to live 
in this world as a slave to material gains. Like the åñis I am devoted only 
to righteousness. I will always do whatever is agreeable to My adorable 
father, even at the cost of My life. The greatest piety lies in serving one’s 
father. Indeed, O gentle lady, greater still is service to the mother, 
according to sacred texts. Surely you do not see any good points in Me, 
O princess of Kekaya, as you felt it necessary to ask such a minor thing

88 
of My father. Your request alone would have sufficed. I shall go to a 
lonely forest and live there for fourteen years. Please bear with Me only 
as long as it takes for Me to take leave of My other mothers and to gain 
the agreement of Sétä. Try to ensure that Bharata protects the kingdom 
and serves His aged father, for this is the eternal morality.” 
Unable to speak due to grief, Daçaratha wept aloud. Räma bowed low at 
the feet of His royal father and also before the hard-hearted Kaikeyi. He 
was moved by acute sorrow but He kept it within Himself, showing no 
external sign. Joining His palms and circumambulating His father and 
stepmother, Räma departed.  
He then made His way towards Kaushalya’s rooms. Lakñman, hearing 
from Räma of the turn of events, followed close behind, His eyes 
brimming with tears. Reaching the room where the installation was to 
be performed, Räma respectfully went around the royal seat without 
casting His eyes upon it. Despite His renouncing the rulership of the 
world, no change of mood could be perceived in Räma, any more than in 
a perfect yogé who has completely transcended all dualities. 
Forbidding the use of the royal umbrella which was offered Him as he 
left, as well as the pair of beautiful royal whisks, Räma sent away His 
ministers, His chariot and the citizens. The news of Räma’s impending 
exile had spread quickly and the people were shocked and dismayed. By 
mastery over His mind and senses Räma controlled His own agony upon 
seeing the people’s sadness. He exhibited His normal peaceful demeanor 
and approached Kaushalya’s apartments. He was followed by Lakñman, 
who, seeing His brother equipoised, was strenuously controlling His own 
emotions. Räma smiled softly. He was as dear to His relatives as their 
own lives and He did not wish to display any feelings which would cause 
them pain.  
As he entered Kaushalya’s quarters a loud and pathetic cry came from 
the ladies. “Alas, here is that Räma who has served all of us exactly as He 
did His own mother. Today He will leave for the forest. How could the 
foolish king exile the harmless Räma and thus bring ruin to the world?” 
Hearing from a distance the piteous wail, Daçaratha shrank with shame 
and hid his head beneath the silken sheets on his couch. Räma went 
towards Kaushalya’s room. He carefully maintained His composure, 
although He felt agonised at seeing the suffering of His relatives. As He

89 
approached the outer entrance of Kaushalya’s apartment He saw many 
doorkeepers seated and standing there. They quickly flocked around 
Räma, uttering blessings on the young prince. At the middle entrance 
Räma was greeted by elderly Brahmins who were constantly reciting 
Vedic hymns. Bowing low before them, Räma entered and came to the 
inner door where He was led into Kaushalya’s chamber by her personal 
maidservants. 
Chapter 8 
Grief and Fury 
Kaushalya had spent the night in undisturbed prayer and penance on 
behalf of her son. She was unaware of His meeting with the king and 
Kaikeyi. Räma found her seated before the sacrificial fire, surrounded by 
Brahmins making offerings to Viñëu. She was clad in white silk and, 
although fatigued by fasting, she still appeared most beautiful. Upon 
seeing Räma bowing at her feet, she rose up joyfully to embrace and bless 
Him. “May You attain the age and fame of the virtuous royal sages who 
have gone before You in our line. Sit with me a little and take breakfast, 
then go to Your father, the ever-truthful monarch, for today he will 
install You as the Prince Regent.” 
Kaushalya offered Räma a bejeweled seat next to her, but He merely 
touched it in respect and said, “O godly lady, surely you do not know 
that a great calamity has now arrived. What I am going to tell you will 
cause you unprecedented pain, even as it will My beloved wife Sétä. I am 
about to leave for the forest; therefore, what need have I of this fine 
seat? The time has arrived for Me to occupy a mat made of forest grasses. 
Indeed, in accord with a promise already made to My father, I shall 
inhabit a lonely forest region, living on fruits and roots. How then can I 
partake of this royal fare you offer? The emperor will install Bharata as 
Prince Regent and has exiled Me to the forest, to live like a hermit for 
fourteen years.” 
Kaushalya at once fell down, like a tree severed at its root. Her mind

90 
confused, she lay on the floor like a goddess fallen from heaven. Räma 
quickly lifted her, gently stroking her face with His hand. Kaushalya 
slowly regained her senses. Struck with agony, she looked at Räma, who 
was controlling His own grief. She knew beyond doubt that her son 
could not possibly have spoken falsely, nor was He given to flippancy or 
jest. His words were certainly true and they pierced her heart.  
Clasping Räma’s hand in hers, she spoke in a choked voice. “For a long 
time I suffered the terrible pain of being childless, O beloved son. Surely 
the feeling of being without issue is a grief that consumes a barren 
woman. Before Your birth every effort your father made to please me 
was futile, O Raghava, for I longed only for a child. Your birth ended 
that pain, but now I fear that an even greater suffering has arrived.” 
Kaushalya could not bear the thought of separation from Räma. She 
held Him tightly as she spoke. “Separation from You will rend my heart 
in two. That pain will be compounded by the cruel words of a junior 
wife. What could be more painful for a woman? Unending grief and 
lamentation has become my lot. Even with You by my side I have been 
despised; what then will be my fate when You are gone, O dear child? 
Surely I shall soon die.” 
Kaushalya thought how she had always been neglected by her husband 
in favor of Kaikeyi. With Bharata enthroned she would be entirely 
abandoned. For twenty-seven years she had watched Räma grow to 
manhood, awaiting the day when He would assume the throne and end 
her woes. How could she any longer suffer Kaikeyi’s scorn? Now Räma, 
her only solace, was leaving. It seemed her prayers were all in vain. Her 
fasts and meditations were useless. What was the value of all her self-
discipline and sacred observances? Rather than becoming the king, her 
son was being cast away. Kaushalya condemned herself. 
“Surely my heart is hard like steel, for it does not shatter upon hearing 
this terrible news. Death will not take one before the proper time or else 
I should have certainly gone immediately to the court of Yamaräja, the 
great lord of death. If by one’s own sweet will one could meet with death, 
then in Your absence I would depart this very day. Without You, O 
Räma, life will be useless. Therefore, like a cow following its calf, I shall 
definitely go with You to the forest.” 
Wailing in this way Kaushalya contemplated the calamity about to befall

91 
her. Räma was duty bound to His father and would never oppose his 
order. He would certainly leave without delay. Unable to bear her 
suffering, Kaushalya collapsed sobbing onto a couch. 
Lakñman stood nearby, writhing in pain. This situation was intolerable. 
How could Räma accept it? Why did He not do something? Unable to 
repress His tumultuous anger, Lakñman spoke furiously to Kaushalya. “I 
also find Räma’s imminent departure to be unacceptable, O glorious 
lady. Räma should never relinquish the royal fortune for any cause. 
Perverted by the words of a woman, the king has lost his good sense. He 
is desirous of sensual enjoyments and has been overpowered by lust and 
senility. What will he not say, urged on by the sinful Kaikeyi? To desire 
the banishment of the powerful Räma is nothing short of madness. 
What vice or offense can be found in Räma? There is no man in this 
world, even if he be Räma’s deadly enemy, who could find in Him any 
fault, even in His absence. What man who respects virtue would forsake 
such a son, who is equal to the gods, disciplined and kindly disposed 
even to His enemies? What son would heed such a command from a 
father who has abandoned righteousness?” 
Lakñman’s furious voice resounded around the chamber. If the king 
would not give Räma the kingdom, then it should be taken by force. He 
would stand by His brother with bow in hand, exhibiting His valor. Let 
anyone who dared try to prevent the installation of Räma! He would 
hold off the entire city of Ayodhya should they oppose Räma. Whoever 
supported Bharata would find himself slain by Lakñman. This situation 
called for strong action. Why should They accept it meekly? Lakñman 
tightly gripped the bow hanging from His shoulder and turned to His 
brother. 
“If, at Kaikeyi’s instigation, our father acts like an enemy, then he 
should be made captive or even killed without compunction. The 
scriptures make clear that even a father or a preceptor can be rejected if 
they lose their discrimination, failing to distinguish between right and 
wrong. On what authority has the king sought to confer the kingdom 
upon Kaikeyi’s son when it rightfully belongs to You?” 
Breathing hot, heavy sighs, Lakñman turned back to Kaushalya and 
assured her that Räma would be installed as king. He held up His bow. 
“O godly lady, I swear by My bow that I am truly devoted to Räma with

92 
the whole of My heart. If Räma enters into blazing fire or retires to the 
forest, know that I have already done the same. I shall dispel your sorrow 
by means of My arms even as the sun dispels the morning mist. Let your 
royal highness along with Räma witness today My valor. I shall kill my 
aged and wretched father who, as a result of senility, has entered his 
second childhood in Kaikeyi’s association.” 
Lakñman stood blazing like fire, yet Räma remained calm and composed. 
Kaushalya, weeping, spoke to her son. “Having heard Your brother 
Lakñman, who has raised pertinent and proper arguments, consider now 
what ought to be done. You should not obey the unjust command of 
Kaikeyi, leaving me here to grieve.” 
Kaushalya knew Räma would act only according to moral laws. He would 
never be swayed by sentiment to deviate from scriptural codes. She 
called upon Räma as his mother. “Dear son, do I not deserve the same 
obedience as you offer to the king? Is service to the mother not an even 
higher virtue than service to the father? I cannot allow you to leave, nor 
could I live in your absence. If you leave I will take a vow to fast until 
death. You will then be guilty of killing your own mother.” 
The queen cried piteously, trying again and again to convince Räma not 
to leave. Räma burned with anguish to hear His mother her express her 
feelings, but keeping His mind under control, He spoke to her in a gentle 
voice. “I do not feel able to flout My father’s command, and therefore I 
wish to enter the forest. The order of one’s father is no less than the 
order of the Supreme Lord. It cannot be transgressed if one wishes to 
acquire virtue in this world. The king is not ordering Me to do anything 
sinful. By obeying his command I shall be following the path of morality, 
which has ever been followed by pious men. I only desire to do what is 
right, never otherwise. For as long as one does the bidding of his father, 
he is never overcome by evil.” 
Räma turned towards Lakñman and admonished Him, speaking in soft 
but firm tones. “I know Your unsurpassed love for Me, as well as Your 
strength of arms, which cannot be easily withstood, O noble prince. My 
gentle mother does not deeply understand the imports of morality and is 
thus experiencing great agony. My father’s command is rooted in 
righteousness and is therefore worthy of being obeyed. Indeed I have 
already given My word to honor his order. I cannot break My pledge.

93 
Since I have been commanded by Kaikeyi according to My father’s 
promise, O valiant prince, how can I, knowing well the path of piety, 
neglect that command? Therefore give up this unworthy thought of 
overthrowing the king. Stand firm on righteousness alone and do not 
give way to anger and a display of strength. Accept My resolution to 
follow the royal order.” 
Räma went before His mother and knelt down with folded hands, 
bowing His head low. He was as devoted to Kaushalya as He was to 
Daçaratha and did not want to leave without her consent. He again 
asked her permission to depart. Räma swore on His life that after the 
fourteen years had passed He would return and remain in Ayodhya as 
her devoted servant. He asked her not to yield to sorrow. In accord with 
the eternal laws of morality she should serve the king. He also desired to 
follow the path of piety. For that reason He was anxious to leave for the 
forest in compliance with His father’s order. She should not try to 
prevent Him. 
Hearing His request, Kaushalya felt impassioned. How could her son 
abandon her in this way? She had always carefully observed her duty as a 
mother. She was always affectionate towards Räma. Surely Räma 
realized that she would die if He left her now. In a last attempt to change 
His mind the queen spoke in spirited tones. “As your mother, I do not 
grant You leave to depart. Am I not as venerable to You as Your father? 
O Räma, I cannot face the thought of Your leaving. In Your absence I 
care not for either life or death. What will be the value of life to me 
without You, whether it be in this world or in heaven? Your presence for 
even an hour is more preferable to me than the possession of heaven and 
earth combined.” 
As his mother wailed piteously, Räma only became all the more desirous 
to escape, even as a lordly elephant would want to escape when 
surrounded by men goading it with firebrands towards a trap. Fixed in 
His determination to do his duty, He replied, “I feel that both you, My 
dear mother, and the powerful Lakñman have not properly understood 
My mind. Thus both of you harass me most painfully. Happiness in this 
world is temporary and ultimately illusory. Only the foolish think 
themselves to be the body composed of material elements and thus seek 
sensual happiness. This body, along with its relations and all its sensual

94 
joys, exists for only a few moments. The real self is the eternal soul 
dwelling in the heart, whose happiness lies only in the pursuit of a godly 
life.” 
Both Kaushalya and Lakñman listened silently as Räma spoke eternal 
spiritual truths. He described how association of friends and relatives 
was exactly like the coming together of sticks floating in a river. They 
are thrown together and very soon parted by the swift current of time. 
Therefore one’s happiness should never depend upon such ephemeral 
relationships. One should give up all attachment for the body and fix 
the mind only upon the eternal Supreme Lord, whose order is 
represented by superiors such as the king. This would bring everlasting 
happiness. Räma concluded, “How then can I abandon the righteous 
path of following My father’s command simply out of attachment for 
either the kingdom or My relatives?” 
Räma reassured them that he was not at all disturbed to be leaving for 
the forest. He responded to the suggestion that Daçaratha was acting 
against the codes of morality. “The king has adhered to virtue even at 
the cost of his own desires and happiness. Suffering intense pain, he is 
prepared to abandon his beloved son for the sake of truthfulness. My 
dear mother, it is he who is always your shelter and means of happiness 
in both this and the other world. You should therefore remain by his 
side and serve him. Pray grant Me leave to go to the forest. I shall never 
accept the rulership of the earth through unrighteousness.” 
Räma stopped speaking and approached the anguished Lakñman, who 
was still incensed with His father and Kaikeyi. Lakñman stood with His 
eyes open wide in rage, like an infuriated elephant. Räma gently 
restrained His devoted brother. “Control now Your anger and grief, O 
Lakñman. Take courage and overlook this seeming offense to Myself. 
Experience instead the joy of assisting Our father to increase his virtue 
by implementing his pledge. Gentle brother, please send back all the 
items gathered for My consecration today. Reassure My mother and help 
Me prepare for My departure.” 
Räma placed His hand on Lakñman’s shoulder. He was pained to see His 
brother’s distress, but He had no intention of challenging His father. He 
had to vindicate the king’s honor. As long as He remained in Ayodhya 
the king would suffer the pain of seeing his truthfulness questioned.

95 
Only when Räma had left for the forest, clad in deerskins and wearing 
matted locks, would Kaikeyi be satisfied and the king’s word redeemed. 
Lakñman looked at the ground. He was burning with the thought of the 
terrible injustice about to be done to His brother, but He could not 
possibly defy Räma’s desire. Räma put His arm around Lakñman’s 
shoulder and spoke reassuringly. “All this should be seen as the will of 
Providence, which can never be flouted. No blame should be attached to 
Kaikeyi, for it was Providence alone who moved her to make her request 
to Our father. How could she have ever decided to send Me away? She 
has always treated Me exactly as has My own mother, Kaushalya. Surely 
she was prompted by Providence to say to the king those terrible words, 
giving him such grief. I know her to be gentle and kind. She would 
never, like a vulgar woman, utter words intended to torment both 
Myself and Our father.” 
Räma felt no anger towards Kaikeyi and He did not want her to be 
blamed for what was, after all, a divine arrangement. He continued, 
“That which cannot be foreseen or understood must be accepted as the 
will of Providence alone. What man can ever contend with destiny? Joy 
and sorrow, gain and loss, birth and death—all of these come one after 
another by the arrangement of Providence or destiny. None can avoid 
them nor can anyone alter the strong course of destiny. When even the 
best laid plans go awry without any apparent cause, it is undoubtedly the 
work of Providence.” 
Räma smiled at Lakñman whom He knew had spoken only out of love. 
He asked Him not to lament for that which was unavoidable, decreed by 
some unseen destiny. Lakñman should not censure either Their father or 
Kaikeyi, as they were moved by superior forces. Räma then asked that 
the sacred waters gathered for His installation be instead used to anoint 
Him at the inauguration of His vow of asceticism. He looked at His 
younger brother with affection. “Beloved Lakñman, I will soon depart, 
for this is surely My destiny.” 
Lakñman stood with His head bent low, pondering His brother’s words. 
His mood swung between distress at Räma’s impending exile and delight 
at His brother’s steadfast adherence to virtue. But He was still not fully 
convinced that it was right for Räma to leave. Furrowing his brows, He 
hissed like an angry cobra in a hole. His frowning face appeared like that

96 
of a furious lion and was difficult to gaze upon. Violently shaking His 
head and arms, He said to Räma, “Your steady devotion to duty is 
unequalled, O Räma, but carefully consider its result in this case. By 
accepting the words of that wicked couple You are prepared to do 
something that is condemned by all people. I am surprised that You do 
not suspect the motives of Our father and Kaikeyi. If there were any 
truth in this story about the boons granted by the king, then why did 
Kaikeyi not seek their fulfillment long ago?” 
Lakñman accused the king of conspiring with Kaikeyi. Daçaratha must 
have surely lost his senses under the influence of lust. Along with the 
covetous Kaikeyi he had made a sinful plan, quite opposed to any 
morality. He concluded that the king’s authority was therefore fit to be 
rejected. “Please forgive my intolerance, O Raghava, but I cannot accept 
Your present piety, which impels You to take as fate this evil turn of 
events. Nor can I accept that destiny is supreme.” 
Lakñman was a heroic and powerful warrior. His face turned crimson as 
he went on. Why should one acquiesce to a painful fate as if he is 
helpless? Only those who are cowardly and weak would trust in destiny 
alone, Lakñman argued. The valiant always remain firm of mind. They 
never become disheartened when their purposes are thwarted by fate. 
Rather, they exert themselves with all power. Lakñman stood before 
Räma with His bow held high. “Today You shall see Me rushing at the 
enemy like an uncontrollable king of elephants! Not even all the gods 
united together will prevent Your consecration today. Those who 
support Your exile will find themselves either deprived of life or sent to 
the forest. I will dash the hopes of Our father and Kaikeyi. Anyone 
opposing Me will find no shelter in destiny as My fierce strength 
ruthlessly cuts him down!”  
Lakñman drew His sword and cleaved the air. He gave full vent to his 
rage. The right time for Räma to retire to the forest had certainly not 
arrived. He should rule the globe for thousands of years. Only when His 
own sons were ready to take His place should He leave for the forest. 
That was the proper course of virtue. Lakñman seemed about to consume 
the earth as He spoke. 
“If You fear censure for the seemingly sinful act of rejecting father’s 
order, You should not worry. I shall personally guard You in every way

97 
and forcibly repel all those who object to Your accepting this kingdom, 
even as the coastline holds back the ocean! O Räma, allow Yourself to be 
installed today. I alone am able to prevent any impediments to the 
ceremony. These arms of Mine are not meant simply to add to My 
attractiveness, nor is this bow a mere ornament, nor are My sword and 
quivers of arrows hanging on My body as badges of honor. All these are 
meant for crushing the enemy. Today You will see arrows released like 
incessant showers of rain. You will witness My sword flashing like 
lightning as it cuts down all those who stand before Me. The earth will 
be thickly covered with the arms, legs and heads of heroes. Hewn down 
by My sword, enemies will drop like so many meteors falling from the 
sky! While I stand on the battlefield with uplifted weapons how can any 
man alive be proud of his strength? Today I shall demonstrate the king’s 
helplessness and establish Your unopposed sovereignty! Tell Me which 
of Your enemies should this day be deprived of life, fame and relations? 
Instruct Me how to proceed so that this wide earth will be brought under 
Your control. O glorious lord of our race, I am here to do Your bidding 
alone.” 
Räma wiped away His brother’s angry tears. He knew Lakñman was only 
speaking out his devotion to Him. Lakñman knew that ultimately He had 
to follow Räma. He knew Räma could not possibly act against religion or 
morality. Nevertheless, in His pain He expressed His powerful feelings. 
Räma perfectly understood Lakñman’s mind and He comforted Him. “O 
gentle brother, You should know I am firmly obedient to My superiors’ 
command. This is the path trodden by the righteous. Be firm and control 
Your grief and anger. That will be the most pleasing to Me.” 
Kaushalya realized her son was unshakeable in His determination to 
obey His father’s order. Tears streamed down her face. Who could 
believe this was happening? Räma, the dearest son of the emperor, was 
being exiled to the dangerous jungle. How could that pious-minded and 
gentle boy live in such a fearful place? Destiny was surely supreme in a 
world where one like Räma must retire to the forest. Kaushalya trembled 
with grief. She held her son’s head. “It is well known how a cow will 
follow her roaming calf. In the same way I shall follow You wherever 
You may go, for separation from You, my dearest son, will kill me.” 
Räma addressed His mother with love. “Betrayed by Kaikeyi and seeing

98 
Me leave for the forest, My father will surely not survive if he is also 
abandoned by you, O godly queen. It is sheer cruelty for a woman to 
desert her worthy husband. That should never even be contemplated, 
for it is always condemned. So long as the king lives you should render 
him service, for this is the eternal moral code. For a married woman the 
husband is her deity and her lord.” 
Räma knew His mother was fully aware of her religious duty, which she 
would never abandon. He spoke only to give her strength and 
reassurance. The queen listened in silence as Räma, invoking the 
ancient religious codes, described the fate of a woman who does not 
serve her worthy husband. Even if she is devoted to fasts and sacred 
observances, she will become tainted by sin and suffer the reactions. On 
the other hand, a woman who devotedly serves her husband, even 
without any other religious practices, will reach the highest heaven.  
Räma folded His palms. “Therefore, O queen, remain devoted to the 
king and ensure that he does not suffer excessive grief. Leading a holy 
life, bide the time until I return. When you finally see Me duly installed 
as king and dedicated to your service, you shall achieve all that you 
desire.” 
Although dismayed at the prospect of losing her son for fourteen years, 
the pious Kaushalya nevertheless felt delighted to hear His admonition. 
It was clear she could not change His carefully considered resolution to 
depart. Blinded by her tears she said, “Go then with my blessings, O 
heroic son. May good betide You always. My misery will end only when 
You again return from the forest and offer me words of consolation. If 
only that time were already arrived! Leave now with a steady mind, dear 
Räma. Following in the footsteps of the righteous, repay Your debt to 
your father.” 
Still in the grip of sorrow, Kaushalya began to worship the gods in order 
to invoke divine blessings for her son. Praying to each of the principal 
deities and asking that they guard Räma from all dangers, she offered 
oblations of ghee into the sacred fire. As she finished her prayers, Räma 
bowed before her and held her feet for some time, while she wept softly. 
Embracing Him tightly, Kaushalya said, “Please leave in peace, my child, 
and accomplish Your purpose. When at last I see You returned, as one 
would see the full moon appearing above the horizon, all my sorrow will

99 
be gone. Only when I see You ascend Your father’s throne, wearing the 
crown and clad in royal robes, will my heart’s desire be fulfilled. May all 
the gods protect you as you sojourn in the dreadful forest. Depart now, 
O Raghava, I wish you well!” 
Räma took leave of the grieving Kaushalya, who followed after Him with 
her eyes. He went out of her apartments feeling agony. Lakñman, who 
had resigned himself to accept Räma’s determination to depart, followed 
close behind. 
Chapter 9 
Sétä’s Plea 
Räma moved along the royal highway towards Sétä’s quarters, praised by 
the many Brahmins who lined the road. Sétä still had not heard the news 
of Räma’s impending exile and was eagerly awaiting Him, Her mind 
absorbed in thoughts of his installation. As Her husband entered the 
room She sprang from Her seat. Räma had left Lakñman outside and had 
gone alone to speak with Sétä. He was perplexed as He considered how 
to tell His wife the terrible news. Although striving to control His mind 
and contain His grief, Räma’s face wore a pained expression and His 
head hung low. 
Sétä was astonished to see Him in that state, His face pale and bathed in 
perspiration. Apprehensively She inquired, “What troubles You, my 
lord? Today is the auspicious and joyful day of Your installation, but You 
seem to be covered by the dark shadow of grief.” 
Sétä asked Räma why He was not accompanied by the royal servants 
carrying the white umbrella. Why was He not wearing regal dress or 
anointed with sandalwood paste after having gone through the inaugural 
ceremony? Where was the king and his ministers? What was happening? 
Räma steadied His mind and looked upon Sétä’s face. “My worshipable 
father has ordered Me to enter the forest for fourteen years’ exile. O 
most beautiful princess, according to Kaikeyi’s desire, My brother 
Bharata will be installed in My place. Indeed, in days gone by two boons

100 
were granted to Kaikeyi by My ever-truthful father. She has recalled the 
king’s debt now and placed him under his word to send Me away, 
conferring the office of Prince Regent upon the noble Bharata. In 
obedience to morality I shall therefore depart forthwith to the forest. I 
have come to see You on My way.” 
Sétä shook like a tree caught in a gale. How could this be true? She 
listened with astonishment as Räma continued. “O high-minded lady, 
please remain firm. In My absence You should take to fasts and prayer, 
remaining disciplined at all times. Worship and serve My father and 
mother who are both grieving deeply due to My separation from them. 
Sumitra and Kaikeyi should also be served by You, as should Bharata and 
Shatrughna, who are both as dear to Me as My own self. Be especially 
careful not to praise Me before Bharata, for men endowed with power 
and wealth cannot tolerate hearing others praised. Indeed, Bharata will 
be the king and should therefore be served by You with all attention, 
carefully avoiding any offense.” 
Sétä was dumbfounded. She turned pale and Her eyes opened wide. She 
knew without doubt that Räma meant what He said. The princess 
listened in horror as He instructed Her. Räma told Her to remain living 
peacefully in Ayodhya under the protection of the emperor and Bharata, 
devoting Herself to righteousness and religion. Räma Himself would 
leave immediately for the forest. 
After hearing Räma speak, the noble Sétä became indignant out of Her 
love for Her husband. Her cheeks flushed red and She replied angrily, 
“How have You uttered such words today, O lord? They are never 
worthy of one possessed of strength and weapons, who is capable of 
affording protection to the weak. Your advice is not worth hearing!” 
Considering Räma as Her only refuge, Sétä spoke strongly. She described 
how the father, mother, brother, or any other relation were never the 
shelter of a chaste woman with a husband. The wife should share her 
husband’s fortune under all circumstances. She stood in front of Räma, 
Her eyes flashing as She continued, “I am enjoined by ancient religious 
codes to enter the forest along with You, dearest Räma. I cannot possibly 
remain in Ayodhya! If You leave today for the forest, I shall walk before 
You, clearing away the sharp grasses and thorns on the path.” 
Sétä assured Räma that He could take Her anywhere with confidence.

101 
She would live happily under His protection and would prefer forest life 
with Him to residence in the richest palace or even heaven itself 
without Him. She had been trained in all the arts of service and was well 
prepared to accompany Him. “I need no further advice, O lord. Simply 
order Me to depart. Remaining with You in fragrant woodlands, I shall 
be as happy as I am now living in Your palace.” 
Sétä felt pained that Räma had not considered taking Her with Him. 
Raised in a line of warrior kings, the princess was not easily disturbed by 
difficulty. Again and again She exhorted Her husband to take Her to the 
forest. “Certainly You are capable of guarding Me from any danger. 
Indeed, none other can guard Me as You can, Räma. Nor is it their 
sacred duty. I shall therefore go with You today. That is My fixed 
determination.” 
Sétä was fond of the country. She imagined Herself alone with Räma 
amid beautiful mountains, woods and lakes. Even if it was austere She 
would nevertheless prefer thousands of years spent with Her husband in 
this way than a single day without Him. She spoke Her deepest feelings. 
“I shall enter the forest at Your feet. I am exclusively devoted to You, My 
mind is ever attached to You and I am determined to die if disunited 
from You. Therefore grant My prayer and take Me with You today.” 
Räma considered the difficulty of living in the forest and He did not feel 
at all inclined to take Sétä with Him. He spoke gently to His dear wife, 
who had buried Her face in Her hands and was sobbing. “My dearest 
lady, You are born of a noble line and are always devoted to virtue. 
Practice that virtue and appease My mind, for I cannot bear to see You 
suffer. I shall now give You advice meant only for Your good, frail Sétä. 
Not only is there no joy in the fearful forest, but it is always fraught with 
misery. Simply by taking You there I would be neglecting My duty to 
protect You.” 
Räma described the forest where He had gone many times for hunting 
expeditions. There were numerous lions and other fierce beasts. Marshes 
and rivers abounded in crocodiles and other fierce aquatics. The forest 
paths were rugged and often impassable. Innumerable thorny trees and 
stinging bushes made traveling difficult. Sharp grasses grew everywhere. 
Hornets, gnats, scorpions, spiders and mosquitoes were always present, 
along with snakes and serpents of every kind. In the deep forest the

102 
darkness was dense. Furious winds often blew, lashing a traveler’s face 
with debris. 
Räma was determined to dissuade the gentle Sétä from following Him. 
“Exhausted after searching all day for food, one must lie down at night 
upon beds of dry leaves. Baths must be taken in lonely lakes which are 
the abode of serpents. By day and night the terrible pangs of hunger can 
be appeased only by one’s mind, for food is scarce. O princess, one is 
subjected to all kinds of illnesses and mental anguish. Anger, greed and 
fear must be completely controlled. A forest is certainly a place of 
terrible suffering; therefore, give up this idea of following me there. It is 
not a secure place for one such as You.” 
Sétä’s determination remained unshaken. “All these dangers will be as 
nothing to Me if I am able to remain by Your side. I will in any event 
have no fear whatsoever with You as My protector. Even Indra will not 
be able to harm Me when You are with Me. What then of mere beasts? 
You have always instructed Me that a wife can never be independent 
from Her husband, O Räma; indeed she is half of his very self. How then 
can I not accompany You?” 
Sétä remembered how, when She was a young girl, an astrologer had 
predicted that She would one day have to live in the forest. Surely that 
time had arrived. She continued to plead with Räma. Was this not an 
opportunity for Her to fulfill Her religious duty by following Him to the 
forest? Would not any other course be against virtue? The husband was 
the wife’s supreme deity. Sétä quoted the scriptures. A chaste woman 
who remained throughout life by her husband’s side surely attained the 
same destination as him after death. That was Her only desire, to be 
with Räma always. Looking into Räma’s eyes, She spoke in a piteous 
voice. “For what reason then, O great hero, will You leave Me behind? I 
who am devoted and faithful, who shares alike Your every pleasure and 
pain and who desires to follow the religious path? You should certainly 
bring Me with You; otherwise, being sorely afflicted, I shall resort to 
poison, fire or water in order to bring about My end.” 
Although Sétä’s lamentations hurt Him, Räma did not relent. He tried to 
pacify and reassure Her, but She only became all the more determined to 
accompany Him. Agitated at the thought of separation from Her 
husband, She taunted Him.

103 
“Has My father Janaka obtained as My protector a woman in the form of 
a man? How, in Your absence, could I tolerate the people falsely saying, 
‘It seems that strength and valor are lacking in Räma, as He could not 
protect His own dear wife’? What fear has assailed You that You now 
desire to desert Me, although I remain entirely devoted to You? I will not 
cast My eyes on another man even in thought! How then can You even 
consider delivering Me for protection to another, O My lord?” 
Sétä continued to beseech Räma. She had no intention of remaining 
behind without Him under any circumstances. Be it heaven or hell, She 
could only be happy by Her husband’s side. Sétä gazed imploringly at 
Räma as She begged Him to take Her with Him. 
Räma was agonized by the thought of leaving behind His beloved wife. 
He would miss Her. Still, He feared Her suffering in the forest. His heart 
ached as She cried out to Him. 
“Without You heaven would be exactly as hell to Me, while with You 
hell would be the best of all abodes. How can I remain here under the 
control of those who are inimical to You and have sent You to the 
forest? If I must watch You leave without Me, then I shall drink poison 
this very day. I cannot bear the pain of separation from You for even an 
hour. How, then, shall I stand it for fourteen years? Take Me with You 
or let Me give up My life here and now in Your presence.” 
Sétä’s beautiful face was streaked with tears, which fell continuously 
from Her dark eyes like drops of water from blue lotus flowers. Räma 
embraced Her and gently wiped away Her tears. He was still 
apprehensive about taking Her, but He could not see Her endure the 
pain of His separation. She was already almost senseless from grief and 
He had not even left. What would happen to Her during fourteen years 
of His absence? Making up His mind to take Her with Him, He spoke to 
Her reassuringly. 
“I would find no pleasure even in heaven if I obtained it at the cost of 
Your suffering, O most pious lady! Not knowing Your real feelings and 
being afraid that forest life would cause You pain, I discouraged You 
from following Me. I see now that destiny has decreed You should dwell 
with Me in the forest. Follow Me then, O princess, and I shall protect 
You in strict accord with the moral laws always followed by the 
virtuous.”

104 
Räma made clear His firm intention to go to the deep forest and remain 
there for the full duration. He wanted Sétä to have no doubt of what lay 
ahead. He was fixed in His determination to obey His parents’ 
command. How could one who disregarded elders and teachers ever 
hope to please God, who is not so easily seen or obtained? Earth, heaven 
and the kingdom of God can all be achieved by one who serves his 
mother, father and teacher. Explaining all this to His devoted wife, 
Räma said, “Not even truthfulness, charity or sacrifice are comparable to 
serving one’s father and mother. This is the eternal religion. Pious men, 
devoted to serving their parents, reach the regions of the gods and 
beyond. I therefore desire to do exactly what My truthful father has 
enjoined. I shall go to the forest today. As I see that You are set on 
following Me, My resolve to leave You behind has weakened. O lady of 
bewitching eyes, I shall take You with Me and together We shall practice 
asceticism in the deep forest. I am pleased with You, Sétä. Your 
determination to serve Me in every circumstance is worthy of Your 
dynasty and it adds glory to Mine. Prepare to leave immediately! Give 
away all Your riches to the Brahmins and go with only a simple dress and 
no belongings. We shall soon depart.” 
Sétä was overjoyed to hear Her husband’s agreement. Her face bloomed 
like a full-blown lotus. Excitedly She began following Räma’s 
instructions, giving away all Her costly garments and jewels, as well as all 
the other riches in Her palace.  
In the meantime Lakñman, who had been waiting patiently outside Sétä’s 
apartments, saw Räma coming out. He bowed down before Räma and 
held His feet tightly. “If Your mind is set upon leaving for the forest, 
then take Me with You,” he implored. “I shall walk ahead of You holding 
My bow and guarding against all dangers. With joy I shall accompany 
You through beautiful woods resounding with the cries of wild animals. 
Without You I do not desire even the rulership of all the worlds.” 
Lakñman hoped Räma would approve, but Räma tried to dissuade Him. 
“My dearest Lakñman, You are dearer to Me than life itself. Always 
affectionate, devoted to virtue and firm on the right path, You are My 
constant and most valued companion. Yet if You follow Me to the forest, 
who will be left to serve Your mother Sumitra and the illustrious 
Kaushalya?”

105 
Räma suggested that Kaikeyi would not be kind to her co-wives once her 
son obtained the kingdom. Bharata would be devoted to His own 
mother, Kaikeyi, and thus the other queens would be neglected. 
Therefore Lakñman should remain in Ayodhya to care for Kaushalya 
and Sumitra. By serving Räma’s elders, Lakñman would demonstrate His 
devotion to Räma. Räma concluded, “Incomparably great religious merit 
will be earned by You, O noble Lakñman, and Our mothers will be saved 
from suffering.” 
Lakñman was not inclined to accept Räma’s advice. How could He live 
without Räma? In soft but firm words He argued that Bharata and 
Shatrughna were both devoted to Räma. They would therefore serve all 
of Räma’s elders equally. Lakñman promised His brother, “If somehow 
They become proud and arrogant upon attaining the kingdom, 
abandoning virtue and neglecting Their elders, I will return to punish 
Them. For even while We live in the forest, news of the kingdom will 
reach Us through the sages and ascetics living there.” 
Lakñman had already anticipated Räma’s objections and had carefully 
considered them. There was no doubt in His mind that He should follow 
His brother. Continuing to reassure Räma, Lakñman reminded Him how 
the king had already arranged more than adequate support for 
Kaushalya and her dependents. The revenue of thousands of villages was 
under her control. She was capable of maintaining herself as well as 
Sumitra and even Lakñman Himself. He concluded, “Therefore kindly 
make Me Your personal attendant, for there will be no unrighteousness 
in this act. Going before You with My sword, I shall clear a safe path for 
You and Sétä. In wakefulness or sleep, You shall find Me by Your side 
ever ready to do Your bidding.” 
Räma was pleased and comforted to hear Lakñman speak. Lakñman was 
as dear to Him as life itself and Räma had been sad at the prospect of 
leaving Him. Holding Lakñman by the shoulders and looking into His 
expectant face, Räma said, “Take leave of Your near and dear ones, O 
My brother, for We shall depart shortly.” Lakñman felt a surge of 
happiness and His limbs trembled. He bowed to His elder brother and 
asked for His order. 
Räma asked Lakñman to go to Vasiñöha’s hermitage, where He had left 
some divine weapons. There were two celestial bows along with a pair of

106 
inexhaustible quivers, two impenetrable pieces of body armor and a pair 
of long, shining swords. Räma had received these as a dowry from Janaka 
and had left them with Vasiñöha so they could receive daily worship in 
his hermitage. He said to Lakñman, “Bring all these weapons, dear 
brother, for I feel We will have need of them soon.” 
Lakñman joyfully went and fetched the weapons. Then He and Räma 
together began to distribute Their wealth to the Brahmins. Many sages 
came at that time to offer their blessings to Räma and all of them were 
given great riches. Gold, silver, jewels, pearls, chariots, horses, silken 
garments and hundreds of thousands of cows were distributed freely to 
anyone who came begging charity. Many thousands of Brahmins were 
given sufficient alms to maintain them for the rest of their lives. Räma’s 
relations and dependents, as well as the needy and afflicted were also 
given much wealth. At that time in Ayodhya there was not a single 
Brahmin or needy person who was not provided with gifts. Being thus 
honored and gratified by Räma, they all returned to their own homes, 
praising Him in their hearts. 
Chapter 10 
Sad Farewells 
It was time for Räma and His two companions to say Their farewells. 
Holding Their weapons and followed by Sétä, the brothers made Their 
way towards Daçaratha’s palace. As They passed along the road many 
men crowded around to watch Them. Plunged in sorrow at seeing their 
beloved prince leaving, they lamented in various ways. 
“Here passes the same Räma who before would move regally in state, 
followed by a huge retinue,” said the people. “Now He walks with only 
Sétä and Lakñman as His companions. Although used to every luxury, He 
is going to the terrible forest in obedience to His father’s word.” 
Some citizens censured the king, whom they felt had been gripped by 
some evil spirit. How could he send his dearest son into exile? Räma’s 
qualities were evident to all; his compassion, learning, gentleness, sense

107 
control and mental peace—all were ever visible in that noble prince. 
The citizens could not face the prospect of Räma’s departure. They felt 
pain, just as a tree with all its fruits and flowers is hurt when its root is 
damaged, and they spoke out in public places. “We will give up our 
homes and villages and go with the pious Räma to the forest. Let us 
share with Him all His joys and sorrows. Let Kaikeyi rule over a deserted 
kingdom, bereft of its people.” 
Everyone feared the prospect of Kaikeyi becoming powerful as the 
mother of the king. They angrily cursed her again and again. All of them 
would go with Räma. They would abandon the city, leaving its houses to 
be filled with dust and overrun by mice. The forest would become a city 
and Ayodhya a forest. They would drive out from the forest all the fierce 
animals and snakes, sending them to live in Ayodhya with Kaikeyi as 
their protector.  
The two brothers heard the laments of the people, but they kept Their 
minds under strict control. Smiling gently and glancing with affection at 
the citizens, They walked together like a pair of powerful lions. They 
entered Daçaratha’s palace and saw Sumantra, who stood with folded 
hands and a disconsolate face. Räma asked him to announce Their 
arrival to the king. When Sumantra went before Daçaratha he found the 
king distracted by grief, heaving deep sighs, his eyes red from weeping. 
The devoted and faithful Sumantra regarded his master to be like the 
eclipsed sun or a fire covered by ashes. Bowing at the king’s feet, 
Sumantra said, “The illustrious Räma has distributed all His wealth to 
His dependents and the Brahmins, and He now stands at your door 
awaiting your permission to depart for the forest.” 
Ordering his minister to show Räma in, the king also asked that all his 
wives be present. Sumantra brought the queens, who arrived 
accompanied by numerous maidservants. He then brought Räma and 
Lakñman before Their father. As Räma entered the room, Daçaratha ran 
impulsively towards Him; but being stricken with sorrow, he fell 
senseless to the floor. Räma and Lakñman rushed to assist Their 
unconscious father. All the ladies threw up their arms and gave out a 
wail which mixed with the tinkling of their ornaments. A commotion 
filled the room, with cries of “Alas! Alas! O Räma!” Kaikeyi alone 
remained unmoved.

108 
Räma and Lakñman, both crying, lifted Their father and placed him 
gently on a couch. As the king returned to consciousness, Räma 
regained His composure and, with folded hands, said, “I have come to 
take leave of you, father. Please grant Me your permission to go to the 
forest. Also allow Lakñman and Sétä, whom I could not deter even with 
great effort, to accompany Me. O great king, please give up your grief 
and look favorably upon Us, for We wish now to depart.” 
Räma calmly awaited His father’s permission. The king spoke with 
difficulty. “As a result of a promise made to Kaikeyi I have lost my good 
sense. Therefore, my dear Räma, take me captive and rule over this 
kingdom.” 
Fixed in righteousness, Räma replied, “May you rule the earth for 
another thousand years. I have no desire for sovereignty. After a mere 
fourteen years have passed I shall return and once more take hold of 
your feet, having redeemed your pledge, O ruler of men!” 
Daçaratha was mortified, but he saw Kaikeyi urging him on with covert 
gestures. Bound by the fetters of truth he spoke to his son, granting him 
permission to leave. “Please leave with an undisturbed mind, O Räma, 
and may Your journey be a safe and happy one.” 
The king was devastated. He could see that Räma’s decision to depart 
was firm and not to be reversed. Räma was devoted to piety and truth. 
Daçaratha requested Him to remain for just one night, so that he and 
Kaushalya might see Him a little longer. He wanted to offer Räma all 
enjoyable things on that last day. Trembling with grief the king said, “I 
swear to You that I never wanted this to happen. I have been obliged by 
Kaikeyi, who has abandoned virtue after long concealing her evil 
intentions. Your willingness to accept even this terrible order, simply to 
save me from sin, proves beyond doubt Your greatness. O gentle Räma, I 
permit You to leave. Only, go tomorrow with my blessings.” 
Hearing of His father’s request, Räma became concerned. He did not 
wish to delay His departure any longer and said, “Who will offer Me 
tomorrow the delights I enjoy today? The time for My departure has 
come and I must now cast aside all thoughts of enjoyment. Let Me leave 
right away. Make over this vast kingdom, with all its riches, to Bharata. 
My resolution to live in the forest cannot be swayed. Your boons to 
Kaikeyi should now be implemented in full. I shall live with ascetics for

109 
fourteen years and the world should be given to Bharata.” 
Räma moved closer to His anguished father, who sat shaking his head. 
He asked the king to be firm and free from sorrow. Räma assured His 
father that He had no desire at all for the kingdom, nor for any 
pleasures, nor even for life itself devoid of virtue. He only wished to 
execute the king’s command and prove him true to his word. Comforting 
the grieving monarch, Räma said, “Since Kaikeyi said to Me, ‘Go to the 
forest, O Raghava,’ and I replied by saying, ‘I am going,’ I must now 
redeem that pledge. Please let Me leave. I cannot wait an instant 
longer.” 
Räma felt sorrow to see His father suffering such intense agony. Not 
wanting to increase His father’s pain, however, Räma kept His own 
feelings in check and maintained a calm expression. He spoke gently, 
assuring His father that He would certainly enjoy His stay in the forest. 
He would sport happily with Sétä in the many delightful woods and 
groves. Protected by His own weapons and by Lakñman, there would be 
no fear for Them from the beasts and Räkñasas in the forest. When 
fourteen years had passed the king would find Them returned unharmed 
and ready to serve him again. Bharata alone could competently and 
righteously rule the globe in His absence.  
Räma added, “I shall never accept the kingdom by bringing infamy to 
you, O king. Indeed, I could renounce every pleasure, including My own 
dear wife, in order to satisfy your command. I shall only be happy the 
moment I enter the forest. You need not feel any pain for Me. Be 
peaceful, my lord, and allow Me to leave.” 
Daçaratha, tormented by a burning agony, embraced Räma tightly and 
then again fell unconscious, showing no signs of life. All the queens, 
along with their maidservants, cried loudly. Kaikeyi felt her purpose 
fulfilled and was rejoicing inwardly. Witnessing her silence, the king’s 
intimate friend Sumantra was furious. Beating his head, wringing his 
hands and grinding his teeth, he spoke scathingly to her, his eyes blazing 
with wrath. 
“Here lies your husband, the support of the whole world, betrayed and 
forsaken by you, O queen. Surely there is nothing sacred for you. I 
consider you to be the murderess of your husband and the destroyer of 
your entire race. Do not despise your lord in this way, for his order is

110 
superior to that of even a million sons. Ignoring the time-honored rule 
of primogeniture, you seek to usurp Räma’s rights and bring unbearable 
pain to the king.” 
Tears flowed from the old minister’s eyes as he spoke. He told Kaikeyi to 
renounce her evil aim. If her son became the king, then no pious man 
would remain in the kingdom. What joy would she derive from ruling 
the empty earth, which was earned through sin? It was a great wonder 
that the earth did not split apart and swallow her, or that the great sages 
did not utter fiery curses to consume her on that very spot. Having 
served the king all his life, Sumantra felt every pain the king felt as if it 
were his own. As he addressed Kaikeyi he could hardly bring himself to 
look at her. 
“The glorious king will never belie his promise to you. Do not force him 
to perform an act repugnant to himself and the whole world. Follow the 
desire of the king and become a protectress of the world. Let Räma be 
installed on the throne. He will undoubtedly always remain favorable to 
you in every way. If, however, on your order He is sent to the forest, 
then your only gain will be unending infamy. Give up your misguided 
desire, O Kaikeyi, and live happily.” 
Kaikeyi looked coolly at Sumantra, who stood before her with joined 
palms, and she made no reply. Her mind remained unmoved as she 
awaited the execution of her order. Seeing her resolve, Daçaratha, who 
had regained consciousness, sighed and said to Sumantra, “You should 
immediately order my army to make ready to depart. They should 
accompany Räma to the forest. So too should wealthy merchants skilled 
at establishing networks of shops. Search out hunters who know the 
secrets of forests and send them with Räma. Assemble thousands of 
capable servants and have them prepare to leave. Indeed, you should 
arrange for my entire treasury and my granary to be transported along 
with Räma. He should not have to endure any austerity during the 
fourteen years of exile.” 
As Daçaratha spoke Kaikeyi became alarmed. The king was going to 
divest the kingdom of all its wealth before her son was crowned. 
Dismayed and fearful, she turned towards Daçaratha and spoke, her 
mouth parched and her voice choked. “How can you bestow upon 
Bharata a kingdom stripped of its wealth? How then will He actually be

111 
the ruler of this world, as you have promised?” 
The king turned angrily towards Kaikeyi. “After handing me a heavy 
burden to bear, you are now lashing me as I carry it, O hostile and vulgar 
woman! When asking for your boons you should have stipulated that 
Räma could not take anything with Him to the forest. Abandoning all 
sense of righteousness, you have taken to a path leading only to grief. I 
cannot stay here with you any longer. Along with all the people of 
Ayodhya I shall follow Räma to the forest!” 
Räma approached His father and said politely, “O great king, of what use 
to Me is an army and all your riches? I have renounced the kingdom; 
how then can I take its wealth? He who has parted with an elephant yet 
seeks to retain its tether is simply a fool. I am resolved to enter the forest 
and dwell there with the ascetics, wearing the barks of trees and living 
on whatever produce I can glean from day to day.” 
Räma wanted to act only in accord with the scriptural instructions 
regarding the vow of forest life. He told His father that one living in the 
forest should not do so in great opulence. Räma asked that the king not 
bestow upon His brother a kingdom bereft of its riches. He would leave 
with only His weapons and a spade for digging roots. Turning to the 
king’s servants, Räma said, “Bring Me the tree barks and I shall take off 
these royal garments and make ready to depart.” 
His request so gladdened Kaikeyi that she personally fetched the 
Spartan forest clothes made from barks and grasses she had already 
prepared. Shamelessly handing them to Räma, Lakñman and Sétä, she 
said, “Put these on.” Räma and Lakñman quickly and adroitly changed 
into those clothes, but the beautiful Sétä was perplexed, unsure of how to 
wear them. Trying again and again to place the bark linen over Her 
other clothes, Sétä felt abashed. With Her eyes flooded with tears She 
said to Her husband, “How does one wear such dress, My lord?” 
Räma personally fastened the bark over Sétä’s silk dress. Seeing Her clad 
in forest apparel, Her many female servants began to wail piteously. 
“This noble princess has not been ordered to enter the forest!” they 
cried. “Dear Räma, please let Her remain here with us so we may 
continue to serve Her and enjoy the blessing of seeing Her divine form. 
How can this gentle lady live like an ascetic in the forest? She does not 
deserve to suffer in this way!”

112 
Although hearing their loving remonstrances, Räma continued to tie on 
Sétä’s forest clothes as She desired. Suddenly Vasiñöha became 
overwhelmed with distress at seeing the gentle Sétä about to enter the 
forest. Feeling angered and weeping hot tears, he said to Kaikeyi, “O 
cruel woman, have you no shame? After deceiving the king and bringing 
disgrace to your family, are you still not satisfied? Will you stand by and 
watch as this high-born lady leaves for the forest, wearing the coarse 
garments you prepared? You did not ask that She be exiled along with 
Räma! These tree barks are not meant for Her. Excellent garments and 
jewels should be brought by you for your daughter-in-law. She should 
proceed to the forest on first-class conveyances and accompanied by all 
Her servants.” 
Vasiñöha loved Räma and Sétä like his own children. He could not stand 
and watch as They departed while the hard-hearted Kaikeyi looked on 
gleefully. The sage spoke words which pierced Kaikeyi deeply. He 
explained that according to scripture the wife was her husband’s own 
self. They were one and the same person. As such Sétä should therefore 
rule over the kingdom, even if Räma Himself could not. The forest 
would become the capital of the world. Indeed, the entire state of 
Koçala, along with all its people and the city of Ayodhya, would leave 
along with Räma. The sage blazed with anger as he went on, appearing 
like a smokeless fire. 
“Surely Bharata and His brother Shatrughna will also enter the forest, 
clad in barks. You may then rule over a desolate kingdom, peopled only 
by trees, which alone could not rise up and follow Räma!” 
Kaikeyi remained silent and looked at Räma and Sétä, who were ready to 
leave. Sétä wished only to follow Her husband. Even upon hearing 
Vasiñöha’s words, She was not swayed in the least from Her purpose. She 
stood next to Räma, covered from head to toe in the grass and bark 
clothes given by Kaikeyi. All the people present then loudly exclaimed, 
“Shame upon the powerless king who does nothing to stop this flagrant 
injustice!”  
Hearing their cries the emperor became dispirited and lost interest in 
life. He turned to Kaikeyi and rebuked her for making Sétä wear forest 
garments, but the queen remained silent. Räma came before His father, 
who sat with his head bent low, and asked his permission to leave. He

113 
requested the king to take special care of Kaushalya, whom he feared 
would suffer in his absence. Looking at his son clad in the dress of a 
hermit, the king fell unconscious. After being brought to his senses by 
his ministers, who gently sprinkled him with cool water, Daçaratha 
lamented loudly. 
“I think in my past life I must have given terrible pain to other living 
beings and thus this pain is now being felt by me. Surely life will not 
leave one until the appointed time arrives. Otherwise, why does death 
not claim me now, who am tormented by Kaikeyi and beholding my 
dearest son wearing the robes of an ascetic?” 
Crying out, “O Räma!” the king broke off, choked with tears. With a 
great effort Daçaratha then managed to control his grief and, turning 
towards Sumantra, he said, “Fetch here the best of my chariots and take 
the glorious Räma beyond this city. Since I see a virtuous and valiant 
son being exiled to the forest by His own father and mother, I can only 
conclude that this is the results of piety, as declared by the scriptures. 
Religion is undoubtedly difficult to divine.” 
As Räma and Sétä approached the chariot brought by Sumantra, 
Kaushalya came and tightly embraced Sétä, saying, “Wicked are those 
women who forsake their worthy husbands when fallen upon hard times. 
Even though such women have in the past been protected and afforded 
every happiness, they malign and even desert their husbands when 
misfortune arrives. Such women are heartless, untruthful, lusty and 
sinful by nature, being quickly estranged in times of trouble. Neither 
kindness nor education nor gift nor even marriage ties can capture the 
hearts of these women.” 
Kaushalya loved Sétä as a daughter. She knew that Räma’s gentle wife 
was entirely devoted to piety and she spoke to Her only out of motherly 
affection. She continued, “For virtuous women, who are truthful, pious, 
obedient to their elders and acting within the bounds of morality the 
husband is the most sacred object and is never abandoned. Although 
Räma is being sent to the forest You should never neglect Him, dear 
Sétä. Whether wealthy or without any means whatsoever, He is always 
Your worshipable deity.” 
Sétä was filled with joy to hear this advice, which was in accord with her 
life’s aim. Joining Her palms, She replied reverentially, “I shall surely do

114 
all that your honorable self instructs. I have always heard from you 
proper advice about how to serve My husband. Even in thought you 
should not compare Me to wicked women, for I am unable to deviate 
from virtue, even as moonlight cannot be parted from the moon. As a 
lute is useless without its strings or a chariot without its wheels, so a wife 
is destitute when separated from her worthy husband. Having learned 
from My elders all the duties incumbent upon a wife, and knowing the 
husband to be a veritable deity, how can I ever neglect Räma, O 
venerable lady?” 
Kaushalya’s heart was touched by Sétä’s reply and she shed tears born of 
both delight and agony, being moved by Sétä’s piety and at the same time 
anguished at the thought of Her imminent departure. 
Räma looked with affection at His mother. It was time for Him to leave. 
He feared Kaushalya would pine away after He left. Räma stood before 
her with folded palms. “Please do not show My father sad expressions, 
heightening his grief. Fourteen years will pass quickly, even while you 
sleep. You will rise one morning to find Me returned with Sétä and 
Lakñman, surrounded by friends and relatives.” 
Räma looked around at all the royal ladies standing there and said, 
“Please forgive any unkind words or acts which I may have said or done 
out of ignorance because we have lived closely together. Now I take 
leave of you all.” 
A cry rose up from the ladies that resembled the cry of female cranes. 
Daçaratha’s palace, which had always been marked with the joyous 
sounds of music and festivities, was now filled with the sound of 
agonized wails. 
Catching hold of Daçaratha’s feet, Räma, Sétä and Lakñman took their 
final leave of him and walked around him in respect. Numbed by grief, 
Räma bowed to Kaushalya and climbed up onto the chariot, followed by 
Sétä. As Lakñman followed Them, His own mother Sumitra came up to 
say good-bye. Embracing her son she said, “Serve well Your elder brother 
Räma, my dear son. The eternal moral law states that the older brother 
is the refuge of the younger, whether in good times or bad. Never forget 
the duties of our race, O Lakñman, which are to practice charity, 
perform sacrifices for the good of the people and to lay down one’s life 
on the field of battle.”

115 
Blinded by tears, Sumitra allowed her son to mount the chariot as she 
called out, “Farewell, dear son, farewell! Always see Räma as You do 
Your father Daçaratha, look upon Sétä as myself, your mother, and see 
the forest as Ayodhya!” 
Sumantra took up the reins of the horses and urged them forward. The 
great golden chariot moved ahead with a thunderous rumbling. As it 
passed down the royal highway the people assembled were stunned with 
sorrow. Both old and young alike rushed towards the chariot as thirsty 
men would rush toward water in the desert. Clinging to the sides and 
the back of the chariot they looked up at Sumantra, calling out, “Hold 
fast the reins, O charioteer, and drive slowly. We wish to see Räma a 
little longer.” 
Räma, anxious to be gone as quickly as possible, asked them to desist and 
told Sumantra to drive more swiftly. Ordered by Räma, “Move on!” and 
at the same time told by the people who filled the road, “Stop!” 
Sumantra could do neither. With great difficulty the chariot pressed 
slowly forward. 
Seeing Räma leaving and his city plunged into despair, the king fell 
prostrate. Upon being brought back to consciousness, he got up and, 
along with Kaushalya, ran after the chariot. Räma looked behind Him 
and saw them trying to make their way through the crowd. He was 
unable to bear the sight of His father and mother in such distress, but 
being bound by duty, He urged Sumantra ever forward. The charioteer 
was perplexed, hearing from behind the king calling out, “Come back!” 
and then being ordered by Räma to drive quicker. Räma said to him, 
“This pain should not be prolonged further. Make haste! If My father 
reprimands you when you return, you should simply say you could not 
hear him.” 
Finally breaking free from the crowd, the chariot gathered speed and left 
the city. Daçaratha was still running along the road, his eyes fixed on the 
dust raised by the chariot’s wheels. Breathless and at last losing sight of 
the chariot in the distance, Daçaratha fell down on the road. 
As he lay there Kaushalya and Kaikeyi came to raise him up. On seeing 
Kaikeyi, however, the king became inflamed with anger. “Do not touch 
me, O sinful woman!” he roared. “I never want to see you again. You are 
neither my wife nor relation and I have nothing more to say to you. I

116 
also reject those who serve and depend upon you. If your son is in any 
way pleased to receive the sovereignty, then I shall shun Him as well!” 
Daçaratha gazed at the tracks of the chariot. He covered his face in 
shame, blaming himself for Räma’s departure. With Kaushalya’s help, he 
slowly made his way back to the palace. As he passed along the road he 
saw the city marked by mourning, its shops closed, its streets deserted. 
Lamenting all the while, Daçaratha entered his palace as the sun goes 
behind a cloud. The great palace was silent and without movement, 
overlade with a heavy atmosphere of sorrow. Daçaratha went into 
Kaushalya’s apartments and, laying down upon a soft couch, cried out, 
“O Räma, have You really deserted me? Alas! Only those who will 
endure these coming fourteen years will be happy, seeing again the face 
of my gentle son. I cannot tolerate life without that tiger among men. O 
wicked Kaikeyi, you may rule this kingdom as a widow!” 
Kaushalya looked sadly upon her husband and said, “Having discharged 
her poison upon Räma, the crooked Kaikeyi will now wander freely like 
a female serpent who has shed her skin. With Räma exiled and her own 
son installed as king, surely she will cause further fear to me, even like a 
snake living in one’s own house. How shall I survive without Räma?” 
Thinking of Räma and Sétä entering the forest, Kaushalya cried out in 
pain. How would they survive? Exactly at a time when they should have 
enjoyed the luxuries of life, They were banished and made to live like 
ascetics. When again would she see Them? Surely in some past life she 
had committed some grievous sin. For that reason she now suffered such 
terrible pain. She lamented loudly, “O Räma! O Lakñman! O Sétä! 
Where are You now? The fire of my grief tortures me today as the 
blazing sun scorches the earth in summer!” 
Sumitra gently reassured Kaushalya, reminding her of the greatness of 
Räma and Lakñman. Controlling her own grief and sitting next to 
Kaushalya, she placed her arms around her co-wife. She spoke about 
Räma, describing His qualities and immeasurable strength. Simply to 
prove His noble father to be perfectly truthful, He had renounced the 
throne and gone to the forest. This was the path of virtue followed 
always by cultured men. That path led only to regions of never-ending 
happiness. Kaushalya should therefore not pity her son.  
Sumitra spoke softly. “Being ever attended by the loving Lakñman and

117 
followed by His devoted wife, Räma will feel no discomfort. Even the 
sun will withhold its scorching rays from Räma’s body, seeing His 
boundless virtues. A gentle and soothing breeze will always blow softly 
on Räma. At night when He lies down to sleep, the cooling rays of the 
moon will caress Him like a loving father.”  
Sumitra stroked Kaushalya’s face. She spoke to assuage her own 
suffering as much as that of Kaushalya. She told Kaushalya not to worry. 
Räma would surely be protected by the terrible weapons that Viçvämitra 
gave Him. He would dwell fearlessly in the forest just as He would in His 
own palace. Sumitra concluded, “Knowing the power of that prince, I 
have no doubt we will see Him returned as soon as His term of exile is 
concluded. With Räma as your son you should not grieve in the least, for 
your good fortune is very great indeed. Shed your sorrow now, O sinless 
lady, for all the people must be comforted by you at this time, pained as 
they are by Räma’s separation.” 
Comforted by Sumitra, Kaushalya felt relief and embraced her co-wife 
tightly. The two queens sat together for a long time, lost in thoughts of 
Räma. Nearby the king lay almost unconscious on a couch, repeatedly 
murmuring Räma’s name.  
Part Two 
Chapter 1 
Into the Forest 
After their father had returned, Räma and Lakñman left the city and 
went along country paths toward the forest. Even though They urged 
Sumantra to drive quickly, a large number of citizens continued to 
follow Them. Räma stopped to rest after some time and allowed the 
people to reach Him. He said to them with affection, “You have shown 
your great love for Me beyond any doubt. Now for My pleasure, please 
bestow this same love upon My brother Bharata. I am sure He will take 
good care of you in every possible way. Although still a youth, He is old

118 
in wisdom and greatly heroic. He will prove a worthy master and dispel 
all your sorrows and fears. Serve Him well, for He has been selected by 
our lord the emperor. It is also My desire that all of you please Him with 
your service. Be kind to the emperor so that he may not suffer excessive 
agony in My absence.” 
Räma tried hard to make the people turn back, but they would not 
return. The more Räma showed His determination to stick to the path of 
righteousness and truth, the more the people desired to have Him as 
their ruler. It was as if Räma and Lakñman, by the cords of Their 
virtuous qualities, had bound the people and were dragging them along.  
The chariot began to move forward again and a group of elderly 
Brahmins, their heads shaking with age, ran behind, struggling to keep 
pace as the chariot picked up speed. They called out, “O swift steeds, 
stop! Come back and be friendly to Your master Räma, who is always 
intent on pleasing the Brahmins. O horses, halt! Although endowed 
with excellent ears, do you not hear our plaintive cry? You should not 
bear Räma away. He is pure-minded, heroic and virtuous. Therefore, you 
should return Him to the city to be our king, not carry Him away to 
some distant, lonely place!” 
Räma looked back, feeling compassion for the distressed Brahmins. He 
did not want to ride Himself while Brahmins walked, so he got down 
from His chariot and continued on foot. Although His heart was 
breaking to see the people's anguish, Räma looked straight ahead and 
walked with firm strides, followed by Sétä and Lakñman. Sumantra drove 
slowly behind Them in the chariot. As the Brahmins continued to 
beseech Them, They gradually approached the banks of the river 
Tamasa. Searching out a suitable site, they decided to camp there for the 
night. The citizens of Ayodhya camped nearby. Räma released the 
horses and allowed them to drink the clear river water. After bathing, 
Räma spoke to Lakñman, indicating the forest across the water. 
“There lie the desolate woods, My brother, echoing on all sides with the 
sounds of birds and beasts. The city of Ayodhya will similarly resound 
with the cries of forlorn men and women, lamenting for Our having left. 
I fear for My father and mother who must be weeping incessantly and 
will perhaps even lose their sight.” 
Räma thought of Bharata. By now He would have been informed of the

119 
situation. Thinking of Bharata's nobility, Räma felt reassured as He 
spoke with Lakñman. “I am sure the high-minded Bharata will take good 
care of Our parents, consoling them in every way. As I reflect upon 
Bharata's soft-heartedness and piety, My mind is pacified. My dear 
Lakñman, I am grateful You have chosen to follow Me, for this too gives 
Me solace. Fasting for this Our first night in the forest in accord with 
the scriptural codes, I shall now sleep peacefully.” 
Lakñman had Sumantra prepare a bed of leaves on the ground and Räma 
lay upon that with Sétä. He soon fell asleep, but Lakñman stayed awake, 
guarding His brother. Nearby He could see the many fires lit by the 
people who were following Räma toward the forest. 
In the middle of the night Räma rose and again spoke with His brother. 
“It seems there is no possibility of Us convincing the citizens to return to 
their homes,” He said, looking across to the place where the people had 
set up camp. “Just see the pains they are taking to follow Us, sleeping 
now on the bare ground. Surely they would sooner give up their lives 
than go back to the city without Us. Let Us leave immediately while the 
people still sleep. They should not have to endure this austerity further 
on Our behalf. As rulers of the people it is Our duty to eradicate Our 
subjects' suffering. Certainly We should not cause them pain. Thus We 
must leave now and throw them off Our trail.” 
Lakñman agreed and, as Räma woke Sétä, he roused Sumantra and had 
him prepare the chariot. The two princes and Sétä climbed aboard, and 
Sumantra drove it swiftly upstream, away from the sleeping people. The 
charioteer crossed a shallow part of the river and then, leaving the 
common road, drove through the woods. Doubling back and going by 
different paths, sometimes riding through shallow waters for some 
distance, Sumantra made sure the people would not be able to track 
them. He drove quickly, and before dawn they had gone a considerable 
distance from where the citizens were camped. 
As dawn approached in the camp, the sound of numerous birds mingled 
with the lowing of the cows which grazed freely on the riverbank. 
Roused by these sounds, the citizens arose and soon discovered that 
Räma and His party had left. They were shocked and began to loudly 
lament. They condemned sleep for having stolen Räma from them. 
Falling to the ground, they wept and said, “How could Räma, who is fit

120 
to rule the globe, put on the dress of an ascetic and leave for distant 
lands? How did that jewel among men, who was like a loving father, go 
to the forest, leaving us forlorn? Let us now meet our end by fasting until 
death, or by setting out on the final great journey to the north.” 
Looking all around they found big logs of dry wood. Some of them 
suggested they pile up the wood to make a funeral pyre and immediately 
enter it. What use was their life now? What could they say to their near 
and dear ones in Ayodhya when asked of Räma's whereabouts? How 
could they say they let Him enter the forest even as they slept? When 
they returned without Räma, the city would surely become desolate and 
devoid of all happiness. Having gone out with that high-souled hero, 
firmly determined to follow Him anywhere, how could they now go back 
without Him? 
Continuously crying out, the citizens sought out the chariot’s tracks and 
began to follow them. When they found themselves thrown off the trail 
by Sumantra’s expert driving, they became utterly despondent. Their 
anguished voices echoed around the woods. “Alas! What shall we do? 
We are doomed by Providence!” Gradually the bewildered citizens began 
to reluctantly head back toward Ayodhya, following the tracks the 
chariot had made when leaving the previous day. 
Depressed and despairing, the citizens finally arrived in the city. They 
were blinded by grief and hardly able to distinguish between their own 
relatives and others. They searched for their homes with difficulty, some 
of them even entering the wrong houses. Afflicted with sorrow, they 
cast their eyes all around and, although the city and their houses were 
filled with abundant riches, to them it appeared vacant and nothing 
gave them pleasure. 
Ayodhya seemed at that time to be like the firmament bereft of the 
moon. Everywhere its citizens shed tears and all of them felt like giving 
up their lives. No one rejoiced on any occasion, even when coming upon 
unexpected fortune or seeing the birth of a firstborn son. Merchants did 
not display their merchandise, nor did the goods even seem attractive. 
Householders did not cook food and the household deities were 
neglected.  
As the men returned home without Räma, their wives reproached them. 
“Without seeing Räma what is the use of our house, children or wealth?”

121 
the wives said. “It seems the only virtuous man in this world is Lakñman, 
who has followed Räma to the forest in order to serve Him!” 
The men, pained by the loss of Räma, made no reply. Their wives 
lamented at length. How could they remain under the protection of the 
old king, who had lost his good sense and sent Räma away? Worse still 
was the prospect of serving Kaikeyi, whose aim was now completely 
achieved. Having forsaken her husband and disgraced her family for the 
sake of power, who else would she not abandon? 
The ladies could not contain their feelings. Out of despair they 
remonstrated with their husbands. “Thanks to Kaikeyi, this kingdom 
will be ruined. With Räma gone, Daçaratha will soon meet his end along 
with his distinguished line, which has existed for so long. How can there 
be any good fortune with Kaikeyi in a position of power? We should 
therefore end our lives. Or we should follow Räma to some distant place 
where Kaikeyi’s name will never be heard. The glorious and ever-
truthful Räma shall be our only shelter.” 
As the ladies of Ayodhya lamented, the sun gradually set on the city, 
leaving it dark and cheerless, its lights unlit and its temples and public 
meeting places deserted. Fallen upon evil days, the celebrated city 
became silent, the sounds of singing, rejoicing and instrumental music 
having ceased. All the people remained in their own homes, thinking 
only of Räma. 
* * * 
During that night the chariot carrying the princes covered a long 
distance. As they traveled, Räma remembered the pain of His relations 
and people. Reflecting again and again upon His father’s command, he 
kept His determination strong and urged Sumantra to drive swiftly. 
They passed many villages, seeing on their outskirts well-tilled and 
cultivated fields, as well as beautiful, blossoming woodlands. People from 
the villages, to where the news of Räma’s exile had already spread, saw 
the chariot passing, by and they censured the emperor and especially 
Kaikeyi, saying, “The cruel Kaikeyi has acted without propriety. She has 
caused the exile of the highly virtuous Räma. What will become of us 
now? How will the delicate princess Sétä survive in the forest? How 
shameful that the king could abandon all affection for such a son and

122 
daughter-in-law!” 
Going more slowly as He passed the people, Räma heard their comments 
and He smiled at them without saying anything. As the chariot moved 
on more swiftly, the travelers saw innumerable gardens, fruit orchards 
and lotus ponds. Temples resonant with the sounds of sacred 
incantations were everywhere. While sitting in the chariot and enjoying 
the sights of His flourishing kingdom, Räma thought of His coming 
exile. He would long for the day of His return to this prosperous land of 
Koçala. 
As they at last reached Koçala’s southern border, Räma got down from 
the chariot and stood facing the direction of Ayodhya. With His face 
covered in tears He spoke in a choked voice. “I take leave of you, O 
foremost of cities. Protected by the emperor and your presiding deities, 
may you fare well. When I have squared My debt to My father and 
fulfilled his pledge, I shall return.” 
Many country dwellers had gathered around Räma. They were filled 
with grief to see Him bid His sad farewell to Ayodhya. Räma glanced at 
them with affection. He thanked them for the love they showed for 
Him, and told them to go home. 
The people simply stood gazing at Räma, unable to move. Although He 
urged them to return home, they stood rooted to the spot. They could 
not turn away from the heroic and handsome prince. As they stood 
watching, Räma remounted His chariot and it disappeared into the 
distance, even as the sun sets at the end of the day. 
Gradually the party reached the Ganges river in the Ushinara province. 
Along the banks of the river for as far as the eye could see in both 
directions were clustered the hermitages of ascetics and åñis. Hundreds 
of hills ran along the length of the river, and the river flowed with cool 
water flecked with white foam, making a roaring sound as it rushed past. 
Somewhere the river ran still and deep and somewhere else it dashed 
violently against rocks. In places it was covered with white lotuses, while 
in others thousands of swans, cranes and herons hovered on its waters. It 
was the resort of even gods and Gandharvas who sported along its banks. 
Surrounded by trees laden with fruits and flowers and full of varieties of 
singing birds, the river appeared most beautiful. 
Seeing this celestial region, Räma decided to stop for the night. He took

123 
shelter under the branches of a large tree and sat down to offer worship 
to the Ganges. Sumantra unyoked the horses and allowed them to drink 
and then roll on the grassy riverbank. The charioteer stood with folded 
hands near Räma, who sat peacefully with Sétä by His side. 
The king of that territory was named Guha, a dear friend of Räma who 
ruled over the tribal people known as the Niñadhas. Hearing from his 
people of Räma’s presence, he immediately went to Him. Guha found 
Räma by the bank of the Ganges and he stood at a distance, waiting 
respectfully for his audience. He was overjoyed to find his friend arrived 
in his kingdom, but his joy was mixed with sorrow at seeing Him dressed 
as an ascetic. Räma looked up and saw Guha standing there, surrounded 
by his relations and elderly ministers. Quickly approaching him with 
Lakñman, He tightly embraced him and they exchanged greetings. Guha 
spoke to Räma, whom he had met on many occasions in Ayodhya when 
going there to pay tribute. 
“I am honored by your presence in my kingdom. This land here is as 
much Yours as it is mine. Indeed, I am Your servant. Only order me and 
I shall immediately do whatever You wish.” 
He showed Räma the many varieties of food and drink he had brought, 
as well as the excellent beds he had prepared for them. Räma thanked 
him and said, “I have been well honored by you today. You should know 
that I am under a vow to live in the forest as an ascetic. I accept your 
offerings but allow you to take them back. Please leave only as much as 
may be taken by My horses. Since these steeds are dear to Hy father, you 
will please Me by serving them well.” 
Reluctantly, Guha commanded his men to do as Räma had requested, 
having the best of food brought for the horses. He watched with sadness 
and admiration as Räma accepted only water for Himself and then lay 
down to sleep on a bed of leaves. Lakñman washed Räma’s feet and again 
kept vigil nearby. Going over to Lakñman, Guha said, “Here is a bed for 
You. There is no need to remain awake for I shall stand here, bow in 
hand, and guard You all from danger. There is nothing in these woods 
unknown to me. Indeed, along with my men I could withstand the attack 
of a vast and powerful army coming upon this region.” 
Guha took Lakñman by the arm and showed Him the bed, but Lakñman 
politely refused his offer. “Under your protection we feel not even the

124 
least fear, O sinless Guha. But how can I rest while Räma and Sétä lie 
down on the earth?” 
Lakñman looked at His brother lying beneath the tree. His mind was 
troubled. How could one such as Räma, who was capable of withstanding 
even the gods in battle, be brought to such a state? Lakñman’s thoughts 
drifted to Ayodhya. He became restless, thinking of His father and the 
subjects. Surely Daçaratha would soon breathe his last, having sent his 
dearest son to a life of severe austerity. Probably Kaushalya and the king 
would die that very night, uttering words of despair and anguish. Losing 
their beloved monarch after watching Räma depart, the people of 
Ayodhya would be seized with agony after agony. 
Engrossed in such thoughts, Lakñman breathed heavily like an infuriated 
serpent. Hot tears glided down His face. Guha placed an arm around His 
shoulder and gently reassured Him. As the two men spoke the night 
gradually slipped away.  
When dawn broke, Guha arranged for a large rowboat to ferry the 
princes across the fast-flowing Ganges. The time had arrived to leave 
the chariot and continue on foot. As the princes fastened on Their 
armor and weapons, Sumantra humbly approached Them with joined 
palms and asked for instructions. Räma smiled and said, “You have 
rendered Me excellent service, O Sumantra. Please return now to the 
king’s presence and inform him of Our well-being. We shall now proceed 
on foot.” 
Sumantra found it difficult to leave Räma. Gazing into His face, he 
spoke in an anguished voice. “What man in this world has ever had to 
face such a perverse destiny, O Raghava? What is the value of 
cultivating piety and truth when we see such a result? We are actually 
lost and ruined by Your departure. Coming under the control of the 
sinful Kaikeyi, we will simply suffer.” 
Sumantra broke down and wept for some time and Räma comforted him. 
As he regained his composure Räma said, “I cannot think of anyone who 
is as great a friend to our family as you, O noble charioteer. Please act in 
a way which will not increase My father’s grief. Whatever he instructs 
should be carried out without hesitation, even if he orders you to serve 
Kaikeyi.” 
Räma understood all the nuances of statecraft. He was worried that in

125 
his absence the king’s ministers and servants might try to undermine 
Kaikeyi. He wanted the kingdom to run smoothly and his father to be 
spared any unnecessary anxiety in dealing with intrigues. Wanting also 
to ensure that His family not be left anxious for His sake, Räma added, 
“Please tell My father that neither Lakñman nor Sétä nor I are grieving 
in any way. Happily do We commence Our sojourn in the woods. The 
period of fourteen years will soon pass and We shall return.” 
Räma considered the urgent need to re-establish stability in Ayodhya. 
He spoke solemnly to Sumantra. “Ask the king to fetch Bharata quickly 
and duly install Him as Prince Regent. Bharata Himself should be told to 
accept the post without any hesitation, for this will be most pleasing to 
Me. He should then serve the king and all the queens with an equally 
disposed mind.” 
Räma gave His permission for Sumantra to leave, but the charioteer still 
stood before Him, his mind perplexed. How could he return without 
Räma? He revealed his mind to Räma. “As we left the city the people 
were practically rendered senseless with grief even upon seeing You in 
this chariot. What then will be their state when they see the chariot 
returning empty? Surely Ayodhya will be torn in two, even as the army 
of a hero is split apart when it sees his chariot carrying only the 
charioteer, the hero having been slain.” 
Sumantra thought of Daçaratha and Kaushalya. They would be 
devastated by grief when they heard that their son had actually entered 
the forest. Sumantra felt incapable of returning. He pleaded with Räma 
to let him go to the forest too. He was prepared to remain with Räma for 
the full fourteen years rather than go back to Ayodhya without him. 
Falling to the ground and clasping Räma’s feet, he spoke with pain in his 
voice.  
“My desire is to convey You back to Ayodhya at the end of Your exile. If 
I must return without You, then seated upon the chariot I shall enter 
blazing fire. I am Your devoted servant and it does not befit You to 
abandon me now. Let me follow You and render You every service. 
Fourteen years will be as many moments in Your presence, while in Your 
absence it will seem like fourteen ages.” 
Räma was moved by compassion for Sumantra, who was piteously 
supplicating Him again and again. He lifted the weeping charioteer. “I

126 
know your devotion for Me, Sumantra. However, I must ask you to 
return. Kaikeyi will not be satisfied unless she sees the chariot returned 
without Me and hears from you of My entry into the forest. For the good 
of the king I want her to be convinced that I have fulfilled the terms of 
her boons, and I also desire that her son Bharata be given the kingdom.” 
Räma knew that if any doubt remained about whether or not He had 
really gone to the forest, then, in the hope of His return, they would not 
install His brother Bharata. He therefore convinced Sumantra of the 
need for him to return to Ayodhya, carrying the messages He had given. 
With a heavy heart Sumantra finally assented and got up on the chariot. 
Räma then turned and spoke to Guha. “It would not be proper for Me to 
stay in a region where I have many men to serve Me. I wish to go to some 
uninhabited part of the forest and live in a simple hermitage, gathering 
My daily food from wild roots and fruits.” 
Räma knew Guha and his people were hoping to accommodate Him in a 
nearby wood, but He was devoted to virtue and wanted to properly 
follow the scriptural instructions, which prescribed a life of strict 
asceticism for one taking the vow of living in a forest. Using the sap of a 
banyan tree, Räma and Lakñman matted Their hair into a thick mass. 
With Their matted locks and Their bark and grass garments, the two 
princes looked like a couple of ascetic åñis. Räma helped Sétä onto the 
boat, and then jumped aboard Himself, along with Lakñman. Headed by 
Guha, the oarsmen plied the boat out across the river. Räma waved to 
Sumantra, who stood motionless on the sandy river bank, gripped by 
despondency. 
The boat approached the southern shore of the Ganges swiftly and 
smoothly. Sétä folded Her palms and prayed to the goddess Gaìgä for 
protection in the forest. The river was placid and shone like a sheet of 
glass under the bright sun. Small ripples spread from the side of the boat 
as the oars gently and rhythmically splashed the water. Räma and 
Lakñman sat silently, thinking of Ayodhya and Their family and friends. 
They watched as Sétä sat in the prow of the boat, Her eyes closed in 
prayer. Gradually they approached the shoreline, with its sprawling 
forest reaching practically to the river’s edge. 
After the party disembarked, Räma said a fond farewell to Guha. He 
embraced the forest chieftain and then turned and walked toward the

127 
thick forest. Lakñman went ahead of Him, placing Sétä between Them. 
As They walked They heard the sounds of beasts and birds—the shrill 
trills of parrots, the grunts of boars, the cries of monkeys and the 
occasional growls and roars of tigers.  
Räma was apprehensive about Sétä’s safety. The vast and trackless forest 
lay immediately ahead. What dangers would They now have to face? But 
as They began to penetrate into the forest, Räma’s fear for Sétä gave way 
to delight. At last the moment had arrived! His father’s word would now 
be redeemed. Despite any danger He would surely stay here for fourteen 
years, thinking only of the glory of His aged and pious father. Keeping 
His mind fully alert, Räma gripped the great bow which hung from His 
shoulder and placed His other hand on the hilt of the blue steel sword 
strapped to His belt. 
The three travelers had become hungry and They searched for roots and 
bulbs, fit for offering in the sacred fire. After They had cooked and 
made the offering, They ate, and when the meal was over, They 
performed Their evening worship. Räma and Lakñman then sat together 
and Räma spoke a little to His brother. “Surely the king will sleep only 
fitfully tonight, O Lakñman! On the other hand, Kaikeyi will rest 
peacefully with her desired object fulfilled.” 
Räma was pensive. Until now he had not dwelt upon His own anxiety 
for fear of increasing the pain of those He loved. Now that He was 
finally in the solitude of the forest, He felt a deep disquiet. What other 
terrible suffering would Kaikeyi cause for His father? With Bharata 
installed as Prince Regent perhaps she would even try to bring about 
Daçaratha’s death, so that her own son might more quickly become the 
king. How could the king protect himself, being weakened by grief? 
What would become of His mother Kaushalya, as well as Sumitra? Räma 
appeared anxious as He continued. 
“I think that in the morning You should return to Ayodhya, O noble 
prince! Protect Our mothers and Our aged father. I do not see anyone 
else who can guard against Kaikeyi’s evil intrigues. Even now she may be 
plotting to poison Our parents.” 
Although He felt helpless, Räma nevertheless censured Himself for 
failing to secure His parents’ happiness. Having undergone great pains to 
nurture Him with love, they were deprived of His company just when

128 
they should have found their labors repaid. “Alas,” exclaimed Räma, “I 
am an ungrateful and useless son!” 
Räma wept. He could by no means breach the order of Kaikeyi and His 
father, but He feared He might be acting wrongly if the result was His 
parents’ death. Torn apart by His feelings, He wanted Lakñman to go 
back to Ayodhya to protect them. Räma lamented loudly for some time. 
When He fell silent, Lakñman replied, “Please do not grieve in this way, 
dear brother, as You simply cause grief for Myself and Sétä. It is not 
possible for Me to leave You as I would not survive even for a short 
while in Your absence. Placing Your faith in the pious Bharata, You 
should not send Me away. I only wish to remain with You here and do 
not desire even the highest heaven without You.” 
Räma remained silent. He knew well that Lakñman would never leave 
Him. It had grown dark and the brothers sought the shelter of a large 
tree where Räma and Sétä lay down to rest. Lakñman remained awake a 
short distance away, vigilantly guarding Them from any danger. 
Gradually the full moon rose and shone through the branches of the 
high trees, illuminating the beautiful faces of Räma and Sétä as They 
slept, which appeared to Lakñman like two more moons fallen to the 
earth. 
The following morning after sunrise They went in an easterly direction 
toward the confluence of the Ganges and the Yamunä. They were keen 
to find the hermitages of the åñis whom They knew lived in that region. 
The famous sage Bharadväja, the leader of all the Brahmins inhabiting 
that forest, dwelt nearby.  
As They walked They were enraptured by the colorful beauty of the 
forest. Huge trees rose up on all sides. In some places the trees opened up 
into expansive clearings carpeted by innumerable varieties of flowers 
and shrubs. Lakes of crystal clear water covered with white, blue and 
reddish lotuses were seen here and there. The trees were laden with 
blossoms, filling the air with their fragrance. The sounds of cuckoos, 
parrots and peacocks echoed all around.  
Keeping close together, the three travelers walked throughout the day, 
sometimes moving easily and at other times with difficulty through 
densely wooded regions. Toward the end of the afternoon They heard in 
the distance the sound of the two rivers rushing to meet each other.

129 
Around Them They began seeing signs of life: chopped wood and man-
made paths. Catching sight of smoke rising above the trees, They 
realized they had found the dwellings of the åñis and They quickly went 
toward them. 
At the precincts of the hermitage they were greeted by a young ascetic 
who was a disciple of Bharadväja. He led Them through the many 
thatched cottages of the Brahmin community, showing Them to a great 
sacrificial arena where Bharadväja was seated. Surrounded by his 
disciples, the sage sat before the sacred fire, absorbed in meditation. As 
soon as the three travelers caught sight of the effulgent åñi They 
prostrated themselves on the earth in obeisance. They waited 
respectfully at a distance for the sage to beckon to Them. 
Bharadväja had attained virtual omniscience by his long practice of 
asceticism and meditation. He immediately sensed the presence of his 
exalted guests and he rose up to greet Them. Going before the sage, 
Räma said with joined palms, “We are Räma and Lakñman, the sons of 
Emperor Daçaratha, O highly venerable sage. Here is My blessed and 
irreproachable wife, a princess of Videha and the daughter of King 
Janaka. Ordered by My ever-pious father, I have come to this forest to 
live the life of an ascetic for fourteen years, and My brother and wife 
have chosen to follow Me. Please bless Us.” 
Bharadväja gazed upon the faces of his guests, understanding Their 
divine identities. He offered Them various delicious foods prepared from 
wild roots and fruits. Tears flowed from his eyes as he spoke to Räma. “I 
already knew of Your exile and have been expecting You to pass this 
way. Your auspicious arrival here at My hermitage signals the success of 
all My austerities and sacrifices. It is highly difficult to have a sight of 
You and today I am supremely blessed. My dear Räma, if You so desire 
You may remain here in this delightful stretch of land, which is quite 
suitable for the life of asceticism.” 
Smiling and graciously accepting the sage’s offerings of love, Räma 
replied, “This hermitage is well known and not so far from the state of 
Ayodhya. The people will soon seek Me out if I remain here. Please tell 
Me of some other, more lonely place, for I will not be able to tolerate the 
pain of the people again beseeching Me to return.” 
Bharadväja understood Räma’s concern. He directed the prince to a

130 
mountain named Chitrakuta, lying some fifty miles away. After 
spending the night at the sage’s hermitage, the three travelers set out 
the next morning toward the mountain. It lay across the Yamunä, which 
They crossed by means of a raft constructed from timber and bamboo.  
As They walked toward Chitrakuta They saw countless varieties of trees 
and plants spreading everywhere in tableaus of rich colors. The constant 
singing of thousands of birds resounded on all sides, mingling with the 
sounds of trickling rivulets and cascading waterfalls. From time to time 
the trumpeting of an elephant could be heard in the distance. Branches 
of great trees were bent low under their burden of sweet fruits. From 
many of them hung large honeycombs, heavy with the thick honey 
produced by the black bees droning around the fragrant forest flowers.  
Sétä was captivated by the beauty of the forest, touching and smelling 
the many blossoms that hung all around. Completely forgetting His grief 
and anxiety, Räma laughingly held Her hand and told Her all the names 
of the trees and plants. The three travelers were elated simply to see 
such a celestial region. In great happiness They moved toward 
Chitrakuta. 
The part of the forest leading to Chitrakuta had been rendered quite 
passable due to the regular traffic of ascetics, and the travelers made 
good progress. Toward the end of the third day of Their departure from 
Bharadväja’s hermitage They approached the foot of the mountain. 
They saw there a huge banyan tree which spread its branches of dark 
green leaves away in all directions. Bowing down to the presiding deity 
of the tree, Sétä offered Her respects. She prayed that They would 
successfully complete Their exile and return that way again on Their 
way back to Ayodhya. Lakñman prepared beds of leaves near the foot of 
the tree. After saying Their evening prayers and preparing a meal, the 
travelers rested for the night. 
At sunrise the following day Räma and His party moved on again, with 
the great Chitrakuta mountain rising ahead of Them. Bluish in color, it 
was covered with copses of green, yellow and red trees. Numerous 
waterfalls sparkled in the morning sun. The mountain was sheer in 
places, smoothly sloping elsewhere. Its snow covered peaks disappeared 
into the clouds. The travelers stopped and stared for some time at its 
majestic beauty. They began to ascend the mountain and, some way up

131 
its side, arrived at the hermitage of the sage Välméki, situated on a broad 
plateau. 
The sage was joyful to see Räma and His companions. He greeted Them 
with hospitality and respect and they conversed for some time. Välméki 
told Them of his own history. Although he was now a powerful ascetic, 
blazing with bodily luster, he had previously been a robber who had 
maintained his large family by plundering travelers. 
The åñi told the whole story. Once, long ago, he encountered the sage 
Närada in the forest and sought to steal from him. The sage told Välméki 
he would happily give him anything he wanted, but he told him to first 
go to his family and ask them the following question, “Are you prepared 
to accept a share of the sins which will ensue from my crimes?” Välméki 
assented to this request and went to his family. However, they declined 
to accept his sins, saying that they only wished to receive from him the 
fruits of his action in the form of money and goods. 
Leaving them in disgust, Välméki returned to the sage, who then told 
him to renounce his life of crime and become an ascetic. In order to 
bring about in Välméki a full sense of the temporality of life, Närada told 
him to meditate on the word mara, meaning “death.” Välméki thus 
constantly repeated the word mara, without realizing that he was, in 
effect, also repeating the holy name of Räma. By his meditation he 
became a powerful åñi. 
Räma decided to stay close to Välméki’s hermitage and He asked 
Lakñman to construct a cottage. Lakñman quickly erected a timber-
walled hut with a thatched roof. Räma lit a fire and, with roots gathered 
from nearby and cooked in the fire, He made offerings to the gods. He 
prayed to the Lokapälas, the principal deities who guard the universal 
quarters, asking them to sanctify and protect the dwelling. Then He 
entered it along with Sétä. Within that spacious two-roomed hut, Räma 
constructed an altar for the worship of Viñëu in accord with the 
instructions of scripture. Rejoicing at having found such a delightful 
place for Their residence, the three travelers settled down in peace.

132 
Chapter 2 
Devastation in Ayodhya 
After Räma and His party had gone into the jungle on the other side of 
the Ganges, Sumantra and Guha spent some time speaking together 
about Räma. Both were shocked and saddened to realize His firm 
intention to spend fourteen years in the deep forest. They had both 
been hoping that He would relent and perhaps return to Ayodhya to 
punish the evil Kaikeyi, who did not deserve any kindness. Or He could 
at least remain with Guha and his people, where He could be reached 
easily. Now He was gone. Guha heard from his spies about Räma’s 
meeting with Bharadväja, and His going on from there to the 
Chitrakuta mountain. Sadly, the Niñadha king returned to his own 
home in the city of Sringavera, from where he ruled over the forest 
tribes. 
As the reality of Räma’s departure sank in, Sumantra drove the chariot 
back toward Ayodhya. After two days traveling he arrived to find the 
city subdued and silent, overpowered by grief. Sumantra entered by the 
southern gate. As the empty chariot moved along the road, hundreds 
and thousands of people approached it crying, “O Räma! Have You 
really gone? Where is that faultless hero? Alas, we are forsaken and lost!”  
Sumantra, afflicted at hearing their laments, covered his head with his 
garment. He felt ashamed to have been the one who took Räma away. 
He made his way along the royal highway to Daçaratha’s palace, hearing 
the wails of the women who stood on the balconies of their houses, 
gazing upon the chariot now bereft of its passengers. 
Sumantra reached the palace and went quickly through the first seven 
gates, arriving at the eighth which led to the king’s inner chambers. He 
entered the large room and found the king seated on a couch, pale and 
withered from grief. The charioteer described his journey from Ayodhya 
with Räma. Daçaratha listened in complete silence and then, having 
heard of Räma’s definite entrance into the forest, fell senseless to the 
floor.

133 
Seeing their husband fallen, the ladies burst into tears. Kaushalya, 
assisted by Sumitra, lifted him up and said, “Why do you not reply to the 
charioteer, my lord? He has carried out a most difficult task on your 
behalf. Are you feeling ashamed for perpetrating such an unseemly act? 
Be fixed in your determination, O king, for you have firmly adhered to 
truth! Do not submit to this grief, as we who depend upon you will not 
be able to survive seeing you filled with such despair.” 
Kaushalya spoke with a faltering voice. Her dear son, whom she had not 
been able to go without seeing for even a day, was now gone for fourteen 
years. She dropped in a faint next to her husband. All the ladies flocked 
around, sprinkling cool scented water on the faces of the monarch and 
his queen, who lay like a god and his consort fallen from heaven. 
When Daçaratha awoke from his swoon he summoned Sumantra, who 
stood silently nearby. The charioteer was covered in dust and his face 
was streaked with tears. With folded hands, he stood respectfully before 
the king.  
Daçaratha sighed dolefully and said to Sumantra, “Where will Räma live 
now, taking shelter under a tree and sleeping on the bare ground? What 
will He eat? The prince has known only luxury and deserves the best of 
everything. Formerly He would always be followed by my great army; 
how can He now live alone in the desolate forest?” 
Although Räma and Lakñman had grown up to become fierce fighters, to 
the emperor They were still his tender young sons. Daçaratha could 
hardly tolerate the thought of Their living a life of austerity and 
abnegation, along with the gentle Sétä. Anxiously he imagined the scene 
facing his two boys. How could They survive in the wild among 
carnivorous animals and venomous snakes? 
The king continued, “Did you follow Them as they walked alone into 
some bleak and lonely land? What were Their last words? O Sumantra, 
pray tell me what They uttered as They were leaving, for this shall be my 
only sustenance for the coming fourteen years.” 
Daçaratha stood up and looked into his charioteer’s face, whose head 
hung down and who was shaking with sorrow. With a choked voice 
Sumantra replied to the king, “The ever-truthful Räma asked me to 
touch yours and Kaushalya’s feet on His behalf, O great king. He 
requested me to convey His fond farewell to all the ladies in the royal

134 
court, who are to Räma just like His own mother.” 
After bowing at the feet of the king and queen, Sumantra continued to 
speak with difficulty, describing his parting from Räma and the others. 
Faithfully he recounted the exact messages the two princes had given 
him.  
“Räma, who was constantly shedding tears as He spoke, asked that 
Bharata be quickly installed as the Prince Regent. He left instructions 
that Bharata should accord all respect to His aged father and to all of His 
mothers, especially the grief-stricken Kaushalya.” 
The charioteer then recalled the final angry words of Lakñman. “When 
Räma stopped speaking, Lakñman, hissing like an enraged cobra, said, 
‘For what offense has this virtuous prince been exiled? The king has 
carried out Kaikeyi’s order without considering its merit. Regardless of 
his reasoning, I find no justification whatsoever for the emperor’s 
decision to send away the sinless Räma. Räma’s exile will end in remorse. 
It contradicts all good sense and is against tradition and even scripture. 
Having performed an act which has caused nothing but pain to all the 
people, how can father remain as the king any longer? Indeed, I cannot 
even see in him the qualities of a father. For Me, Räma alone is My 
brother, master and father!’” 
Sumantra, having summoned up the vehemence with which Lakñman 
had spoken, calmed himself down and described his last sight of Sétä. 
“The blessed princess Sétä stood silent as I prepared to leave. As though 
Her mind were possessed by an evil spirit, She remained motionless and 
distracted, heaving deep sighs. Gazing upon Her husband’s face, She 
suddenly burst into tears, covering Her own face with Her two bejeweled 
hands, which looked like two white lotuses. Then the three of Them 
stood watching as I drove the chariot away.” 
Daçaratha asked Sumantra to describe his return journey and the 
charioteer replied, “I remained with Guha for three days, hoping and 
praying that Räma would return. Finally I concluded that I would not 
see Him again until the full fourteen years had expired. I yoked up the 
chariot and urged the horses to move, but they remained stationary, 
shedding tears of grief. After much cajoling they finally moved and I 
proceeded on the path back to Ayodhya.” 
Sumantra stopped speaking for some time as he struggled to control his

135 
feelings. After sipping a little water he continued describing the scene 
he had witnessed on his return. On all sides in the kingdom he saw signs 
of grief and separation from Räma. Even the trees with their flowers and 
leaves looked withered. The lakes and rivers were dried up and 
everywhere there were beasts and birds entirely immobile, not even 
searching for food. The woods were silent and gave off none of their 
former fragrance. The parks and gardens in the city appeared desolate 
and deserted. No one greeted him as he entered Ayodhya. Everywhere 
were sighing men and women, lost in thoughts of Räma. As they saw the 
empty chariot they let out tremendous cries of grief. Even the animals 
wore wretched expressions. On the tops of high buildings he saw noble 
ladies gazing mutely at each other, their eyes overflooded with tears. The 
city appeared devoid of all happiness, looking exactly like the empress 
Kaushalya, bereft of her beloved son. 
After Sumantra stopped speaking, Daçaratha became pensive, feeling 
extreme regret. How had he stood by as Räma had left? Why did he not 
reprimand the wicked Kaikeyi? He cursed his foolish attachment to 
virtue that brought about such an unvirtuous end. Where was the truth 
in banishing the truthful prince Räma? 
In a piteous voice the king exclaimed, “It was out of infatuation for my 
wife alone that I exiled Räma. I did not seek any counsel with my 
ministers and wise advisors, being dictated to by the sinful Kaikeyi.” 
Daçaratha wondered how he could have acted so contrary to his own 
good sense and wisdom. Surely this great calamity had suddenly 
happened by the will of Providence simply to destroy his race. The king 
sighed, feeling helpless in the hands of fate.  
Turning to Sumantra, Daçaratha said, “O charioteer, if I have ever done 
you any good turn, then please quickly take me to Räma! My mind is 
drawn irresistibly to the prince. If I am still the king today then let 
anyone fetch Räma back to Ayodhya! I shall not survive for even an 
hour longer without Räma! Where is that Räma, whose shining face is 
adorned with pearl-like teeth? Maybe that mighty-armed prince has 
gone far into the woods by now. Bring me a chariot and I shall 
immediately make haste to see Him. If I do not soon catch a sight of 
Räma, I shall reach Death’s abode this very day!” 
Daçaratha had been hoping beyond hope that Sumantra might somehow

136 
have returned with his sons. Realizing the finality of Räma’s departure, 
the king gave full vent to his terrible grief.  
“O Räma! O Lakñman! O Sétä! What could be more painful for me than 
not seeing You here? You do not know that I am dying from agony, like a 
lost and forlorn creature.” 
The emperor fell senseless onto a couch. Close to him Kaushalya tossed 
about on the floor as though possessed by a spirit. Seeing Sumantra she 
exclaimed, “Charioteer! Yoke up the chariot and take me to Räma, for I 
shall not live another moment without Him! Where now is my son 
reposing, His head placed upon His mighty arm? When again will I see 
His charming features surrounded by curling black locks? I think my 
heart is as hard as a diamond; otherwise, why does it not shatter to 
pieces even though I do not see Räma?” 
Sumantra felt all the more agonized himself as he saw the grief of the 
king and queen. He tried to comfort Kaushalya. “I think your son will 
settle happily in the forest along with Lakñman and Sétä. Indeed, I did 
not detect in Them any dejection at the prospect of living as ascetics. 
Shaking off Their grief, They appeared pleased upon approaching the 
forest. Sétä seemed especially happy; much delighted at the sights and 
sounds of the woods.” 
Kaushalya, not appeased by Sumantra’s kind words, turned toward 
Daçaratha, admonishing him out of grief and love. “My lord, you are 
famous in all the three worlds for your compassion and kindness, yet you 
thoughtlessly banished your faultless son! How will your two gentle boys, 
ever accustomed to every luxury, live like hermits? How will the frail 
Sétä, a child of a mere sixteen years, survive the ravages of forest life? 
She has always been offered the very best of cooked foods and will surely 
not survive on wild roots. How will She bear the terrible roars of lions 
and tigers?” 
Kaushalya became increasingly angry as she spoke. Her eyes reddened, 
and black streaks of collyrium ran down her cheeks. She censured 
Daçaratha for his cruelty. 
“You have utterly divested Räma of his right to be king,” she cried. 
“Even after returning to Ayodhya, Räma will surely not accept the 
kingdom. High-class men can never enjoy items left by others. Räma will 
therefore not accept the kingdom left by His younger brother, even as a

137 
tiger would not eat the food brought to him by another animal.” 
Kaushalya’s mind was absorbed in thoughts of her son and she raved 
inconsolably. How could Daçaratha have perpetrated such an evil act? 
Kaushalya railed at the king, holding her head in her hands.  
“Räma has been ruined by His own father, even as a brood of fish are 
swallowed by their father. I believe, my lord, that you can no longer tell 
right from wrong. The main support for a woman is her husband; the son 
is the second. Therefore, like Räma, I am also ruined, my husband 
having lost his good sense and my son gone away! This whole kingdom 
has been ruined by you. All your people have been destroyed. Only 
Kaikeyi and her son are happy!” 
Kaushalya stopped speaking and began to sob uncontrollably. Daçaratha, 
already deeply remorseful, felt even more anguish upon hearing his 
wife’s words. Crying out, “O Räma” again and again, he sat disconsolate. 
With great difficulty he gathered his senses and went before Kaushalya 
with folded hands, speaking in a trembling voice, his head hanging 
down.  
“Be kind to me, O godly lady. You are merciful even to your enemies. 
What then to speak of me. The husband is always the lord for the wife in 
good or evil times. Seeing me to be sorely pained, you should not 
increase my grief by such harsh words.” 
Kaushalya immediately felt sorry. She took Daçaratha’s hands and folded 
them around her head. Kneeling before him and weeping, she spoke 
hurriedly through her confusion.  
“Now I am surely ruined for having spoken words disagreeable to my 
husband. I deserve to be punished by you, who I know to be always 
truthful. She is a wicked and low-born woman who must be beseeched by 
her worthy and virtuous husband.” 
Kaushalya was afflicted by many strong feelings and her mind became 
completely distracted. Her grief, despair and anger at losing Räma were 
now compounded by remorse and guilt at having upset Daçaratha. She 
had spoken in an almost hysterical manner. 
“Pray forgive me, O great king. Overcome by grief I uttered unseemly 
words. Grief destroys patience, eradicates knowledge and confounds the 
senses. Indeed, there is no enemy like grief. Even a great blow from an 
enemy can be endured, but the smallest amount of grief is intolerable.

138 
The five nights that Räma has been gone seem to me like five years. 
Even as I remember Räma again my grief grows like the ocean receiving 
the rapid flow of many large rivers.” 
As Kaushalya was speaking the sun set. Daçaratha, being comforted by 
his wife, fell into a fitful slumber for an hour. Upon waking he sat 
sighing and recalled something he had done when he was a young 
prince. Realizing that long past deed to be the cause of his present 
suffering, Daçaratha related it to Kaushalya. 
“Without doubt a person receives the results of his own actions, good or 
bad, O gracious queen,” the king said. “He who acts without 
consideration of the results, both immediate and long-term, is surely a 
fool. If a man cuts down a mango grove because the trees have 
unattractive blossoms, planting instead the brightly flowering palasha 
trees, he will later lament when the bitter fruits of the palasha appear. 
By sending Räma away I have indeed cut down a mango grove just as it 
was about to bear fruit. Now I am tasting the bitter palasha.” 
Daçaratha felt as if his heart might burst. He maintained his composure 
with a great effort and continued. “A long time ago, as a youth and 
before we were married, I went to the forest to hunt. I had acquired 
great skills at bowmanship and could easily hit even an invisible target 
by its sound alone. Little did I know that this skill of mine, of which I 
was so proud, would yield such a disastrous result. 
“It was the rainy season and the rivers were swollen. Going out at night 
on my chariot, I made my way to the Sarayu. I waited there in the 
darkness by the river bank for a buffalo or an elephant to come by. Soon 
I heard the sound of gurgling at a point nearby, although I could not see 
what caused the sound. Thinking the sound to be that of an animal 
drinking, I took out an arrow and released it. From the quarter where I 
shot my snake-like arrow there came a loud wail of some forest dweller. 
In distinct and pain-filled tones I heard the following cry: 
“How has this weapon fallen upon a harmless ascetic like myself? To 
whom have I given any offense? I am a simple seer who has forsworn 
violence and lives only on fruits and roots. Oh, I am killed! What foolish 
person has hurled this arrow? This act will result only in evil. I do not 
grieve so much for myself but for my aged and helpless parents. Without 
me, their sole support, how will they survive? With a single arrow some

139 
ignorant fool of uncontrolled mind has killed me and both my parents!’” 
Weeping all the while, Daçaratha continued, “When I heard that 
plaintive shout I was mortified. My bow and arrows fell from my hands. I 
was all but overwhelmed with grief and dropped to the ground, almost 
losing my senses. I scrambled toward the source of the voice with my 
mind utterly perplexed. There, lying on the bank of the river, was an 
ascetic wearing tree-bark garments. My arrow was protruding from his 
chest. Smeared with dust and blood, with his thick mass of matted hair 
in disarray, he lay groaning. He had come for water and the sound I had 
heard was the gurgling of his pitcher, which lay nearby with its water 
run out.  
“Seeing me to be royalty, the ascetic looked up at me with bloodshot eyes 
and spoke angrily. ‘What wrong have I done, O king, that I should 
receive this terrible punishment? I came here to fetch water for my blind 
parents. Even now, as I lie here dying, my poor father must be 
wondering where I am. But what can he do? He is old and feeble and 
cannot even move. He can no more help me than could any tree help 
another which is about to be hewn down. Seek his forgiveness, O king. 
You should quickly make your way along this path to where he waits.’” 
Daçaratha’s grief for Räma was compounded by the grief caused by 
remembering this long past unfortunate incident. With difficulty he 
continued to speak. 
“The young hermit, writhing in agony, asked me to extract the arrow. I 
hesitated, knowing that the instant the arrow was removed he would die. 
The boy reassured me, telling me that he was prepared for death. I thus 
pulled out the arrow. Looking at me in dismay, due to anxiety about his 
parents, the boy died, uttering the name of Viñëu. 
“Seeing the ascetic lying dead, killed by me out of ignorance and folly, I 
wondered how I could make amends. I quickly filled his pitcher and 
followed the path he had shown me toward his parents. As I reached the 
hermitage I saw his aged and blind parents, sitting forlorn like a pair of 
birds whose wings have been clipped. When he heard me approach, the 
boy’s father said, ‘Do not delay, my son. Bring the water immediately. 
Your poor mother is in anxiety because you have been sporting in the 
river for a long time. Our lives depend upon you, dear child. You are our 
only support and indeed our very eyes. Where are you? Why do you not

140 
speak?’ 
“I was gripped by fear to behold the sage and I replied to him in a 
faltering voice, ‘O holy sage, I am not your son but a prince named 
Daçaratha. I have committed a most terrible and evil act out of sheer 
folly. Hearing your son collecting water, I mistook him for a beast 
drinking. I released a deadly arrow and killed the boy. As a result of my 
rash act your son has ascended to heaven, leaving you here. Please tell 
me what I should do now.’ 
“When he heard my story, the sage, though rich in ascetic power and 
thereby capable of burning me with a curse, restrained himself. Sighing 
in sorrow with his face bathed in tears, that old åñi, who appeared 
exceptionally glorious, said to me, ‘Had you not come here and 
confessed, then as soon as the news of my boy’s death reached me, your 
head would have been split into a hundred pieces by my anger. Indeed, if 
one consciously kills a hermit engaged in austerity, then death is the 
immediate result. You are only surviving now as you performed this deed 
in ignorance.’ 
“The sage asked me to take him to the place where his son lay. I 
immediately lifted both of the elderly ascetics on my two arms and 
carried them to the river bank. Being placed near the dead boy they 
cried out in agony and gently stroked his face. The sage said, ‘Why do 
you not greet us today, dearest child? Why are you lying here upon the 
ground? Have you become displeased with us? Here is your beloved 
mother. Why do you not embrace her, my tender son? Please speak to us. 
Whose heart-moving voice will we now hear beautifully reciting the 
holy Vedic texts? Who now will tend the sacred fire? Who will comfort 
us with consoling words, deprived as we are now of our only support? My 
son, how will I be able to support your old mother?’ 
“The sage sat weeping for some time, lost in grief. Holding his son’s head 
he said, ‘Pray wait a while, dear boy, and do not yet proceed to 
Yamaräja’s abode. I shall go with you and speak to the god on your 
behalf, saying, “Although my son has been killed as a result of some 
former sin, he has in fact become sinless. Therefore grant to him those 
regions which are attainable only by Brahmins perfect in asceticism and 
study of scripture, or by heroes who drop their body while fighting 
fearlessly for the good of the people.”’

141 
“Wailing piteously, the ascetic and his wife offered sanctified water to 
their dead son with mantras and prayers. I then saw the boy appear in an 
ethereal form along with Indra, the king of heaven. He gently consoled 
his parents, saying that he had achieved his exalted status as a result of 
his service to them. He said they would soon join him in heaven. The 
boy then left, seated next to Indra in a shining celestial car. 
“At that time the sage said to me, ‘In order to release you from the 
terrible sin of killing an ascetic, which can drag even the gods down to 
hell, I shall pronounce upon you a painful curse. Just as I am dying now 
in the agony of separation from my son, so in the future shall you die in 
the grief of separation from your son.’ 
“After saying this, the sage had me light a fire and place upon it his son’s 
body. Along with his wife he then entered the fire. The two ascetics 
gave up their bodies and went to heaven, leaving me stunned and 
pondering the sage’s words.” 
Daçaratha was suddenly afraid as he realized that, in accord with the 
sage’s infallible curse, his death was now near. Controlling his mind he 
called out for Kaushalya. His eyes were blinded with tears and his body 
was trembling. He said to his wife, “That curse uttered so long ago by the 
sage is now coming to pass. I shall soon die of grief. Come here, 
Kaushalya, for I cannot see you clearly. Men on the threshold of death 
have all their senses confounded.” 
Kaushalya sat close to her husband and comforted him with soft words. 
Daçaratha became deeply absorbed in remembrance of Räma. He longed 
for one last sight of Him. He felt anguished and remorseful, wishing he 
had somehow been able to stop Räma from leaving. The king lay back 
upon the couch and spoke in a trembling voice. 
“This grief is drying up my vitality even as the blazing summer sun sucks 
out the earth’s moisture. Blessed are they who will see the pious and 
handsome Räma returned fourteen years from now. I can no longer see 
or hear anything. All my senses are failing along with my mind, just as 
the bright rays of a lamp disappear when its oil has run out. This grief 
born of my own self is rendering me helpless and unconscious, just as the 
current of a swift river wears away its own bank. O Räma, reliever of my 
suffering, are you really gone? O Kaushalya, my dear wife! O Sumitra, 
pious lady! O Kaikeyi, my sworn enemy and disgrace of my family!”

142 
Daçaratha lamented and tossed about in agony for some time. Gradually 
he became silent, his mind fixed only upon Räma. Stricken with the 
intolerable pain of separation, the great emperor gave up his life during 
the night and ascended to the highest abode of the Supreme Lord. 
Chapter 3 
Bharata’s Return 
The following morning large numbers of singers and bards assembled at 
the palace with the intention of waking the king. They stood near his 
quarters and began their recitations, praising the emperor and telling of 
his ancestors’ glorious deeds. Holy Brahmins chanted sacred texts while 
expert musicians played on various instruments. Those chants and songs 
mixed with the singing of the birds on the palace trees and created an 
exquisitely beautiful sound. 
The palace attendants, unaware of the king’s demise, gathered together 
the items required for his morning ablutions. Gold pots filled with 
scented water, along with many soaps and unguents were fetched. In 
accord with the Vedic tradition, young virgin girls, along with milk cows 
and other pure items like gold and silver, were brought before the king 
so that he would see these immediately upon waking, thereby creating 
an auspicious start to the day. 
When everything was made ready just before sunrise, the royal ladies 
went into the king’s chamber to wake him. As they approached his bed 
they saw him lying motionless and showing no symptoms of life. Nearby 
Kaushalya and Sumitra were lying asleep, exhausted from grief. Their 
faces were tear-streaked and withered like lotuses scorched by the sun. 
The palace ladies fell back in alarm and began to shake like reeds in a 
stream. They touched the king’s body and, finding him cold and lifeless, 
realized he had died from grief. All those beautiful women began to wail 
loudly, like a herd of female elephants who have lost their lord in the 
forest. 
Kaushalya and Sumitra were roused by the sound. Looking at the

143 
emperor and touching him, they cried out, “My lord!” and dropped to 
the ground. Kaikeyi ran into the room and she too became afflicted by 
pain and sorrow, falling down unconscious. The three queens tossed 
about on the ground lamenting loudly. They appeared like three 
goddesses fallen from heaven, deprived of their splendor. The whole 
chamber became crowded with men and women, all alarmed, bustling 
about excitedly. With the sudden death of the king everyone became 
perplexed and confused. Loud cries filled the air. The king’s three 
hundred maidservants surrounded him on all sides, weeping piteously. 
Kaushalya looked at her husband’s face, which seemed like the sun shorn 
of its luster. Kneeling by his side she held his head and began to loudly 
reprimand Kaikeyi.  
“O cruel Kaikeyi, are you now satisfied? Having killed the king you may 
now enjoy the throne without fear. Räma has forsaken me and gone to 
the forest and now my husband has ascended to heaven. I cannot live 
any longer. Only Kaikeyi, casting all propriety to the winds, could live 
happily after seeing her husband die in agony. O cruel lady, you have 
destroyed our noble race!” 
Kaushalya embraced her dead husband. She thought of Räma, Sétä and 
Lakñman. How would They learn of Their father’s death? What will 
They do when They hear of it? Even now poor Sétä must be clinging 
fearfully to Räma, terrified by the sights and sounds of the forest. If this 
painful news should reach Her, surely She will die. 
Kaushalya could not tolerate any more grief. Tearfully she cried out to 
Kaikeyi, “You have killed me as surely as you have killed the king. I shall 
enter the fire clinging to my lord’s body.” 
With difficulty the king’s ministers separated Kaushalya from Daçaratha. 
They gently removed her from his chamber and began to perform the 
necessary rituals for the death of a king. As none of Daçaratha’s sons 
were present, They could not perform his funeral. Therefore, in order to 
preserve the body until Bharata arrived, they immersed it in a vat of 
fragrant oil. 
The city of Ayodhya, already plunged in sorrow, became even more 
desolate. The people cried out their distress and everything remained 
still, no one going out for any business. The great city looked like a dark 
night bereft of the moon and stars. Loudly reproaching Kaikeyi in

144 
choked voices, the citizens grieved throughout the day and night, 
finding no rest. 
The following day the king’s Brahmin counselors assembled together. 
Looking toward Vasiñöha, who was temporarily carrying out the king’s 
duties, the wise sages made different speeches pointing to the need for a 
prince to be quickly coronated. The sages described how, without a ruler, 
the kingdom would soon meet with ruin. In a land without a king even 
the rain would not fall in proper time and the crops would fail. Sons 
would disobey their fathers and wives their husbands. There could be no 
personal property without a protector and men could not sleep in peace. 
Everything would become chaotic and anarchy would soon prevail. Like 
fishes, men would devour one another. Atheism would become 
prominent and godless and misbehaved men would become leaders. 
One of the chief Brahmins concluded, “Even as the eyes protect the 
body, so the king is ever vigilant to protect the people. The king is 
truthfulness and virtue incarnate. He is the mother and the father and 
the best benefactor of all men. All the principal gods reside in the body 
of the king; indeed he is the powerful representative of the Supreme 
Lord Viñëu. Therefore, O Vasiñöha, have Bharata and Shatrughna 
brought home. Quickly crown a qualified man as king, before this 
ancient and prosperous kingdom is thrown into utter confusion and 
darkness!” 
When the Brahmin sages had finished speaking they sat awaiting 
Vasiñöha’s opinion. Vasiñöha looked around the assembly and replied, 
“We should immediately send swift messengers to the Kekaya capital, 
Girivraja. Since the emperor has bestowed this kingdom upon Bharata, 
He must be brought here as quickly as possible and installed as king. No 
other course of action can be considered.” 
Vasiñöha wanted Bharata to be brought home before the news of His 
father’s death and Räma’s exile reached Him. Bharata should be 
informed of the heartbreaking news while surrounded by His intimate 
family. Vasiñöha said to the messengers, “Tell the prince that all is well, 
but that He is required for some urgent business. Take with you 
excellent gifts for the Kekaya king and leave at once.” 
The messengers mounted upon the best of the king’s horses, which were 
capable of covering hundreds of miles a day, and sped westwards toward

145 
Girivraja. They took the shortest possible route, at times leaving the 
road and traversing open countryside and woods. They crossed the 
Mäliné River, which flowed between the Aparatala and Pralamba 
Mountains, and also the Ganges where it flowed through Hastinäpura. 
Moving quickly through the Païchäla and Kurujangala provinces, the 
messengers reached the Saradanda River at the end of the second day. 
After crossing that river they entered the city of Kulinga, hardly pausing 
for a moment. Galloping together they passed through the city and soon 
crossed the Ikshumati River, then the Beas and Salmali Rivers, finally 
arriving at the Kekaya district at the end of the third day. With their 
horses all but exhausted, they entered the city of Girivraja and went 
straight toward the king’s palace just as dawn approached. 
* * * 
In His palace Bharata had just risen and was feeling disturbed. He had 
awoken from a dream filled with inauspicious omens. He sat alone, sunk 
in thought. Some of His friends approached Him and inquired why He 
looked so sad. Bharata replied, “In a dream I saw My father looking 
dejected, falling from the peak of a mountain into a filthy pool. He 
seemed to be laughing and he swam around in that pool. I then saw the 
ocean dry, the moon fallen upon the earth and the entire world assailed 
by demons. My father, dressed in black, wearing a crimson garland and 
smeared with red sandal-paste, got upon a chariot drawn by donkeys and 
rode southwards.” 
Bharata knew the science of omens and dreams. He understood that 
these visions clearly indicated His father’s death, or perhaps the death of 
one of His brothers. Sighing heavily, the prince continued. “My throat 
feels parched and I am gripped by anxiety. Suddenly I hate Myself for no 
reason. Surely some great calamity is imminent.” 
As Bharata spoke, a messenger entered His room to announce the 
arrival of envoys from Ayodhya. They came before Bharata and bowed 
low, touching His feet and saying, “We have been sent by the sage 
Vasiñöha. He sends word that all is well, but he requires Your immediate 
presence in Ayodhya for some urgent business.” 
On behalf of Daçaratha, the envoys presented their gifts to the Kekaya 
king and his son. The messengers were feeling fatigued from their

146 
journey, so Bharata had them seated and served with the best of food 
and drink. He tried to find out from them the exact nature of the 
business for which Vasiñöha was summoning Him. Thinking of His 
dream, he asked about His father and other dear relatives. The 
messengers answered His questions politely, carefully avoiding telling 
Him about His father’s death or Räma’s exile. Bharata could 
nevertheless sense that something was terribly wrong. He wanted to 
depart immediately and He went to King Aswapati, requesting his 
permission to leave. The king embraced Him and said, “In you my 
daughter Kaikeyi is blessed with a noble son. Leave now with my 
blessings, but return again when Your business is complete.” 
The king of Kekaya presented Bharata with many gifts to take to 
Ayodhya. Huge elephants, horses, costly cloth and much gold were given 
by King Aswapati. He also quickly arranged for a detachment of his best 
soldiers to accompany Bharata.  
Bharata received the gifts with gratitude to the best of His ability, but 
His mind was distracted. He was anxious and could not wait to depart. 
Taking leave of His friends and relations, Bharata mounted His chariot 
along with Shatrughna and They hurriedly left. Followed by hundreds of 
other chariots, as well as by the thousands of elephants and horses gifted 
by the king, the prince of Ayodhya went out of the city looking like a 
god leaving the heavenly city of Indra. 
* * * 
For seven days Bharata and His party traveled to Ayodhya. The prince 
longed to race ahead, taking the shorter route through the woods as did 
the messengers from Ayodhya, but He was hampered by His large 
retinue. They went along the established roads and passed through many 
villages and towns, but they did not stop anywhere.  
Bharata’s mind was filled with apprehension. What could possibly be 
wrong, especially in the presence of Räma and Lakñman? Had Their 
father died? Was some powerful enemy besieging the city? Perhaps it was 
simply that His father wished to install Räma as the king. But why had 
the messengers not told Him? 
As the party reached the territory of Koçala, Bharata urged on His 
charioteer. His chariot went quickly ahead, leaving the army, headed by

147 
Shatrughna, to follow slowly behind. He soon arrived at Ayodhya. 
Looking at the city from a distance, Bharata said to His charioteer, 
“Something is surely amiss in this great and glorious city. I do not hear 
the usual clamor of men, nor the sound of sacred recitations made by 
throngs of Brahmins as they perform sacrifices. Even the animals are 
silent. No one is moving about on the roads and no one has come out to 
greet Me.” 
As they passed along the main road into the city Bharata became even 
more concerned. Where were the young couples who would always sport 
romantically in the gardens lining the road? The trees in those deserted 
gardens, with their leaves falling all around, seemed to Bharata to be 
weeping. As He rode quickly into the city He saw various ill omens. 
Crows and vultures cried on all sides. The sun was enveloped by dark 
clouds and a chill wind blew, raising up clouds of dust and leaves. 
Bharata reached the city’s western gate. The guards, gladdened to see 
Him, welcomed Him with loud shouts. The prince moved on after 
politely greeting the sentries. He was tired and His mind was dejected 
and disturbed. He spoke again to His charioteer. “Why have I been 
suddenly brought here, O noble one? I wonder what terrible calamity has 
occurred. Even without any apparent cause My heart is sinking and My 
mind is consumed by fear.” 
The prince looked around as the chariot sped toward Daçaratha’s palace. 
He saw signs which seemed to Him to indicate the king’s death. Houses 
were unswept, dirty-looking and bereft of splendor, their doors standing 
wide open. There was no smoke from sacrificial fires rising up, nor the 
usual sweet aroma of aloe and sandalwood drifting from the mansions 
along the road. Men and women were standing here and there, wearing 
soiled clothes and looking pale and emaciated, as if they had not eaten 
for days. 
Bharata looked at the closed shop fronts and abandoned market places, 
the temples with their dusty courtyards and the deities without fresh 
dresses or garlands—everything seemed desolate. Filled with sorrow to 
see the unprecedented state of His beloved city, the prince arrived at 
Daçaratha’s palace.  
Bharata went quickly into His father’s rooms and was alarmed to find 
the king not present. Everyone looked down to avert His gaze. The

148 
palace ladies were weeping and a sorrowful silence had replaced the 
normal sound of drums, lutes and Vedic recitations. Bharata felt His 
stomach sink and His limbs seemed to dissolve. Too afraid to ask about 
His father from the people present, He ran to His mother’s apartments. 
As He entered, Kaikeyi sprang up from her golden seat. Bharata bowed 
and touched His mother’s feet and she embraced Him. It had been a long 
time since she had seen Him.  
Holding her son and seating Him on her lap, Kaikeyi inquired, “How was 
your journey, my son? You must be tired. Are Your grandfather and 
uncle both well? Have You fared well Yourself while living in their 
kingdom? I have missed You here.” 
After hearing her endearing questions, Bharata told her everything 
about Himself. Still filled with apprehension, He asked, “How is it that I 
do not see the king seated here with you? Where indeed is My pious 
father? Why do I find everyone looking disconsolate and not speaking? I 
long to clasp My father’s feet. Tell Me, gentle mother, is he just now in 
Kaushalya’s apartments?” 
Possessed by greed for the kingdom, Kaikeyi began to tell her son the 
terrible news as if it were agreeable and pleasant. “Your high-souled and 
glorious father, who was always the shelter of all living beings, has 
attained the state of the gods. This kingdom is now Yours.” 
Bharata looked at His mother in disbelief. He fell to His knees. Crying 
out “Alas, I am ruined!” He struck His arms on the floor. His worst fear 
was confirmed. With His mind confused and agitated, Bharata lamented. 
“This golden couch would always appear beautiful being adorned with 
the king’s presence. Now it appears dark and lusterless like the night sky 
bereft of the moon. Oh, where is My noble father?” 
Bharata covered His handsome face with a cloth and cried in anguish. 
Seeing her son, whose body shone like that of a god, laying on the floor 
in a wretched state, Kaikeyi raised Him and said, “Get up, O king! Why 
are you lying here like one unfortunate? Virtuous souls like You are 
never overwhelmed by grief. Steady Your mind, which is always fixed in 
piety and knows the truth. This wide earth now awaits Your rule, O 
sinless one.” 
Bharata wept for some time, unable to speak. He remembered His 
father’s love and affection, how the king had personally trained Him in

149 
statecraft, how they had played and sported together, the times He had 
sat with His father as he related tales of their great ancestors. Now he 
was gone! How could it have happened? Bharata could not understand 
why no one had called Him earlier. Calming His mind He said, “Having 
speculated that the king was to install Räma as the Prince Regent, I 
came here swiftly. It seems My calculation was wrong, as I do not see 
either My father or Räma.” 
The prince was confused. His mother sat calmly as He spoke out His 
grief. “Of what disease did My father die, O mother? How fortunate are 
Räma and Lakñman that they were able to perform the last rites of the 
great monarch. Or is My father still present? Surely he does not know I 
have arrived or else he would have come quickly to see Me, embracing 
Me and offering his blessings. Where is that gentle hand which would 
often brush Me off when I would fall in the dust as a child?” 
Bharata looked up into His mother’s face, His eyes streaming. “Please 
announce My arrival to Räma. For a man who knows what is right, the 
elder brother is as good as the father. I shall fall at Räma’s feet and ask 
Him what final words were spoken by the righteous and ever-truthful 
king. I wish to hear My father’s last kind message to Me.” 
Kaikeyi slowly replied to her son, telling Him the course of events 
exactly as they occurred. “The glorious king, the best among the wise, 
departed from this world calling out, ‘O Räma! O Sétä! O Lakñman!’ 
Bound by the laws of time, even as a powerful elephant is bound by 
ropes, the king submitted to death saying, ‘Only those men who will see 
Räma returned with Sétä and Lakñman will have their desires fulfilled 
and be happy.’” 
Hearing this news Bharata became even more confused. What did the 
king mean? Where were His brothers and Sétä? He asked His mother. 
Kaikeyi began to relate how They had left for the forest, speaking as if it 
were something Bharata would be pleased to hear. “Prince Räma, with 
Sétä and Lakñman, left the city clad in tree barks. They have gone to a 
distant forest and will remain there for fourteen years.” 
Bharata was shocked. How could it be true? Surely Räma could not have 
been exiled. What crime could He possibly have committed?  
The prince spoke in amazement. “Did Räma wrongly seize property from 
some elevated Brahmin? Did My brother somehow kill a sinless man?

150 
Surely He did not look longingly upon another’s wife. I cannot imagine 
Räma ever doing anything even remotely sinful. Why then has He gone 
into exile accompanied by the delicate Sétä and His loyal brother?” 
Kaikeyi completely misunderstood Bharata’s mood. Out of ignorance she 
imagined He would be pleased to hear that, thanks to her machinations, 
He had become the undisputed ruler. She smiled as she spoke to her son. 
“Räma has committed no sin. However, entirely neglecting Your noble 
self, the king was intent upon installing Him as the Prince Regent. As 
soon as this news reached me I asked Your father to send Räma away 
and install You instead.” 
Bharata’s face froze as His mother continued. 
“Bound by truthfulness, the emperor did my bidding and granted me two 
boons which were owed from a former occasion. After exiling Räma, 
who was followed by Sétä and Lakñman, the king was sorely afflicted 
with an unbearable grief. Overwhelmed with pain and constantly calling 
Räma’s name, the lord of Ayodhya left this world and ascended to 
heaven.” 
Kaikeyi saw Bharata’s pained expression. “Do not yield to grief, dear son. 
This city and indeed this earth now depend upon You. Be firm and 
perform Your father’s funeral ceremony, O Bharata. Then assume the 
throne as the undisputed ruler of the globe.” 
Bharata could not believe what He was hearing. Had His mother gone 
mad? Did she really think He envied Räma and coveted the throne? 
Covering His face with His hands and slowly shaking His head, He 
replied to the shameless Kaikeyi, “What came into your mind, O cruel 
woman, that you could have perpetrated such an act? What possible gain 
is there for Me in having the sovereignty of the earth while I stand 
deprived of My dearest relations? By sending My father to the next 
world and Räma to the forest you have heaped calamity upon calamity!” 
The prince was infuriated. His mother’s actions were unforgiveable. 
Kaikeyi shrunk back as He roared, piercing her with volleys of words. 
“You have appeared in My family like the goddess Kalaratri, the night of 
universal dissolution! Having clasped you to his bosom My father has 
brought about his own death and the extermination of his race. O 
woman who sees evil where there is none, you have ended My family’s 
joy through greed alone. Tell Me the reason that impelled you to kill the

151 
king and exile the sinless Räma.” 
Aghast at her son’s vehement reaction, Kaikeyi tried to defend herself. 
She spoke candidly, telling Him about her conversation with Manthara. 
“O prince, I would surely have said nothing to Your father, but 
Manthara pointed out how You were being wronged. My dear son, I 
simply acted with Your interests in mind.” 
This only angered Bharata all the more. In grief and anger He stood 
blazing like fire. With copper-red eyes He gazed at His mother who sat 
on a couch with her head cast downwards. “Alas,” He continued, His 
voice incredulous, “I am shamed by My own mother! Having got you for 
their co-wife, the godly Kaushalya and Sumitra have been tormented 
with agony. How did you not grieve, O hard-hearted one, when you saw 
those gentle ladies weeping as their heroic sons left for the forest? Are 
you happy to see your husband lying dead, Räma with Sétä and Lakñman 
banished, and your remaining family seized with unbearable pain?” 
Bharata wept aloud while Kaikeyi sat silently. He was astonished at His 
mother’s deeds. What on earth had possessed her? She had never acted 
like this before. She had always loved Räma as much as her own son. 
How could she possibly think it would please Him to gain the 
sovereignty in this terrible way? 
Bharata went on fiercely. “Blinded by lust you have clearly not 
understood My devotion to Räma. I will never take this kingdom in His 
absence! My strength and intelligence depend only upon My powerful 
brother. Räma should certainly become the king while I become His 
humble servant. I can no more take the weight of the kingdom than a 
young calf can take the load borne easily by a bull. Even if I were able to 
rule without Räma, I will never allow you to achieve your cherished end. 
I would sooner die!” 
Bharata’s mind raged. Kaikeyi’s insane action had to be somehow 
reversed. He resolved to go immediately to the forest and find Räma. He 
first had to establish to Räma that Kaikeyi’s abhorrent acts had nothing 
to do with Him. What must Räma be thinking? Surely He would not 
believe that His own devoted brother was in any way guilty! Did anyone 
think that? Bharata was horrified. He rounded on Kaikeyi again.  
“I cannot stand by and watch the path of morality abandoned as a result 
of your sinful desires. The eternal moral code prescribes that the king’s

152 
eldest son should inherit the throne—especially when that son is the 
most highly qualified and beloved of all the people. I shall doubtlessly 
bring back Räma from the forest. O evil-minded one, you will never see 
Me installed as the king!” 
Bharata continued to reproach His mother with sharp words. Kaikeyi 
remained silent, her mind bewildered. Bharata’s reaction was quite 
unexpected and she did not know how to reply.  
Bharata shook His head. “Since you have committed a hideous sin, you 
shall surely reside in hell. There you shall wail endlessly with none of 
your desired objects attained. Do not say anything to Me, evil lady. I 
hereby desert you! You are neither My mother nor the emperor’s wife. 
Without doubt you are a wicked Räkñasé who entered My family in the 
guise of a relation.” 
Bharata hissed like an enraged serpent. Immediate remedial action was 
required. He would bring Räma back and then take His place in the 
forest to fulfill His vow! How could He possibly remain in Ayodhya 
among the grieving citizens while Räma sat in some lonely wilderness?  
The prince pointed angrily at His mother as He went on. “For your part, 
cruel woman, you had best either enter fire, swallow poison or go 
yourself to the forest. There is no other course left for you to free 
yourself from the stain of your sinful deed. I myself shall be freed of this 
sin only when Räma has been brought back and installed upon the 
throne.” 
Bharata fell to the floor almost senseless with grief. With His garments 
in dissaray and his jewels tossed about, the prince looked like a banner 
raised in honor of Indra and suddenly dropped down again. 
While Bharata lay absorbed in sorrow, Daçaratha’s ministers, having 
heard the commotion in Kaikeyi’s rooms, gathered around. After some 
time Bharata regained His senses and saw the ministers surrounding 
Him. Rising up quickly, the prince again rebuked His mother, who sat, 
miserable, her eyes full of tears.  
Bharata turned toward the king’s advisors and said in a loud voice, “At 
no time did this sinful woman consult with Me concerning Räma’s exile. 
I have never coveted the kingdom. Indeed, I knew nothing of the 
intended installation of Räma. I was far away from Ayodhya. Only today 
have I learned all the facts from My mother, whom I utterly reject.”

153 
Kaushalya, whose rooms were nearby, heard Bharata’s voice. She got up, 
desiring to speak to the prince. Bharata was also thinking of Kaushalya. 
He ran out of Kaikeyi’s apartments accompanied by Shatrughna. As 
they went toward Kaushalya, they saw her in the passageway. She was 
dressed in white silks and appeared pale and emaciated. Her body was 
trembling and she seemed distracted. As she saw the two princes 
approaching she cried out and collapsed to the floor. Bharata and 
Shatrughna quickly lifted her up and she embraced the brothers, who 
were both weeping.  
The distraught queen said to Bharata, “You may now enjoy this kingdom 
stripped of all its enemies. Surely You hankered for the sovereignty and 
now Your mother has fully secured it for You. The cruel Kaikeyi has sent 
away my son as an ascetic. She should now send me away as well. 
Otherwise I shall place at my head the sacrificial fire and, followed by 
Sumitra, proceed happily along the road taken by Räma. In any event I 
cannot remain here any longer.” 
Kaushalya sobbed as she spoke. “Your mother has served you well, O 
Bharata! Your plan has succeeded. Rule now this wide earth abounding 
in riches, but first, please take me to wherever my high-souled son is 
staying. I shall spend my days with Him in the forest.” 
The queen bitterly reproached Bharata with many painful words. 
Hearing this the prince was stunned and He practically lost 
consciousness, His mind utterly confused. He fell at Kaushalya’s feet and 
cried out. Kneeling before her with joined palms, Bharata said, “Surely 
you know My love for Räma, O noble lady. How could you even imagine 
that I am in any way guilty of conspiring with Kaikeyi? I found out only 
today of this terrible turn of events.” 
Bharata clasped Kaushalya’s feet. Did she really believe He was a party 
to Räma’s exile? The prince spoke from His heart. “Let the man who 
agrees to Räma’s exile reap the sins that follow every kind of wicked act 
condemned in the scriptures! Let him roam about this world like a 
madman, clad in rags and begging for his food. Let him never take 
delight in piety and truth. Let all his wealth be looted by robbers. Let 
him fall victim to every kind of disease. Let him never attain the higher 
regions inhabited by the gods. Indeed, let that merciless and evil man 
fall down to the darkest hell and remain there forever!”

154 
The prince expressed His anger to Kaushalya, pleading His innocence by 
making numerous difficult oaths. He was mortified to think that anyone 
could imagine Him in any way inimical to Räma. 
The queen was reassured by Bharata’s words. She had spoken only out of 
her own anguish. In her heart she knew the prince was innocent. Gently 
stroking His head she said, “My agony is aggravated by Your pain, dear 
son. Surely You are free of all sins. Your mind has not deviated from 
righteousness and You are true to Your word. You will doubtlessly reach 
the realms of the virtuous, my child.” 
As Kaushalya and Bharata spoke together, remembering Räma and the 
king, they both fell to the floor, overpowered by grief. The palace 
attendants then helped them to their rooms, where they lay in a fitful 
sleep. 
Chapter 4 
‘We Shall Bring Räma Back’  
The next day as twilight approached Vasiñöha came to Bharata and said, 
“Rise up now, O prince, and shake off this grief! The time has come to 
perform Your father’s funeral. Come quickly, O Bharata, for the 
ceremony is long overdue!” 
Seeing the sage, Bharata fell prostrate at his feet, saying “So be it.” After 
quickly bathing and changing His clothes, He went with Vasiñöha to the 
place where His father’s body was lying in its tank of oil. Vasiñöha had 
Daçaratha’s body brought out and laid upon a golden bier studded with 
numerous bright jewels.  
As he gazed at His father, Bharata lamented. “O great king, you always 
knew right from wrong! After sending Räma and Lakñman into exile, 
what did you intend to do? How shall I act now, my lord? Alas I am lost! 
Where have you gone, dear father, leaving this servant of yours 
distressed and forlorn? Where now is that glorious Räma who performs 
great deeds with little exertion?” 
Bharata stood at His father’s feet. Daçaratha lay covered with white silks

155 
and adorned with royal ornaments. Bharata cried to him piteously. “Now 
that you have left for the heavens, O king, who will protect the people? 
Deprived of you this earth no longer appears attractive. Indeed, this city 
of Ayodhya looks like a dark night bereft of the moon.” 
Vasiñöha came up to Bharata and said, “Gather Yourself together, O 
prince. You should now carry out the last rites for the king with a cool 
mind.” 
Bharata asked the priests to proceed with the ceremony. The Brahmins 
brought out from the king’s apartments his sacred fire, which he had 
maintained throughout his life. Placing the fire at their head they 
carried the king to the cremation ground, their throats choked with 
sorrow. As the procession made its way along the road, the citizens came 
out of their houses and walked ahead, scattering flowers and pieces of 
new cloth on the road. 
At the cremation ground on the bank of the Sarayu, the priests prepared 
a pyre with various types of fragrant woods. They placed Daçaratha upon 
the pyre and began to chant the sacred hymns of the Säma Veda to 
invoke good fortune. Bharata took a flame from the king’s sacrificial fire 
and lit the pyre. The king’s wives, along with the princes and priests, 
then circumambulated the fire, their hearts burning with grief.  
The women wailed piteously. Kaushalya and Sumitra fell to the ground, 
crying like a pair of female cranes. Although they both longed to ascend 
the pyre and follow their husband, they longed even more to see Räma 
and Lakñman return. As the fire died down, all of the king’s relatives 
went to the riverbank and offered palmfuls of that holy water to his 
departed soul. They then returned to the city and spent the following 
ten days grieving, taking little food and lying upon the bare ground, 
their eyes filled with tears. 
On the eleventh day the final obsequial rites were performed and on the 
twelfth day Bharata gave to the Brahmins much charity on His father’s 
behalf. On the following day Bharata and Shatrughna returned to the 
cremation ground to collect Their father’s ashes. Upon arriving at the 
funeral pyre, the two princes saw Their father’s remains and They cried 
out in pain. Remembering again the king’s various affectionate gestures 
toward Them, They fell to the ground and rolled about.  
Shatrughna lamented angrily. “A fierce and formidable sea of grief has

156 
been unleashed by Manthara! Kaikeyi’s boons are its great waves and her 
words its fearful alligators. Alas, this violent ocean has swept over us all! 
Where have you gone, dear father, leaving behind poor Bharata, who is 
yet a tender boy?” 
Shatrughna stood up with His arms outstretched. “How strange that this 
earth does not split in two, seeing you gone and Räma retired to the 
forest! We two brothers shall also go to the woods for We cannot return 
to Ayodhya, rendered desolate without Our father and brother.” 
All the attendants of Bharata and Shatrughna were distressed to see the 
princes’ agony. Comforting the royal brothers, the omniscient Vasiñöha 
said, “Your father has surely ascended to the highest regions of bliss. He 
was ever pious and never committed a sin, even in his mind. You grieve 
needlessly, for the soul of Your father is eternal and has gone to the 
Lord’s eternal abode.” 
The two princes stood with folded hands, looking at the royal priest. 
Putting aside Their grief, They listened attentively as the sage 
continued. 
“The body is always dead, being composed of nothing more than lifeless 
matter. It is born and remains for only a short while, with destruction 
being its inevitable end. Only a fool grieves for the unavoidable. The 
wise understand that this entire world will be destroyed along with all its 
living creatures. It is the soul alone that will survive.” 
Vasiñöha pointed to the king’s remains as he spoke. The king had 
achieved the perfection of life and would not take another birth. Those 
devoted to God’s service leave this temporary world forever. For them 
there is no more suffering. The princes should shed their grief and 
perform Their duties. Their father now sat in the highest heaven, while 
the kingdom stood in need of Their protection. 
After hearing the sage’s spiritual instructions the brothers gained 
strength. They took Their father’s ashes and placed them in the sacred 
Sarayu. Along with all Their attendants, They made Their way back to 
Ayodhya. As They walked, Shatrughna spoke to Bharata. “How strange 
it is that the mighty Räma stands exiled by the words of a woman. I 
cannot understand why Lakñman did not forcibly restrain the king, 
seeing him to be straying from the path of righteousness.” 
Shatrughna was mystified that such an injustice could have taken place.

157 
How did Räma allow Himself to be sent away, causing His father’s death? 
What sin had that powerful and virtuous prince ever committed? Had 
He been present, Shatrughna would surely have intervened. Kaikeyi and 
her evil maid would have been checked and severely rebuked for their 
unforgiveable behavior!  
As Shatrughna thought in this way they arrived at the king’s palace and 
saw Manthara at the gate. She was wearing costly garments and adorned 
with jeweled ornaments. Seeing the two princes she gasped and shrank 
back. Immediately the doorkeeper seized her and dragged her to the 
princes, saying, “Here is the cruel wretch responsible for the exile of our 
beloved lord! Do with her what you will!” 
Shatrughna became inflamed and took hold of Manthara. Pulling her 
into the palace, He spoke in front of the many other maidservants who 
were standing there. “This wicked one shall now reap the fruits of her 
evil deeds! She has brought acute and unbearable pain to all in this 
house, as well as to all the citizens of Ayodhya. Watch now as I punish 
her!” 
Manthara shrieked loudly, being held tightly by Shatrughna. All her 
female companions ran away in different directions, fearful that the 
enraged Shatrughna would also turn on them. The prince dragged 
Manthara violently across the floor and her ornaments broke and 
scattered on the blue marble floor like so many stars in the sky.  
Kaikeyi heard her servant screaming and came quickly to help her. 
Seeing her, Shatrughna began rebuking her with harsh words. Kaikeyi 
was pained by Shatrughna’s sharp words and ran to Bharata for 
protection. Bharata moved away from His mother and spoke to the 
furious Shatrughna. 
“Even when sinful, women should never be slain. You should therefore 
forgive this maidservant. Indeed, I would have slain My own mother if 
the eternal moral law did not forbid it—and certainly such an act would 
never be pleasing to Räma. Our pious brother would never speak with 
Us again if He heard that We killed this woman.” 
Hearing Bharata’s admonition, Shatrughna released Manthara and she 
fell almost unconscious to the floor. Kaikeyi raised her up and she wailed 
piteously, her clothes and hair in disarray. Kaikeyi looked fearfully at 
Shatrughna and gently calmed her servant. Although Manthara had

158 
brought about a terrible calamity in Kaikeyi’s life, the queen felt no 
anger toward her. Her son’s severe reaction had made Kaikeyi 
thoughtful. She remembered her husband’s words when she asked for 
the boons. He had been right. She had always loved Räma like her own 
son. What had possessed her so that she had desired His exile? She 
considered it the work of all-powerful Providence. Manthara could not 
be blamed. She was only an instrument in the hands of destiny. 
Thinking of Räma and feeling she had done Him a great injustice, 
Kaikeyi watched in silence as Bharata and Shatrughna left. 
* * * 
On the fourteenth day after the funeral the king’s counselors conferred 
and then spoke with Bharata. Wanting to install Him as king, they said, 
“As Your elder brother has gone to the forest along with Lakñman, there 
will be no sin in Your superseding Him and accepting the throne. 
Therefore, O jewel among men, be consecrated as our ruler and protect 
us with justice and compassion.” 
The counselors showed Bharata the seat and coronation paraphernalia 
which had been prepared for Räma’s installation. Exactly as Räma had 
done, however, Bharata walked around the seat in respect and said, “I 
shall never accept the kingdom, passing over the pious Räma. All of you 
know well the rule in our race. The kingship is always conferred upon 
the eldest brother. Therefore, Räma will be the ruler of this earth. Let a 
large and powerful army be made ready, for we shall go to the forest to 
bring back Räma.” 
Bharata pointed to the paraphernalia. “Taking all these items, we shall 
perform Räma’s coronation even in the forest. You may then bring Him 
back in honor as the king. I Myself shall remain there in His place for 
fourteen years. I shall never allow My mother to realize her wicked 
ambition!” 
Bharata became enlivened as He contemplated the possibility of 
bringing Räma home. He felt sure that Räma could be convinced to 
return when He saw Bharata coming to get Him with all the people of 
Ayodhya. He ordered that expert architects and engineers construct a 
road to the forest. The work should begin immediately and they would 
leave as soon as possible.

159 
All the Brahmin counselors applauded Bharata, saying, “Very good! It 
shall be done!” They blessed Bharata and He felt delighted in mind. His 
face lit up with joy and tears flowed from His eyes. Thinking of Räma 
and His imminent return, everyone found their grief dispelled. 
Thousands of skilled men were employed in the task of building the 
road. Absorbed in thoughts of Räma they worked swiftly, leveling the 
land to lay out a broad road paved with great slabs of red stone. The 
work was carried out as quickly as possible. Wells were dug and large 
ponds excavated. Trees were planted along the edge of the road to 
provide shade, and fragrant gardens were laid out at intervals. The great 
highway was decorated with festoons and sprinkled with scented water 
mixed with sandalwood paste. Along the way tent encampments, 
enclosed by wide moats, were erected for the army. Temples were 
constructed and images of Viñëu and the gods were installed and 
worshipped. In some places wealthy men had mansions built and villages 
grew up around these houses. The road extended from Ayodhya all the 
way to the Ganges. Strewn with various forest flowers, it appeared like a 
pathway made by the gods and leading to the heavens. 
Within less than a month the road was complete. Bharata summoned 
Sumantra and ordered him to have the army prepare to leave. In great 
eagerness the army chiefs prepared everything for the journey to the 
forest. Mounting upon His own golden car drawn by six pairs of horses, 
Bharata set out from the city. He was followed by nine thousand 
elephants, sixty thousand chariots and a hundred thousand infantry. All 
the royal counselors and priests accompanied Him, as well as Daçaratha’s 
three wives.  
The procession from Ayodhya consisted of thousands of citizens of all 
classes. It made its way slowly toward the forest. Merchants set out shops 
and artisans and craftsmen of all kinds plied their trade along the road. 
Thousands of Brahmins, their minds absorbed in meditation, followed 
the procession on bullock carts, uttering benedictions and prayers. 
After some days Bharata arrived near Sringavera, where Räma’s friend 
Guha lived. Halting on the bank of the Ganges, the prince set up camp. 
Bharata descended from His chariot along with Shatrughna and went 
down to the riverbank, where He lay down in prostrated obeisance. 
Along with His brother and Daçaratha’s wives, He offered Ganges water

160 
to the king’s departed soul. 
Guha had seen Bharata’s approach and said to his counselors, “This huge 
army appears like a sea without any shore. I see in the distance a 
towering banner bearing the emblem of Bharata. Surely He has come 
here wishing harm to Räma.” 
Guha thought Bharata intended to kill Räma in order to establish His 
unchallenged right to the kingdom. Seeing the tremendous number of 
people accompanying Bharata, he felt fearful.  
“I think this prince will either bind us with chains or kill us, finding us 
entirely devoted to Räma,” Guha continued. “Have our men stand ready 
with weapons and clothed in mail. The boats should each be filled with 
one hundred warriors and should wait on the other side of the river. 
Räma is our lord and master and we should do whatever is in our power 
to assist Him.” 
Guha decided to go personally to Bharata and discover His purpose. 
Taking various sweetmeats and fruits as an offering, he went with his 
chief ministers toward the prince’s tent. As he approached nearby, 
Sumantra saw him and informed Bharata, “Here comes the Niñadha 
king, Guha, accompanied by a thousand of his men. He is Räma’s friend 
and he knows well everything about the forest. O noble prince, You 
should allow him to see You, for he will surely know Räma’s 
whereabouts.” 
Bharata immediately gave orders that Guha be shown into His tent. He 
came before Bharata and humbly bowed down saying, “This kingdom is 
Yours, O prince. As Räma’s friend You are my friend and indeed my 
lord. Be pleased to accept these foodstuffs and please also stay in my 
house. Allow my men to entertain Your army tonight, and tomorrow 
You may leave refreshed to accomplish Your purpose.” 
Bharata could understand Guha’s mind. He was pleased by his reception 
and by his devotion to Räma. He spoke gently to the Niñadha ruler. “It is 
a pleasure to meet you, dear friend of My brother. We are satisfied by 
your kind hospitality.” 
Bharata pointed across the Ganges. “I heard Räma went that way, O 
king, toward Bharadväja’s hermitage. By which route should we proceed 
in order to find Him, O king? Should we cross this river or go along its 
bank?”

161 
Guha was apprehensive. He looked down as he replied to Bharata. 
“Seeing Your vast army, my mind was filled with fear. I trust that You 
wish no harm to Räma. If that is the case, then my ferrymen can take 
You across the river and show You the way.” 
Bharata reassured Guha. “May the time never come when any 
wickedness toward Räma enters My heart. Do not have any doubts about 
Me, O Guha. I am here to bring back Räma to Ayodhya. My glorious 
brother is as good as My father, and I long to see Him again. Pray point 
out His whereabouts to Me and I shall go and press His feet to My head.” 
Tears sprang to Guha’s eyes as he replied. “There can be none equal to 
You on this globe, O jewel among men! Who else could renounce the 
rulership of the world? Surely Your fame will be everlasting. Rest now 
for the night and tomorrow I shall make all arrangements.” 
Guha took his leave from Bharata and the prince laid down to sleep. 
Thinking of Räma, He was seized with sorrow. Perhaps He would not be 
able to find Him. Many months had passed since Räma had left. Who 
knows where He might be now? Bharata was unable to sleep. He was 
oppressed with an agony which weighed upon Him like a heap of rocks. 
Heaving sighs Bharata tossed around, immersed in thoughts of Räma. 
Gradually the dawn approached, and as the sun rose Guha returned. 
The forest king spoke again to Bharata. He described how Räma had 
spent a night there and then, after matting His hair, had left for the 
deep forest with Lakñman and Sétä. Guha indicated the way They had 
gone. 
Hearing how Räma had matted His hair, Bharata became apprehensive. 
Surely Räma would not now return. His resolve to remain as an ascetic 
for fourteen years must be firm. Seized with such thoughts Bharata all of 
a sudden fell to the ground, saddened at heart. Shatrughna raised His 
brother, who sat shedding tears. Kaushalya and Sumitra quickly 
approached Him and spoke comforting words. Bharata recovered His 
composure and said to Guha, “Tell me everything about Räma. What 
foods did He eat? Where did He sleep? What did He say?” 
Guha told Bharata how he had offered Räma many excellent cooked 
foods, but Räma had refused them, saying “It is never the duty of rulers 
to accept charity. Indeed, we should always give charity to others.” 
Guha explained how Räma had drunk only water and then had slept

162 
upon a bed of grass laid out by Lakñman. Bharata asked to be shown the 
place where Räma slept and Guha took Him to the foot of the tree 
where the bed still lay. Seeing it Bharata loudly exclaimed, “Alas, how 
could it be that one such as Räma should lay down on a bed of grass? He 
was ever accustomed to sleep at the top of high palaces, in rooms with 
golden floors spread with the finest rugs. Having always been awoken by 
the sweet strains of music and song, how is He now roused by the roar of 
wild beasts?” 
Bharata lamented at length as the reality of Räma’s exile and ascetic life 
struck Him. The injustice was insufferable to Bharata and it was made 
even more excruciating by the thought that He was the cause. His voice 
was filled with pain. “This is truly incredible! It cannot be real. Surely I 
am dreaming. See here the strands of gold left by Sétä where She lay on 
these grasses, Her delicate limbs pressed to the hard ground. I am ruined 
indeed, for it is on My account that all this has happened!” 
Images of Räma and Sétä dressed in forest attire, emaciated due to eating 
only fruits and roots, filled Bharata’s mind. Beating His head He cried 
out. “From this day I shall wear matted locks and tree bark! I shall lay 
upon the bare earth to sleep and shall eat only simple forest fare.” 
Bharata became even more determined to find Räma and bring Him 
back to Ayodhya, staying Himself in the forest in Räma’s place. After 
spending another night sleeping on the spot where Räma had lain, 
Bharata had the army prepare to leave. Guha brought five hundred large 
boats equipped with oarsmen and sails. He offered his own personal boat 
to Bharata and His relatives. Some boats were filled with women, some 
with horses and others with chariots. As the boats plied across the river 
the elephants swam with the flags on their backs waving in the breeze. 
Many of the soldiers also swam while their equipment was carried in the 
boats.  
Late in the afternoon the whole party assembled again on the other side 
of the river. Ordering them to camp at that spot, Bharata went with 
Vasiñöha and other Brahmins to look for Bharadväja’s hermitage. 
Out of deference to the great sage Bharadväja, whose only wealth was 
asceticism, Bharata approached him wearing only simple cloth, leaving 
His armor and weapons behind. With Vasiñöha at their head, the prince 
and His counselors went on foot and soon arrived at the sage’s

163 
hermitage.  
As soon as he saw them at his door, the sage hurriedly rose and had his 
disciples fetch water to wash their feet. He embraced Vasiñöha and 
offered blessings to Bharata, who had fallen prostrate at his feet. 
Bharadväja gazed at Bharata, whom he recognized as Räma’s brother. 
The sage knew by his own mystic vision that Daçaratha was dead. After 
inquiring about the situation in Ayodhya the sage asked Bharata, “What 
brings You all this way, leaving aside the onerous business of managing 
the state? Because of Your mother’s words, You are ruling the world as 
its undisputed monarch. I trust that You have not come here with some 
dark intention toward the sinless and perfect Räma?” 
The sage’s words cut into Bharata. Tears flowed from His eyes as He 
replied in a hurt voice, “If even you impute such motives to Me, then I 
am truly ruined. I never approved My mother’s aims! I cannot even 
imagine doing harm to Räma, nor will I ever accept the kingdom!” 
Feeling that no one would believe His innocence, Bharata felt despair. 
He folded His hands and spoke imploringly. “The powerful Räma is the 
true ruler of this earth. I have come here to bring Him back to Ayodhya. 
Falling at His feet I shall make Him return and then remain here in His 
place. O all-knowing sage, please be gracious to Me and show Me where 
Räma is staying.” 
Bharata’s sincerity was obvious. The all-knowing Bharadväja smiled. He 
placed his hand upon Bharata’s head, who sat before him weeping, and 
said, “I surely knew of Your intention and spoke only to heighten Your 
resolve and indeed Your fame. You are a worthy member of Your royal 
line, O prince, and are always dedicated to the service of Your elders. 
Your devotion to Räma is beyond doubt.” 
The sage assured Bharata that he would point out Räma’s whereabouts. 
He asked the prince to stay the night at his hermitage and leave the 
following morning. Bharata agreed and the sage then offered to feed the 
entire army. Astonished, Bharata said, “We have already received 
sufficient hospitality from you, kind sir. As a forest dweller you need 
only offer simple fruits and this you have done. My army is vast and 
occupies a huge area of land. If I brought them here, they would all but 
wreck this holy site.” 
Bharadväja laughed and replied, “Have Your army brought here

164 
forthwith. You should not doubt my ability to receive them, nor will 
they be any trouble at all.” 
Commanded by the sage, Bharata assented. Sending back one of His 
men, He had the army approach the hermitage. As they moved slowly 
through the forest Bharadväja sat in meditation. By uttering Vedic 
mantras he invoked the presence of the principal gods. He then 
requested them to provide hospitality for the divine prince and His 
army.  
Seated in trance, the sage said within himself, “Let the sacred rivers bear 
to this region all kinds of celestial beverages. Let the moon-god bring 
every sort of excellent cooked food. May the heavenly architect 
Viçvakarmä create a suitable site for receiving the army. May Indra send 
all his Apsaräs along with the Gandharva clans to entertain these 
troops.” 
As Bharadväja invoked various divine beings with perfectly pronounced 
Sanskrit hymns, they all appeared before him. A cool and delightfully 
fragrant breeze began to blow. Thick showers of flowers fell from the 
heavens and the sound of celestial music was heard. As the Gandharvas 
sang and played upon véëäs, hosts of Apsaräs danced. All of Bharata’s 
entourage, who had assembled at the hermitage, felt their hearts moved 
by the exquisite sights and sounds seen and heard everywhere. 
Before everyone’s eyes the entire area around the hermitage changed 
wonderfully. For a radius of forty miles the ground became even, 
carpeted with soft blue grass. Numerous types of fruit trees sprang up, 
full of ripe fruits. Mangos, guavas, peaches, melons and innumerable 
other soft and hard fruits were seen. Alongside streams of crystal clear 
water stood large white mansions furnished with seats and couches. A 
great palace appeared that looked like a white cloud and had a large 
arched doorway. Delicious food and drink were laid out in these spacious 
buildings.  
With Bharadväja’s permission, Bharata entered the palace, which was 
adorned with countless flower garlands and sprinkled with scents. 
Seeing a golden throne, Bharata simply walked around it and sat on the 
seat next to it, surrounded by His chief ministers.  
Streams of sweetened milk and cream flowed past the palace. By 
Bharadväja’s mystic power, many trees in the hermitage came to life and

165 
began playing upon different musical instruments. Some of them 
assumed the form of dwarfs and began to move about in haste, serving 
Bharata and His army. All around there appeared thousands of golden 
vessels containing food of every description. Heaps of steaming white 
rice were seen, along with tanks filled with milk drinks and yogurt. Pots 
of honey and large jars filled with intoxicating drinks stood next to 
platters containing delicious sweetmeats. 
Beautiful young maidens attended upon the soldiers, washing them and 
massaging their feet and bodies with fragrant oils. These celestial 
damsels, all adorned in pure silk garments, served the men food on 
golden plates. Being maddened with pleasure, the troops laughed loudly 
and ran about in all directions. They praised Bharata and Räma again 
and again as they partook of every kind of enjoyable thing. Although 
they ate and drank huge amounts they found that they were still not 
sated. Their senses and minds became more and more enlivened and 
they felt renewed and refreshed. Even the army’s animals were carefully 
tended and given all kinds of food and drink by the celestial beings 
invoked by Bharadväja. 
As the night ended, the troops saw before them numerous items of 
toiletry. Pots of hot water along with soaps and unguents in silver and 
wooden cases appeared. Combs, brushes, talcs and shining mirrors were 
in abundance, as well as fresh clothes, shoes and all kinds of ornaments. 
As the men bathed and put on their clothes and armor, the gods and 
Apsaräs left the hermitage and returned to the heavens. The army was 
astonished by the night’s events, which seemed like a dream. They 
looked around at the hermitage, which had returned to its normal 
appearance. Everything had disappeared except for the celestial garlands 
strewn about, which, although crushed, were as fresh then as they had 
been at the beginning of the night. 
As the sun rose Bharata went to Bharadväja after the sage’s morning 
prayers. The prince bowed before him and asked his permission to leave. 
Bharadväja blessed Him and said, “I trust You and Your followers spent 
an enjoyable night. Please tell me if there is anything else I can do for 
You.” 
Bharata thanked him for his hospitality and asked to be shown the way 
toward Räma’s hut in the woods. The sage smiled and said, “There is a

166 
mountain some twenty miles from here named Chitrakuta, full of lovely 
caves and groves. On the northern side of that mountain, shaded by 
blossoming trees, flows the Mandakini River. There, by that river, You 
will find Your two brothers.” 
As the sage spoke Kaushalya and Sumitra got down from their chariot 
and clasped his feet. They thanked him profusely as they anticipated 
seeing Räma. Kaikeyi also came to the sage and shamefully bowed before 
him, feeling guilty at heart. Looking at her with compassion the sage 
asked Bharata, “Please tell me, who are these noble ladies?” 
Bharata indicated Kaushalya saying, “This godly lady is the mother of 
the lion-like Räma. Afflicted with grief, she is emaciated with fasting. 
Clinging to her arm is the celebrated Sumitra, the mother of Lakñman 
and Shatrughna, those two great heroes.” 
Becoming angry, hissing like a cobra as He spoke, Bharata indicated 
Kaikeyi. “This one here is My own mother, the wicked and vulgar 
Kaikeyi. It was by her intrigues that the great emperor Daçaratha died 
from anguish and the mighty Räma now resides in a lonely mountain 
reach.” 
Bharadväja, who knew the plans of the gods and the divine 
arrangements of the Supreme Lord, said to Bharata, “You should not 
censure Your mother, O great prince. Do not think her guilty, for 
Räma’s banishment will result in good to the entire universe. Indeed, it 
will bring happiness to the gods, demons and åñis, along with the whole 
of the creation.” 
Bharata blushed deeply. He had been piercing His mother with angry 
looks and He felt rebuked by the sage. Unable to immediately subdue 
His anger, He averted His gaze and tried to assimilate Bharadväja’s 
instructions. He stood up and walked respectfully around the sage. 
Receiving his permission to leave, Bharata ordered the army to depart 
and mounted upon His chariot. Guha accompanied the two princes. As 
the huge mass of men moved off through the woods they made a great 
noise, terrifying the deer and birds dwelling there. Slowly approaching 
the Chitrakuta mountain they all thought only of Räma, longing to see 
Him again.

167 
Chapter 5 
Räma Remains Firm 
Three months had passed since Räma had settled on the Chitrakuta 
mountain. Living peacefully in Their thatched cottage, Räma, along 
with Lakñman and Sétä, was happy. From their hut They could see the 
top of the mountain, some of which was yellow, some red as madder, 
some glittering silver and some blue-green like a shining emerald. 
Thousands of other subtle hues shone on the side of the great mountain, 
and it teemed with deer of every description and hosts of harmless tigers, 
leopards and bears. Trees laden with flowers and fruits were crowded 
with varieties of colorful and sweetly singing birds. Clear rivulets flowed 
from countless springs, and waterfalls sparkled in the sunshine. 
Räma felt gladdened at heart to see all this and, sitting at ease on the 
porch of His hut, He spoke with Sétä: “Look at the Kinnaras as they 
sport on these delightful slopes, having descended from their own 
planets. See also the Vidhyadharas and Gandharvas courting their 
womenfolk after hanging their swords and other weapons from the 
boughs of trees. This place is finer even than heaven. Surely We will 
easily spend fourteen summers here as if they were a month.” 
Sétä smiled. She felt joyful to be living there with Räma. Despite its 
simplicity She liked forest life, preferring it even to Her life of luxury in 
the city. She looked down at the Mandakini River where lines of 
ascetics, clad only in loin cloths, stood in the water with their arms 
upraised as they worshipped the sun. A cool breeze carried the aroma of 
tree blossoms, which cascaded on all sides of the mountain. On the 
sandy bank of the river heavenly Siddhas were appearing and 
disappearing, moving about in delight. Further down the river She saw a 
group of elephants standing amid the red and white lotuses as they 
drank the clear water.  
Räma continued, “Let Us take Our midday bath in the river, O princess. 
With You by My side I do not miss any of My relatives or even Ayodhya 
itself. Your beauty puts to shame the so-called beauty of these heavenly

168 
damsels, and it gives Me newer and newer pleasure.” 
Räma looked at His brother, who stood at a distance holding His bow. 
“The godly Lakñman stands over there equipped with weapons and ready 
to carry out My every command. Living on the delicious forest fare He 
gathers, We reside here most happily, dear Sétä. What more could I 
desire even if I lived in Ayodhya?” 
Räma and Sétä descended to the river and found a secluded spot to take 
Their bath. After bathing and sporting for some time in the cool waters, 
They came out and sat in the sun on a large flat rock. As Räma 
conversed with Sétä He noticed in the distance a cloud of dust rising to 
the sky. Looking around He saw frightened animals running in all 
directions and heard a terrific noise, which became progressively louder. 
Räma called out to His brother. “Lakñman! What do You think is 
causing this disturbance? A sound like a terrible crash of thunder is 
coming from the north! Is some king or prince out hunting in the forest, 
followed by his army? Or is it some vast herd of beasts on the move? 
Please go and see.” 
Lakñman immediately climbed a tall tree and looked all around. Fixing 
his gaze on the north, He saw in the distance a large army crowded with 
elephants, horses and chariots, and joined with a mass of marching foot 
soldiers. He shouted to Räma and informed Him. 
“Let Sétä quickly find a cave,” Lakñman advised Räma. “Extinguish the 
fire so that the smoke will not be seen. We two shall stand here clothed 
in mail and holding upraised weapons, for a powerful army approaches!” 
Räma, who was not at all fearful, replied to Lakñman, “Look carefully at 
the ensigns. Try to determine whose army You think it might be.” 
Lakñman stared at the head of the army and saw a tall ensign waving in 
the breeze, bearing the emblem of a kovidara tree. The prince became 
infuriated and looked at the army as if He might consume it with His 
gaze alone. 
“Clearly this is Bharata’s army!” He exclaimed. “I see there the mark of 
the kovidara. Evidently He has secured the throne of Ayodhya and now 
desires to attain undisputed sovereignty by killing Us both. Even now I 
see swift horses going ahead to seek Us out.” 
Lakñman seethed with anger. “It is fortunate indeed that I shall now see 
Bharata’s face, for whose sake You are enduring this forest life deprived

169 
of Your sovereign rights. Surely He has come here as an enemy and as 
such deserves to be killed outright! I see no sin in this action, O Räma, 
for Bharata has sorely wronged You.” 
Lakñman descended from the tree and picked up His weapons. He held 
His sword aloft. “Today Kaikeyi, who is so desirous of the kingdom, will 
be seized with sorrow when she sees her son slain by Me! I shall then kill 
her also! Let the earth drink the blood of all these warriors. Beasts of 
prey will drag about the corpses of elephants and horses, as well as of 
thousands of men pierced by My arrows. Killing Bharata along with His 
army, I will repay My debt to My weapons!” 
Räma replied gravely to the enraged Lakñman. “These sentiments do not 
befit You, dear brother. The mighty Bharata has come here longing to 
see Us and You wish to greet Him with weapons. I have given My word 
of honor to remain in the forest. How then can I forcefully take the 
kingdom from Bharata, thereby gaining a sovereignty stained with 
infamy?” 
Feeling admonished by His brother, Lakñman looked down and sheathed 
His sword. Räma continued, “I will never accept a royal fortune won at 
the cost of the death of My kinsmen. Indeed, I would only accept the 
kingdom for the pleasure and protection of My relatives, for I have no 
personal desire for sovereignty. If any joy should come to Me that is not 
enjoyed by Yourself, Bharata or Shatrughna, then let it be reduced to 
ashes.” 
Räma knew Bharata’s heart. Bharata was no less devoted to Him than 
Lakñman. He could understand why His brother had come to see Him. 
He also longed to see Bharata. Comforting Lakñman, Räma said, “When 
Bharata heard of My exile I am sure He would have felt His heart 
overwhelmed with affection and His mind distracted by grief. After 
censuring Kaikeyi with harsh words, He no doubt left Ayodhya intent 
on bringing Me back. Of this I feel certain.” 
Lakñman felt ashamed to have spoken angrily about Bharata. He 
remembered the close and loving relationships the four brothers had 
enjoyed in childhood. Räma was right. Bharata could not possibly have 
come in a martial spirit. Lakñman blushed as Räma continued.  
“I cannot imagine Bharata harming us even in His mind,” Räma said 
gently. “Has He somehow previously offended You, dear brother, so that

170 
You wax so wrathful toward Him now? If You are set upon the slaughter 
of Bharata, then I shall order Him to hand over the kingdom to You this 
very day. Certainly He will remain here in Your place, clad in tree barks, 
while You rule over this broad earth.” 
Lakñman shrank with shame. It had been wrong of Him to think so badly 
of Bharata. There was never a time when any malice or envy had been 
seen in that prince. Lakñman tried to make amends for His previous 
outburst. 
“It must be as You say, dear Räma. I think the mighty-armed emperor 
himself has personally come here accompanied by Bharata. Our father 
will doubtlessly try to persuade Us to return, handing You the 
sovereignty refused by Bharata. Indeed, I saw father’s gigantic elephant, 
Shatrunjaya, rocking about at the head of the army as it marched.” 
From Their vantage point on the mountainside Räma could see the army 
coming into view. Spotting the king’s elephant He felt a sudden 
apprehension. Why was there no white umbrella held over its back? 
Shatrunjaya would not have come out without the king. Unless, that is, 
there was no king. Räma was fearful. Along with Lakñman and Sétä, He 
waited near His hut for Bharata’s arrival. 
* * * 
When they reached the mountain, Bharata detailed a number of expert 
trackers to go in search of Räma’s hermitage. He himself went ahead on 
horseback and began searching on foot when He reached the dense 
forest on the mountainside. Accompanied by Vasiñöha and other 
Brahmins, Bharata pressed ahead into the forest, anxious to see His 
brothers. He said to Vasiñöha, “Blessed is this mountain reach, O sage, 
where Räma and Sétä now roam. How fortunate is Lakñman who always 
beholds the moon-like face of Räma. I long to hold Räma’s feet on My 
head. There will be no peace for Me until I see Him duly consecrated 
and seated upon Ayodhya’s throne.” 
Bharata climbed a tall tree and gazed all around. Upon seeing a column 
of smoke He surmised it to be coming from Räma’s hermitage. Rejoicing, 
He descended quickly and went in that direction. Confident that they 
were now close to Räma, He sent Vasiñöha back to bring the queens. 
Then, along with Shatrughna and Guha, He went as quickly as possible

171 
up the mountain slope.  
As they arrived at a plateau they suddenly burst into a clearing and saw 
there, on a leveled piece of ground, Räma’s hut. Räma and Lakñman 
were sitting in front of the leafy cottage. Bharata saw the sacrificial fire 
placed on an altar surrounded by blades of kusha grass. Hanging on the 
sides of the hut were two long bows, plated with gold and shining like 
rainbows. Large quivers filled with fearful looking arrows stood by the 
bows, along with two great shields adorned with gold engravings. A 
couple of swords hung by the bows, sheathed in silver and gold. 
When Bharata saw Räma dressed as an ascetic, His hair matted, He let 
out a cry and fell prostrate. Rising up again He gazed with tear-filled 
eyes at His beloved brother, who appeared like Brahmä seated in his 
celestial assembly hall. Räma turned and smiled at Bharata, who along 
with Shatrughna was rushing toward Him. Stumbling even as He ran 
over level ground, Bharata swiftly approached Räma and fell before 
Him. In a choked voice He began to lament. 
“Alas, here is My elder brother, who deserves to sit in a royal assembly, 
seated now in the company of deer,” Bharata cried. “What a cruel 
destiny! Here is that exalted soul who should wear garments worth many 
thousands wearing the barks of trees. All this is on My account! Woe to 
Me, condemned by all the world.” 
Sobs stifled Bharata’s voice as He lay near Räma, His hands stretched 
toward His brother’s feet. His face was covered with perspiration and He 
called out, “Oh, My brother, My noble brother!” Shatrughna also shed 
tears and bowed before Räma. Räma and Lakñman quickly got up and 
closely embraced both of Their brothers. The four princes coming 
together appeared as if the sun and moon had conjoined with Venus and 
Jupiter in the heavens.  
Räma asked Bharata what had brought Him away from Ayodhya. 
Surprised to see Him with matted locks and wearing a deerskin, Räma 
said, “Why have You come here without Our father, dearest brother? I 
hope all is well in Ayodhya. As long as father lives You should surely 
wait upon him with great attention. Still, I am glad to see You here, 
although You appear pale and emaciated. Why the ascetic dress, noble 
Bharata? I think your love for Me must be very deep.” 
Räma gently stroked Bharata’s head. Looking up He saw Guha standing

172 
at a distance with folded palms and He smiled at him. Räma was fully 
absorbed in loving exchanges with His friends and relatives. Feeling 
pain and concern to see Bharata’s condition, He continued to speak. “I 
hope You have not lost the kingdom due to immaturity and 
inexperience. Surely You know all the facets of diplomacy and kingly 
science, O powerful prince.” 
By way of loving instruction, Räma asked after many aspects of the 
kingdom. He inquired if the people were properly protected, the animals 
cared for, the army well maintained and the Brahmins given sufficient 
charity. Bharata listened respectfully as His elder brother spoke. 
“I see here all My mothers,” said Räma. “Indeed it seems that the entire 
kingdom of Koçala has accompanied You, dear Bharata. This gives rise to 
grave doubts in My mind. Please tell Me why you have all arrived here 
today, for you have aroused My curiosity.” 
Bharata knelt before Räma, clasping His feet. “Dear Räma, the act 
perpetrated by My mother was wicked and never approved by Me. 
Casting You into the forest and afflicting the whole of Ayodhya with 
unbearable pain, she hoped to see Me installed as the king. This will 
never happen! Please return now with us, O Raghava, and take Your 
rightful position as ruler of this world. Be kind to Me and to all these 
people, O tiger among men.” 
Räma felt compassion for Bharata. He questioned Him again. “What 
need is there for Your adopting this mode of ascetic life, dear Bharata? 
The order of Our father is that You become the king. I too stand 
enjoined by Our father to remain here in the forest. Our pious father’s 
order is supreme. Therefore, without censuring Your mother Kaikeyi, 
You should enjoy the kingdom. For myself, I am happier staying here in 
obedience to Our father than I would be in attaining to the imperishable 
abode of Brahmä.” 
Bharata’s head sank. He knew His elder brother’s mind. It would be 
impossible to convince Räma to transgress an order given by His elders. 
Still He felt impelled to try. He could not possibly take the throne in 
place of Räma. With a heavy heart Bharata informed Räma of what had 
happened in Ayodhya.  
“While I was away in the Kekaya kingdom and You had already gone to 
the forest, our glorious father ascended to heaven. Thinking only of You

173 
and lost in grief at Your separation, the king left his mortal body. Now, 
by the time-honored rule, You, as the elder son, should inherit the 
kingdom. There cannot be any doubt on this point.” 
As he heard for the first time the news of his father’s death, Räma felt as 
if His heart had been pierced. Raising His arms and crying out, He sank 
to the ground like a tree filled with blossoms cut at its root. He lay 
motionless with the color drained from His face. Bharata quickly 
sprinkled Him with cool water. Räma sat up and held His head, wailing 
piteously.  
“With My father dead and gone what shall I do in Ayodhya? Alas, I am 
surely a wretched and useless son. My father died because of Me. Nor 
was I even able to cremate him. Even when the fourteen years expires I 
shall not have the courage to return to the city, seeing it desolate and 
bereft of its protector. Who will now speak those kind and loving words 
My father spoke when he saw Me well-behaved?” 
Räma went over to Sétä and Lakñman who were seated nearby. “Dear 
Sétä, Your father-in-law is no more. O Lakñman, You are now fatherless. 
Our brother brings the sorrowful news of the king’s ascent to heaven. 
This world now stands without a ruler.” 
Sétä’s eyes filled with tears and She was unable to look at Her husband. 
Räma and Lakñman wept along with Sétä as Bharata and Shatrughna 
comforted Them.  
Räma controlled His feelings and said, “I must now perform the last 
sacred rites for the king. Let us go to the river.” 
The four princes and Sétä, stumbling due to their grief, descended with 
difficulty to the riverbank. They were assisted by Sumantra and other 
ministers of the king, who stood watching as Räma entered the water 
along with His brothers and Sétä.  
Räma faced the southern quarter, over which Yamaräja presides, and 
held water in His cupped palms. He let the water trickle through His 
fingers and said in a choked voice, “May this sacred water reach you, O 
great tiger among kings! Let this offering serve you, dear father, who 
have gone for-ever to the world of our forefathers.” 
Räma offered prayers for His father and then returned to His hermitage 
to prepare an offering of food for the departed king. After the offering 
was made, Räma and His brothers clasped each others’ hands and began

174 
to wail loudly. The sound was like the roaring of lions and it 
reverberated all around the mountain passes. 
Hearing that confused noise the soldiers in Bharata’s army were alarmed 
and they said to one another, “Surely Bharata and Shatrughna have met 
Räma and Lakñman. This sound must be the loud cry of those four 
brothers mourning for Their deceased father.” 
The soldiers got up quickly and began running toward the sound. 
Crashing through the undergrowth on foot, horseback and in chariots, 
everyone in Bharata’s entourage rushed toward Räma’s hermitage, eager 
to see Him again. The noise of all those thousands of people moving 
through the forest was tumultuous. Deer, buffaloes, boars, lions and 
elephants ran in all directions, terrified by the great commotion. Birds of 
every kind cried loudly and flew up into the air. 
Daçaratha’s widowed queens got down from their chariot and went on 
foot into the woods, accompanied by Vasiñöha. Walking with difficulty 
along the narrow forest paths, they finally arrived at the spot where 
Räma was standing with His brothers. Räma saw them as they entered 
the clearing and He ran quickly toward them. He bowed down to 
Vasiñöha and each of the three queens, touching their feet. After 
Lakñman and Sétä had also offered their respects, Räma sat down with 
Vasiñöha on the wooden seats in front of His hut. The queens wept aloud 
upon seeing the ascetic dress of Räma and Sétä.  
Kaushalya went to Räma and tenderly wiped the dust from His face. 
Turning to Sétä, she said, “How are You surviving in this lonely forest, 
dear Sétä? Your face appears pale and withered. Alas, my grief upon 
seeing You here blazes up like a fire fed with abundant fuel.” 
Räma consoled Kaushalya, while Lakñman spoke with Sumitra, who was 
also deeply pained. Bharata then came and sat at Räma’s feet. With His 
palms folded he said, “Kaikeyi is now satisfied and the kingdom has been 
offered to Me. If this kingdom is Mine, then I hereby give it to You, O 
Räma. Please take it without any hesitation.” 
As Bharata sat before Räma and Lakñman, the three brothers shone like 
three sacrificial fires. Bharata held Räma’s feet as He spoke. “The power 
to rule this world rests only with You, O Räma. I can no more emulate 
that power of Yours than a donkey can emulate the gait of a horse or a 
sparrow the flight of Garuòa. Indeed I am dependent upon You. Let the

175 
world behold You shining with splendor on Ayodhya’s throne. We shall 
take You there in state this very day!” 
All the people gathered there called out, “Well said!” upon hearing 
Bharata speak. With tears streaming from His eyes Bharata sat looking 
up at Räma. He hoped desperately that Räma might somehow be 
persuaded. He could not imagine going back to Ayodhya without Him. 
Seeing His brother and other relatives weeping, Räma felt compassion. 
Keeping His own grief in check, He replied, “No man is free to act as he 
pleases. In this world the embodied soul is dragged here and there by the 
all-powerful force of Providence. No one can control that force. All 
gains will end in loss, every meeting ends in separation and all life has its 
end in death. As there is no fear for a ripe fruit other than a fall, so 
there is no fear for any man other than death.” 
Everyone listened attentively as Räma spoke, their feelings of sorrow 
relieved by his instructions. “The passing of days and nights quickly 
exhaust the life span of all beings, even as the summer sun sucks up the 
water in a lake,” Räma went on. “You should grieve only for yourself; 
why do you grieve for another? Death is our constant companion. He 
walks with us, sits with us and having gone a long distance with us when 
we travel, he duly returns with us.” 
Räma still had no desire to return to Ayodhya. He wanted to encourage 
Bharata and give Him strength. Stroking His brother’s head, He 
continued to instruct Him. 
“Beloved brother, the power to prevent one’s own death does not exist 
in a person grieving for another. Our father departed after a long life of 
piety and We should by no means grieve. We ourselves have embarked 
on the very same path trodden by the emperor and will join him in due 
course. Let Us therefore throw off grief and dedicate Ourselves to the 
pursuit of piety by which We too shall attain the blessed regions reached 
by the king.” 
Räma looked around His hermitage. Thousands of people were crowding 
on the mountainside, all looking towards Him. There was complete 
silence as Räma spoke. Even the animals seemed silent. Only the sound 
of the river and the rustling of leaves in the breeze could be heard. 
Dappled shadows moved over the ground in the late afternoon sun. 
With a mild smile Räma continued to address Bharata, within the

176 
hearing of everyone there. 
“Father has shed his old, worn-out body and, with an ethereal and 
undecaying form, he now sports in great happiness. Rather than grieve 
for him we should now carefully do his bidding. For Your part You 
should rule over the earth, dear Bharata, while I for mine should remain 
in the forest until fourteen years have expired. This will ensure Our 
welfare in both this world and the next. Under no circumstances should 
We disobey Our virtuous father.” 
Räma spoke for more than an hour and Bharata felt joy to hear His 
brother’s words of instruction. But He was also dispirited to see Räma’s 
determination to stay in the forest. 
When Räma stopped speaking, Bharata grasped His feet and replied, 
“Your position is glorious, O mighty brother. You are never dejected at 
adversity nor exhilarated at finding joy. You are always able to 
distinguish truth from untruth. Therefore You know what is real and 
what is only temporary and thus ultimately unreal. It is certainly the 
soul and not the body that one should nurture in this world.” 
Bharata realized that Räma was only acting with philosophical 
understanding; He knew that Räma could not possibly act outside the 
codes of religion or morality. Nonetheless, Bharata was Himself still 
doubtful about the justice of Räma’s exile. He spoke to Räma in order to 
clear His doubts. “Were it not for moral codes, I would have surely slain 
My sinful mother. How did the king allow himself to fall under her sway? 
Due to infatuation or foolishness Our father acted wrongly. As his sons 
is it not Our duty to correct his mistakes? Surely this is the proper 
religious path for an honest and worthy son.” 
Bharata turned and indicated the people gathered around. “All these 
people need Your protection. This is the duty of rulers according to 
scripture. Nowhere is the duty of a ruler stated as being life in the forest. 
March back to Ayodhya at the head of this vast army. Let Your friends 
feel joy today and Your enemies run frightened in all directions. O 
Räma, if You resolve to stay here, then You shall find Me by Your side. I 
can by no means find in Myself the strength to rule in Your absence.” 
Bharata sat with His head bowed. Everyone was enthralled by the 
conversation between the two royal brothers, and they became 
simultaneously joyful to witness His firm resolve and disconsolate to

177 
realize He would not be returning to Ayodhya.  
Räma replied to Bharata in a solemn voice. “All his life our father 
followed the path of piety. This is widely known. Impiety would not 
have been possible for that truthful man. When Our father accepted 
Kaikeyi’s hand he promised her father, as the bride price, that her son 
would inherit the kingdom. Furthermore, sworn under solemn oath by 
Kaikeyi, the king promised You the kingdom and ordered Me to go to 
the forest. Whatever the reasons, this was the king’s promise. If that 
promise is broken Our father will be liable to sinful reactions. Our duty 
as his sons is to fulfill his promise and thereby save him. No other course 
is possible for Us.” 
Räma paused for a moment. He got down from His seat and lifted up 
Bharata and Shatrughna. “You two should return to Ayodhya and 
protect the people. O Bharata, get Yourself consecrated as king and rule 
the earth. I shall become the emperor of wild beasts. The white umbrella 
should be held over Your head as You ride on the royal elephant, while 
for My part I shall go on foot, shielded by a canopy of trees. Leave with 
joy for the city, My brothers, and I with Lakñman will joyfully enter the 
woods. In this way We shall preserve Our father’s piety.” 
Bharata said nothing. He felt reassured by Räma’s reply, but was 
profoundly sorrowful at the prospect of leaving Him.  
At that moment a Brahmin named Jabali spoke, trying to convince 
Räma to return on the basis of atheistic doctrines. “Why are you 
attached to Your father, Räma? He was nothing more than flesh and 
bones and has now merged again with the earth. People who consider 
that others are in some way related to them are simply mad. Alone we 
came to this world and alone we shall leave. As such we should only 
work toward our own interests. You need not suffer now for the interests 
of Your deceased father. Take the throne and enjoy it, O Räma, for this 
will be in Your own best interests.” 
Jabali did not himself believe the philosophy he was espousing. He was 
only trying somehow to change Räma’s mind. Perhaps Räma would 
accept the arguments as a pretext for going back to Ayodhya. Most 
likely, though, He would defeat Jabali’s position and thereby establish 
the path of religion. Either way Jabali would be satisfied and he 
continued to speak his atheistic philosophy.

178 
“I lament for those who forsake sense pleasures for the austerities of a 
religious life,” said Jabali, rising to his feet. “Hoping for future happiness 
they meet only with extermination at death, having led a life of 
suffering. The scriptures have been written by intelligent Brahmins who 
wished to exalt sacrifice and charity. In this way these Brahmins have 
assured their own livelihood.” 
Jabali smiled as he spoke his false philosophy. No one in the assembly 
accepted his words, but they too hoped that Räma would yet be 
convinced to leave the forest. Everyone listened in silence as Jabali 
concluded his speech. 
“Knowing this truth, O Räma, You should renounce Your foolish 
asceticism. There is nothing beyond this visible universe. Do not depend 
for Your happiness on anything outside of that which You can see and 
immediately experience. Therefore, O great prince, accept the kingdom 
and enjoy it as the undisputed ruler.” 
Räma sat down again as Jabali stopped speaking. Looking at the Brahmin 
He said, “A man is known by his conduct alone. Although posing as a 
learned and cultured person, one who acts as you direct is to be accepted 
as sinful and debased. Those who are wise never praise a person who acts 
only to please his senses. Such a person is mean, selfish and greedy, 
driven only by lust for pleasure. His immediate happiness soon turns to 
distress and he sinks into a hellish condition.” 
Räma appeared angry as He refuted Jabali. His eyes were red and He 
spoke gravely. “If I were to follow the path espoused by you, O atheistic 
one, then this entire earth would be cast into ruin. All men follow the 
king’s example. Abandoning the religious path, the people would become 
licentious and uncontrolled. Chaos would prevail and everyone would 
suffer.” 
Jabali sat down before Räma with his palms joined and his head bowed. 
He said nothing as Räma explained how the attempt to find happiness 
through sense enjoyment was futile. Both the senses and their 
enjoyments are soon destroyed. Only the soul and God are eternal, along 
with the spiritual realms where the Lord resides. Those who are actually 
learned therefore follow the path of truth which leads to those ever-
existing realms of bliss.  
Räma paused and gradually His anger subsided. After some minutes He

179 
spoke again. “My father was wedded to truth. Following his instruction 
will lead only to happiness. I shall therefore remain in these woods and 
Bharata should rule the earth. This will be Our only assurance of 
happiness, both in this world and the next. O Jabali, you should not 
speak in this way again, for to mislead the people is a very great sin.” 
Räma, having spoken to instruct all people, fell silent. He knew Jabali’s 
heart and did not feel anger toward him, only toward his words. The 
people’s pain was Räma’s pain and He knew that Jabali’s presentation of 
hedonism led only to pain. 
Saying “It is exactly as you say,” Jabali prostrated himself before Räma 
and returned to his place among the other Brahmins.  
Vasiñöha stood up and spoke in the midst of the assembly. “This Jabali 
knows well of the soul and its actual happiness. He spoke only out of his 
desire to see You installed as the king. This is also my desire, O Raghava. 
As the emperor’s eldest son it behooves You to now accept the throne. 
You need entertain no doubt in this regard.” 
Vasiñöha recounted the history of Räma’s line. One by one he named the 
previous kings and explained how each had handed the kingdom to their 
eldest son. Finally he said, “O Räma, this is my instruction to You. I am 
Your preceptor and as such I am even more worthy of your obedience 
than Your father. Indeed, I was also his preceptor. Therefore I command 
You to accept the throne of Ayodhya.”  
The sage had spoken only out of love. He was aware that Räma was 
enacting a divine plan by remaining in the forest, but still he longed for 
Him to return.  
Räma looked with affection at Vasiñöa and replied, “The debt owed to 
one’s parents cannot be easily repaid, O learned sage. They give 
everything they have for their children. Feeding them, nurturing them, 
putting them to bed and rubbing them with oil, the father and mother 
give their love at every moment. My worthy father’s word should not 
prove false due to My negligence, for I wish to render him some service 
in return for his love.” 
It was obvious that Räma was not going to be convinced by anyone to 
leave the forest. Bharata suddenly stood up and exclaimed, “Seated upon 
blades of kusha grass spread on the ground, I shall remain here in front 
of Räma’s door. Without taking food or water I will not move until

180 
Räma agrees to accept the throne.” 
Quickly grabbing a bunch of grass from near Räma’s hut, Bharata spread 
it out and sat down. Räma said in surprise, “O Bharata, why do You take 
such a vow? Your duty is to rule the kingdom, not sit upon the ground 
like a destitute Brahmin.” 
Bharata turned toward the people and implored, “Why do you not plead 
with My brother to return?” 
A leader of the Brahmin community stepped forward. “It is clear that 
Räma will not be swayed from His determination to follow His father’s 
command. What can we do? Our hearts are breaking with the thought of 
Räma’s separation.” 
Räma glanced lovingly at the Brahmin and then said to Bharata, “Get 
up, O tiger among men. Return to Ayodhya. Become the king and rule 
with justice. In fourteen years You will see me returned.” 
Bharata stood up and replied to Räma, “If Our father’s order must be 
followed, then allow Me to stay here in Your place.” 
Räma gently admonished Bharata, telling Him that it was not possible 
for one’s promise to be fulfilled by another person. Räma had given His 
word and it was He who had to keep that word. He promised that when 
He returned to Ayodhya He would accept the throne, but He would not 
under any condition return before the fourteen years had expired. 
The many eminent sages who were present had listened intently to the 
conversation between the two divine brothers. They were thrilled and 
astonished, thinking of the deep import of Their discussion. Hosts of 
heavenly åñis along with the gods, stood invisible in the sky. The divine 
beings then spoke so that only Räma and His brothers could hear. 
“Hearing this wondrous dialogue between Räma and Bharata, we long to 
hear it again and again,” said one of the gods. “O Bharata, please allow 
Räma to fulfill His promise to His father. By virtue of Räma’s vow 
Daçaratha has ascended to the highest heaven, freed of his debt to 
Kaikeyi.” 
The gods were anxious for Rävaëa’s death which they saw as imminent. 
They showered celestial flowers on Räma and His brothers and then 
returned to their heavenly abodes. Encouraged by hearing the demigods, 
Bharata was prepared to accept the responsibility of ruling Ayodhya. 
Falling at Räma’s feet He voiced His final doubts. “My lord, how does

181 
the power to rule our vast kingdom exist in Me? I am young and 
inexperienced. Nor am I possessed of any great ability. Surely the 
kingdom will meet with ruin under My incapable guidance.” 
Räma raised His younger brother and placed Him on His lap. Stroking 
His head He said, “Your humility is Your real qualification. By virtue of 
this wisdom You can protect the entire earth. Always seek the counsel of 
learned Brahmins and rule with confidence, O jewel among men.” 
Bharata then brought before Räma a pair of ornate wooden sandals 
embellished with gold. He put them on the ground and said, “Please 
place Your feet in these sandals, dear Räma. Let these shoes be the rulers 
of the kingdom and I shall remain as their servant.” 
Räma immediately put on the sandals and then took them off again, 
handing them back to Bharata. Bharata placed the sandals on His head. 
“For the coming fourteen years I shall live in a hut outside Ayodhya,” 
He said, sighing. “I shall survive on only fruits and roots and My hair 
shall be matted. If at the end of this time I do not see You return, O 
Räma, then I shall enter blazing fire.” 
“So be it,” replied Räma and He embraced each of His brothers. He 
again told Bharata that Kaikeyi should not be condemned and that she 
should be treated with kindness. Räma paid His respects to all the people 
there according to their positions, speaking fond farewells to everyone. 
Kaushalya and the other queens stood in front of Räma unable to say 
anything, their throats choked and their eyes flooded with tears. Räma 
bowed to each of them in turn. 
As the queens departed Kaikeyi turned and spoke privately to Räma. 
She censured herself again and again, begging His forgiveness. The 
queen fell at Räma’s feet. “I am entirely ignorant and have acted like a 
fool,” she said tearfully, “but now I understand that Y?ou are the eternal 
Supreme Person. Who would not be bewildered upon seeing Your 
human pastimes? O Lord, please forgive me and destroy my attachments 
to family and wealth.” 
Räma smiled at her with affection. “It was I who, for the sake of the 
gods, prompted you to act as you did,” he said. “You are not to blame, nor 
am I angry with you. Hardly anyone knows My real nature. I am never 
affected by desire in the same way as ordinary men. I act simply to 
reciprocate the service and love I am given. Gentle lady, return to

182 
Ayodhya and live peacefully. Think of Me day and night and you will 
soon be freed from all your attachments to this temporary world.” 
Kaikeyi felt deeply relieved and gladdened. With folded hands she 
circumambulated Räma and again joined the other queens. 
Bharata had the golden sandals placed upon the royal elephant and 
shielded by the white umbrella. With the elephant at their head, the 
citizens of Ayodhya returned the way they had come. 
As they entered Ayodhya some days later, they saw that it had become 
dark and desolate. The streets were unswept and rubbish was strewn all 
around. The doors and windows of the empty houses swung open. The 
city had become overrun by cats and owls, and mice ran everywhere. No 
offerings were being made in the temples and all the shops and pleasure 
houses were closed. The streets were deserted and the city, which had 
always been full of the life and joy of countless people, was now silent 
and still. The city resembled a vast army which has been defeated in 
battle, its armor shattered, its ensigns torn down, and its heroes killed. 
Bharata made His way to Daçaratha’s palace, dejected to see the state of 
His beloved Ayodhya. After entering the palace, which was like a 
mountain cave abandoned by its lion, Bharata went into the assembly 
hall with Vasiñöha and His other counselors. He placed Räma’s sandals 
on the throne, then sat next to them and said, “I shall not accept the 
throne of Ayodhya. These sandals should be consecrated as the king and 
I shall be their servant only. Indeed, I shall live in a hermitage outside 
the city. When Räma returns I shall again place these sandals on His 
feet, as He alone is the king.” 
The Brahmins applauded Bharata. “So be it!” they exclaimed. They then 
duly installed the sandals with the coronation ceremony.  
Bharata then moved with Shatraghna into a small wooden hut, eating 
only forest fare and wearing ascetic dress. Each day He would submit the 
affairs of state before Räma’s sandals. Only then would He carry out any 
necessary action. Any gifts He received He would also offer to Räma’s 
sandals. In this way He ruled the kingdom. 
Chapter 6

183 
The Forest Sages 
After Bharata left, Räma continued to live on Chitrakuta Mountain. As 
the months passed, Räma began to notice that the åñis living nearby 
were always fearful and anxious. He approached the leading ascetics and, 
bowing down humbly, asked, “O venerable ones, has something in My 
behavior given you cause for concern? Have either My brother or I been 
acting in a way not worthy of Our esteemed forefathers? Is Sétä behaving 
in a way unbecoming a young woman?”  
Räma had noticed on several occasions that the Brahmins spoke 
together while glancing at Him. He knew they were worried about 
something. Seated before them with folded palms, Räma listened 
carefully as the leaders replied. 
“How could there ever be any fault in the behavior of You or Your 
brother, O Räma?” one åñi said. “What unseemly conduct will ever be 
seen in the gentle and high-born Sétä? We know well Your true 
identity.” 
The åñis glowed with ascetic power. They constantly chanted various 
names of God, fingering their wooden beads as they intoned the 
mantras. With a desire to render service to Räma, they addressed Him as 
if He were an ordinary man. 
“There is a powerful Räkñasa called Khara living near here,” the åñi 
continued. “This demon is Rävaëa’s younger brother and he is brutal, 
haughty and sinful. Angered by Your presence, he has been afflicting us 
with more vehemence than usual.” 
Räma frowned as he heard about the Räkñasa. He could not tolerate any 
aggression toward Brahmins. 
The åñi went on, “Khara and his hordes of Räkñasas, constantly impede 
our sacrifices. The demons show themselves in hideous, savage and 
frightening forms. They throw flesh, bones, excrement and urine down 
from the sky, defiling our sacrificial arenas. They make strange and 
terrible noises and it is only a matter of time before they become violent 
toward us. We therefore desire to leave this place.” 
Seeing sacrifice as their sacred duty, the ascetics wished to go to another

184 
forest where they would not be disturbed. As Brahmins, they would not 
themselves fight the Räkñasas, although they were capable of checking 
them by their mystic power. They also understood that Räma wanted to 
destroy the demons, especially their leader Rävaëa. 
Räma tried to reassure the åñis, but they were determined to leave. 
Having stayed on Chitrakuta for some years, the renounced ascetics 
were also concerned that they may have become attached to their 
material situation. Normally they moved continuously from forest to 
forest, staying only one or two years in each place. After speaking a little 
more with Räma, informing Him of where Khara lived, the Brahmins 
rose up in a body. With only their water pots and staffs they left the 
region. Räma followed them for some distance in order to see them off 
with respect. He then returned to His hermitage, considering in His 
mind how to deal with the Räkñasas. 
When He reached His hut, Räma said to Lakñman, “I think the time has 
come for Us to leave Chitrakuta. The Brahmins have left, and I am 
afraid that We will again be visited by the people who now know of Our 
whereabouts. We should leave for some other more remote forest.” 
Räma decided to make His way to the Dandaka forest, which was 
inhabited by the Räkñasas. He wanted to confront the demons. The two 
brothers donned Their weapons and, with Sétä walking between Them, 
immediately left. 
After journeying for some days They entered the Dandaka forest and 
came upon a cluster of hermitages. The åñis there greeted Them with 
respect. Those ascetics were endowed with divine vision, and they were 
astonished to see Räma and His companions. The Lord of all the worlds 
was standing before them. Seeing Räma and Sétä’s simple forest dress, 
the sages felt wonder and awe. They worshipped Räma with various 
prayers and offered Him a hut for the night.  
“Welcome indeed is Your arrival in these woods,” the åñis said. “The king 
is the protector of righteousness and the only refuge of the people. He 
stands with his scepter and metes out justice as God’s powerful 
representative. O Räma, we are Your subjects and Your servants. We are 
simple Brahmins who have renounced anger and controlled our senses. 
As such we deserve Your protection, even as a fetus is protected by its 
mother.”

185 
Entertaining Räma with forest produce, the ascetics described how the 
Räkñasas had become increasingly violent. Under Rävaëa’s leadership 
the demons had become fearless and they attacked the Brahmins 
constantly. Fourteen thousand powerful Räkñasas had taken up their 
residence in the Dandaka forest, headed by Rävaëa’s two brothers, 
Khara and Dushana. The situation was becoming unbearable for the 
sages. 
Räma and Lakñman listened gravely. They resolved to deal with the 
Räkñasas as soon as possible. While They were conversing with the åñis, 
Sétä met Anasuya, the sage Atri’s wife. Anasuya gave Sétä a celestial 
garment, garland and ornaments, along with celestial cosmetics and 
unguents. Sétä accepted the gifts graciously and with Her husband’s 
permission adorned Herself with them. After decorating Herself with 
the heavenly apparel, She shone brilliantly, exactly like Lakñmé, the 
eternal consort of Viñëu. 
After spending the night with the åñis, the princes left with Sétä and 
they penetrated deep into the Dandaka region. Lakñman moved ahead 
and cleared a path with His sword, cutting through the thick creepers 
and bushes. Sétä, Her head covered with Her cloth to protect Herself 
from the swarms of insects that flew about, walked in the middle. Räma 
brought up the rear, vigilantly watching on all sides and holding His bow 
at the ready. The cries of jackals and the shrieks of vultures and birds of 
prey could be heard all around. Here and there They saw uprooted, 
broken trees and the carcasses of slain beasts. 
As They broke through into a clearing They suddenly saw a dreadful-
looking Räkñasa. Powerfully built and as tall as several men, he stood 
entirely blocking Their way. With high pointed ears, fierce teeth 
protruding from his cavernous mouth, and blood-red eyes staring out 
from an ugly misshapen face, the demon was terrible to behold. He held 
a long lance on which he had speared four lions, three tigers, a couple of 
wolves and about ten spotted deer. Around his blackish and hairy body 
were draped tiger skins, still dripping with blood and fat. He resembled 
the god of death standing with his staff of justice. When he saw Räma 
and the others he let out a terrific roar that could be heard for many 
miles. He rushed furiously toward Them and quickly seized Sétä.  
Taking the princess a little distance away, the Räkñasa spoke to Räma

186 
and Lakñman in a voice resounding like claps of thunder. “Who are You 
two, looking like ascetics but carrying weapons? You shame the Brahmin 
class with this strange behavior. Why have You brought a woman into 
this dense forest? Sinful as You are, You shall meet death at my hands. 
This lady shall become my wife. Today I shall drink Your blood on the 
battlefield.” 
Sétä trembled in the monster’s clutches, like a sapling trembling in a 
storm. Seeing Her carried away by the Räkñasa, Räma said to Lakñman, 
“It seems that Kaikeyi’s cherished desire will today be fulfilled. This 
hideous demon has taken hold of My sinless wife. There is nothing more 
painful for Me than to see the princess of Videha touched by another. 
This is more painful even than the death of My father or the loss of the 
kingdom.” 
Räma cried tears of sorrow as He spoke. Lakñman became infuriated with 
the demon and He hissed like an angry cobra. “Why are You, the Lord of 
all beings with Me as Your servant, grieving like an orphan?” He asked. 
“The earth will soon drink this beast’s blood. The anger which I wrongly 
directed toward Bharata will today be released upon that foul demon. 
Watch now as My arrow pierces his breast and he whirls around, falling 
lifeless to the ground.” 
The Räkñasa, still awaiting a reply to his question, again boomed out, 
“Who are You and where are You going?” 
Räma moved closer to the demon and replied, “We are two warriors of 
the royal order of Raghu who have come here in exile. Tell us who you 
are and why you roam this forest, O wicked one.” 
“So, you are kings from Ayodhya!” the Räkñasa replied. “Know me to be 
Viradha, a Räkñasa who wanders this forest eating the flesh of sages. You 
should run away the way You came. I’ll not kill You. I have been granted 
boons by Brahmä and cannot be slain by any weapon, O Raghava. Leave 
quickly and abandon this princess to me. Assuming a human form I shall 
sport with Her as my wife.” 
Räma grew furious. With bloodshot eyes He spoke in a voice like Indra’s. 
“You pathetic fool! You are certainly seeking death. You will get it today 
on the battlefield. I shall not leave you with your life.” 
Without uttering another word Räma shot seven golden-feathered 
arrows at the demon. The arrows flew with the speed of Garuòa and

187 
pierced right through Viradha, falling upon the earth drenched with his 
blood. The Räkñasa roared in pain and released Sétä. With his lance 
upraised he rushed at Räma and Lakñman. The brothers immediately 
sent a shower of arrows at the demon.  
Even though pierced all over, Viradha remained standing. Laughing 
aloud he yawned contemptuously. He then hurled his lance at Räma 
with the force of a tempest. Räma at once fired two arrows which cut the 
lance into three pieces as it coursed toward Him. As it fell to the ground 
the shattered lance resembled a rocky mountain ledge that had been 
struck by Indra’s thunderbolt. Räma and Lakñman took out Their 
swords, which resembled two black serpents preparing to attack. They 
rushed at the Räkñasa and began striking him with great force. Viradha 
reached down and lifted both brothers, one on each arm. Placing Them 
on his shoulders he ran toward the woods.  
As Viradha approached the dense forest Sétä cried out, “Alas, where goes 
My lord? O best of the Räkñasas, please take Me also. How can I remain 
here alone?” 
Hearing Sétä’s plaintive wail, Räma raised His sword high and hacked off 
the demon’s right arm. Lakñman lopped off his left arm, and Viradha fell 
upon the ground in a swoon. Although striking him with Their swords 
and with kicks and punches, the brothers saw that the Räkñasa still did 
not die. Räma said to Lakñman, “It is clear that due to his boons this 
demon cannot be killed by force. We should bury him in a pit, for this is 
the traditional way of disposing of the Räkñasas. Quickly dig a large pit, 
O tiger among men!” 
Räma stood with His foot pressing down upon the Räkñasa’s neck. 
Viradha regained consciousness and said, “O Raghava, I am defeated by 
You. Your strength is not less than Indra’s. I now know You to be the all-
powerful Räma and Your wife the highly fortunate Sétä. I am the 
Gandharva named Tumburu. Due to not properly serving Kuvera, the 
lord of wealth, I was cursed by him.” 
The fallen Räkñasa explained how as Tumburu he had previously been 
Kuvera’s servant. One day Tumburu had been sporting with the Apsaräs 
and had failed to properly attend upon his master. In anger Kuvera had 
cursed him to enter a demon’s fierce form. Tumburu had pleaded for 
mercy and Kuvera had replied, “When Räma, the son of Daçaratha,

188 
defeats you in battle, then you will attain your own form and return to 
heaven.” 
Viradha spoke with difficulty. “By your grace, O Räma, I am freed from a 
terrible curse. I shall now go to my own abode. O Lord, ten miles from 
here lives the sage Sarabhanga, who longs to see You. Go to his 
hermitage, for he will give You good advice.” 
Viradha begged Räma to inter him in the pit so that he could die. Räma 
and Lakñman rolled the huge body of the Räkñasa into the hole Lakñman 
had dug. After covering him with earth and rocks, They comforted Sétä 
and then continued on Their way, looking for Sarabhanga’s hermitage. 
In the sky the gods had witnessed the whole scene. Seeing Räma, whom 
they knew to be the powerful Viñëu acting like a human, they were 
astonished. Nothing was beyond Räma’s knowledge or power, yet He 
accepted the feelings and actions of an ordinary man. Pondering upon 
the import of Räma’s deeds, the gods received Tumburu back to them. 
Räma searched for Sarabhanga, absorbed in a mood of affection for the 
sage. As the brothers came near the ascetic’s hermitage They saw in the 
sky a golden chariot. It shone like the midday sun and was drawn by a 
thousand greenish horses. A brilliant white canopy resembling a large 
cloud and decorated with magnificent garlands covered the chariot. 
Seated in the chariot was Indra, who was being fanned with white 
whisks by two beautiful young girls. In the sky many other gods 
surrounded Indra. Räma and Lakñman saw numerous Gandharvas and 
Siddhas, all dressed in resplendent silk garments and gold ornaments. 
All these high-souled beings were worshipping Indra with Vedic hymns. 
Upon seeing this wondrous sight Räma said to Lakñman, “O Lakñman, 
see here Indra’s wonderful chariot, full of grandeur. Those young men 
with broad chests and arms like iron clubs, wearing red garments and 
gold earrings and surrounding him in the hundreds, appear as 
unassailable as tigers.” 
Lakñman gazed up at the host of gods assembled in the sky. All of them 
appeared youthful and all had garlands as bright as fire on their chests. 
As the two princes looked on, the gods rose up into the sky and 
vanished. Amazed at this sight Räma and Lakñman walked on and 
entered Sarabhanga’s hermitage. 
Sarabhanga was seated before the sacrificial fire. Having practiced

189 
asceticism for many years, he was able to fix his mind upon the Supreme 
Person within his heart. He had realized that Räma was that same 
person. In meditation the sage prayed that he might be able to see God 
in His human form. Accordingly, Räma approached the old ascetic and 
bowed low before him, touching his feet and saying, “I am Räma, and 
this is My brother Lakñman and My wife Sétä. At Viradha’s behest, We 
have sought your presence. Viradha has now risen to heaven with the 
gods. Pray tell Us what We should do, O jewel among sages.” 
Sarabhanga rose immediately, his eyes flooded with tears. He showed the 
three travelers a seat. Offering Them water and fruits, he said, “O Räma, 
there is no one more kind or merciful. After meditating for a very long 
time and reaching the end of my attachments to this world, I saw You in 
my heart. Now I see You here as the son of Daçaratha.” 
After offering many prayers the sage fell silent. He sat for some time 
gazing with love upon Räma’s face. Smiling, Räma asked, “Why did I see 
here the lord of the gods, O sage?” 
The sage said that Indra had come to take him to the higher planets, 
which he had earned as a result of his asceticism. Sarabhanga explained 
that, desiring to remain on earth to see Räma, he had sent Indra away. 
“Now that I have seen Your transcendental form I have no desire to go 
to the heavenly worlds, O Raghava,” Sarabhanga said. “Please take from 
me my ascetic merits.” 
“You will doubtlessly rise beyond even the highest heaven and attain 
Viñëu’s immortal abode, O learned one,” Räma replied. “But before 
leaving, pray tell Me where I should go now.” 
Sarabhanga directed Räma to the hermitage of another sage named 
Sutikshna. He then gazed at Räma and entered a deep meditation. From 
within himself Sarabhanga invoked the fire element and immolated his 
mortal frame, which quickly burned to ashes. The sage appeared in a 
shining spiritual body and, after offering his respects to Räma, rose up 
into the sky. 
Räma remained seated in Sarabhanga’s hermitage and many other åñis 
came there and begged Him to dispose of the Räkñasas. They told Him 
how the demons were killing thousands of Brahmins. Räma assured the 
åñis that He would annihilate the Räkñasas in due course. He then left 
and went toward Sutikshna’s hermitage, following Sarabhanga’s

190 
directions. 
Upon seeing Räma, Sutikshna offered many prayers and then took Him 
to see the powerful Åñi Agastya. On the way to Agastya They saw that 
the forest resembled the famous Nandana grove in the heavens. The 
ground was suddenly smooth, carpeted with soft grasses. Trees bent 
down on both sides under their heavy loads of ripe fruits. The clear lakes 
were filled with lotuses and crowded with swans, cranes and many other 
varieties of water birds. Flowers grew and trees blossomed everywhere. 
The animals were docile and approached the travelers without fear.  
Räma looked around at the wonderful scenery. “It seems We are near 
Agastya’s hermitage,” he said. “By his austerities the sage has 
transformed this forest into heaven. We will soon behold that shining 
åñi.” 
Requested by Lakñman, Räma told various stories about Agastya. He 
kept His brother and Sétä entertained as They walked throughout the 
day. Finally by evening They arrived at the hermitage. As They 
approached it Räma said, “Let Us go see Agastya, for he will surely bless 
Us with all good fortune. I think that with his permission We should 
remain in this region for the rest of Our stay in the forest.” 
Sutikshna went ahead and informed Agastya of their arrival. The sage 
quickly had them brought into his hermitage. As they entered the large 
compound they saw numerous sacrificial fires, each dedicated to a 
particular god and tended by Agastya’s disciples. All the principal 
deities, including the Supreme Lord, Viñëu, as well as Çiva, Brahmä and 
dozens of other gods were being worshipped. Sacrificial smoke and the 
sound of mantras filled the air.  
Agastya, feeling ecstasy, rose up from his seat and came swiftly toward 
Räma. Räma saw the sage coming and along with Lakñman He 
immediately prostrated Himself on the ground. Sétä stood close behind 
with Her hands folded and head bowed. 
Agastya raised Räma up and said, “I have been thinking of You for a 
long time, O Raghava. I am blessed by Your appearance here. You are 
always beyond the influence of the unsurpassable material energy. 
Simply by remembering You one can be carried beyond the great ocean 
of birth, death and suffering. What then can be said of one who sees 
You?”

191 
Agastya sat the travelers down and after offering oblations into the 
sacred fire, he presented them with water and food. Seated in 
meditation the sage then caused a great golden bow to appear. There 
were also two quivers filled with sharp arrows which blazed like fire, and 
a long sword sheathed in a golden scabbard. Agastya presented the 
weapons to Räma, telling Him how in a previous age Viñëu had used 
them to assist the gods in a war against the demons.  
Räma accepted the celestial weapons respectfully and then asked the 
sage to tell Him of a place where He could live. After again meditating 
for a while the sage replied, “By virtue of my austerities and meditation I 
have come to know You and understand Your purpose, O Räma. I 
therefore suggest You go to a nearby forest called Panchavati. It is 
beautiful and sanctified. At that place all Your desires will be fulfilled.” 
Agastya gave the brothers directions. After taking leave, Räma, 
Lakñman and Sétä began the twenty-mile walk to Panchavati, making 
Their way along the narrow forest paths. 
After a few miles they came across a huge vulture lying in a clearing. 
Räma and Lakñman, assuming it to be a Räkñasa, quickly prepared to 
fight. Räma carefully approached the vulture, which resembled a hill. 
“I am Räma and this is My brother Lakñman, two descendants of Raghu,” 
He declared. “Who are you and what is your race?” 
In gentle speech the bird replied that he was an old friend of Daçaratha. 
His name was Jatayu and he was the king of the vultures. He recounted 
to Räma his entire lineage, which began with the ancient sage Kardama. 
In the course of his narration Jatayu described how all the various 
species of birds and animals had descended. Jatayu was the nephew of 
Garuòa, the invincible eagle carrier of Viñëu.  
“This forest is infested with Räkñasas and vicious beasts,” Jatayu said. 
“Allow me to accompany You in the forest. I shall protect Sétä when You 
two brothers go out to gather food.” 
Räma knew of Jatayu’s friendship with His father. He joyfully embraced 
the great bird and gave His permission for Jatayu to follow Him. Räma 
then continued toward Panchavati, eager to encounter the demons. 
After arriving at Panchavati, Räma selected a spot near the sacred river 
Godavari. Lakñman sanctified the spot with prayers and water from 
river. He constructed a large hut with mud walls, supported on strong

192 
wooden pillars, its roof thatched with kusha grass and reeds. Räma was 
delighted to see the beautiful cottage and He embraced Lakñman. “With 
You as His son, virtuous and always attentive to My needs and desires, 
surely the king still lives,” Räma said affectionately. “O Lakñman, You 
are to Me as good as My beloved father.” 
Räma and Sétä settled in the dwelling and lived peacefully, bathing in 
the Godavari and enjoying the sights and sounds of the forest. 
Chapter 7 
The Räkñasé Shurpanakha 
The time passed quickly for Räma and His companions. They lived in 
almost complete solitude, seeing only an occasional ascetic. Although 
Räma wanted to face the Räkñasas, no opportunity presented itself. 
One day, just as Their tenth winter in exile was ending, a powerful 
Räkñasé named Shurpanakha, a sister of Rävaëa, came to the Panchavati 
region. While she was roaming about looking for food, she saw Räma’s 
footprints and followed them. Soon she arrived at Räma’s cottage. As 
she came near the hermitage she saw Räma seated outside His hut. She 
was immediately attracted to the handsome Räma, with His powerful 
frame and majestic bearing. Her mind filled with lust, she assumed the 
form of a beautiful woman and walked slowly before Him. 
“Who are You, dressed in ascetic garb yet wielding weapons?” the 
Räkñasé asked. “Why have You come to this forest which is frequented 
by Räkñasas? Be pleased to tell me.” 
Räma looked guilelessly at the Räkñasé. “There was a powerful king 
named Daçaratha,” He replied. “I am his son Räma and this is My 
brother Lakñman. There is the princess of Videha, My wife Sétä. On My 
father’s command I am sojourning here in the forest. Now tell Me, who 
are you, O beautiful maiden? Who is your husband? You seem to Me to 
be a Räkñasé capable of assuming various guises. Tell Me truly why you 
have approached Me.” 
Shurpanakha moved her hips and glanced down coyly. “Know me to be

193 
Shurpanakha, sister of the unconquerable Rävaëa. Living here with my 
other brothers, Khara and Dushana, I range these woods devouring 
ascetics and causing fear to all. However, upon seeing You I long to 
embrace You as my husband.” 
Shurpanakha hoped that, even if Räma was not attracted to her, out of 
fear of her He might accede to her request. Hearing that she was a 
Rakshashi, Räma and Lakñman looked at her in surprise. In her fine silks 
and ornaments she appeared exactly like a celestial maiden. She moved 
closer to Räma and smiled. “O Räma, of what use to You is this skinny 
and deformed woman?” she asked, throwing a disdainful glance at Sétä. 
“Accept me as Your wife. I am possessed of great power. After devouring 
this wife and brother of Yours, I will carry You to high mountain reaches 
where we can sport together in joy.” 
Räma laughed heartily. He decided to joke with the infatuated Räkñasé. 
“O beautiful woman, I am already married. For ladies like you it is always 
painful to have a co-wife. Here though is My younger brother. He is 
handsome and highly qualified and is as yet unmarried. Why not take 
Him as your worthy husband?” 
Shurpanakha turned quickly toward Lakñman, who stood smiling with 
His hand resting on His bow. The Räkñasé moved toward Him. “See my 
alluring form,” she said. “I am certainly worthy of becoming Your wife, 
O handsome one. Let us range together happily through these woods.” 
Lakñman caught Räma’s joking mood. “Why do you seek to become a 
maidservant, foolish woman?” He asked with a laugh. “I am dependent 
on My older brother. As My wife you will be Sétä’s servant. You should 
seek only Räma as your husband. Who could actually refuse you in favor 
of a human lady? Surely Räma will soon abandon the weak and worn-out 
Sétä once you are his wife.” 
Shurpanakha was too simple to catch the joke. She took Lakñman’s 
words to be true and turned again toward Räma, who sat next to Sétä. 
“Why do you cling to this hideous wife of Yours?” she asked, growing 
impatient. “If it is her who stands between You and me, I shall now 
devour Her, even as You watch. We shall then roam together at ease.” 
Shurpanakha rushed furiously toward Sétä, even as a large meteor would 
fall toward the earth. She assumed her natural form as a Räkñasé, 
appearing like a black cloud. Räma immediately roared and checked her

194 
by the sound alone. As she fell back Räma said angrily to Lakñman, “It is 
clear that jests should not be had with cruel, low-class people. See how 
We have placed Sétä in danger. O mighty brother! Take Your sword and 
quickly disable this ugly, vile and wanton being. Do not slay her, as she is 
a woman.” 
Lakñman drew His sword. He moved swiftly and sliced off the demon’s 
long nose and pointed ears. Shurpanakha screamed in pain. She realized 
the brothers were formidable and quickly ran off into the woods. Her 
dissonant and horrible cries could be heard disappearing into the 
distance as she retreated. She bled profusely and raised her arms as she 
ran, roaring like a monsoon cloud.  
The Räkñasé sought her brother Khara, who was the leader of the 
Räkñasas in the forest. Going before him drenched in blood and crying 
loudly, she dropped upon the ground like a bolt from the blue. Khara sat 
surrounded by numerous powerful Räkñasas. He was holding a massive 
club. When he saw his sister’s state, he frowned. 
“What fool has done this to you?” the Räkñasa snarled. “Who has 
ignorantly goaded a poisonous serpent with his finger? Whoever has 
assailed you has fastened around his neck the noose of death. Tell me 
explicitly, O sister, who will today meet with his end at my hands?” 
Khara stood up. He was proud and arrogant. He took the offense to his 
sister as a personal insult. “Who could possibly have been so bold as to 
provoke me?” he thundered. “Whose foaming blood will soak the earth 
today? Whose flesh will the vultures delightedly tear from his body when 
he lies slain by me on the battlefield? Quickly tell me the name and 
whereabouts of the wretch. I do not see a being in the three worlds of 
heaven, earth and hell who would dare challenge me, including Indra 
himself!” 
Shurpanakha gathered her senses and answered her furious brother. She 
told him how she had seen Räma and Lakñman in the forest, appearing 
young and tender yet obviously possessed of terrific strength. “These two 
brothers look like Gandharva kings,” she said. “They are dressed like 
ascetics and seem to be in perfect control of Their senses. I could not 
ascertain if They were humans, gods or some other divine beings. In 
their midst I saw a young lady of faultless form and beauty who shone 
like the moon. On account of that lady I was reduced to this state by

195 
those two brothers.” 
Shurpanakha asked Khara to kill them immediately. Holding a cloth to 
her wounded face she said, “I long to drink the blood of that slender 
woman as well as of those two brothers. Quickly accomplish my desire, 
dear brother. Go now to where they are staying and slay them in an 
encounter.” 
Khara at once ordered fourteen powerful Räkñasas to go and attack the 
two princes. He told his sister to accompany them. “Once these Räkñasas 
have made short work of those three, you may drink Their gushing 
blood. Dragging Their corpses on the field of battle, pierce Their soft 
flesh with your long teeth.” 
Like clouds driven in a storm, the fourteen Räkñasas along with 
Shurpanakha sped toward Räma’s hermitage. As they arrived they saw 
Räma seated at ease with Sétä in front of Their hut. Lakñman was nearby 
chopping firewood. Räma saw the Räkñasas entering the area of His 
hermitage and He said to Lakñman, “Wait here by Sétä’s side, O son of 
Sumitra. I shall quickly dispatch these evil marauders of the forest. 
Indeed, I have long awaited just such an opportunity.” 
Räma stood up and strung His bow in an instant. He called out to the 
Räkñasas, “Halt! Why do you seek to injure Us? We live here peacefully, 
harming no one. Armed with My bow I aim to make this forest free from 
the likes of you. If you have any love of life, then flee now and never 
return. Otherwise stand on the battlefield and witness My show of 
strength.” 
The Räkñasas looked at Räma and laughed. Each of them was twice as 
tall as Räma. Their bodies were hugely powerful and they were equipped 
with fierce weapons. They considered Räma’s threat comical. It was a 
rare human who could face even one Räkñasa in battle, and they were 
fourteen. Their leader replied harshly to Räma. 
“Foolish human! What power do You have to face us in battle?” he said, 
his voice resounding around Räma’s hermitage like a great drum. “You 
have angered our master Khara and thereby brought death upon Your 
head. Hit by our iron clubs and swords, You will soon succumb to our 
might. Boast while You can, for in a moment You will give up Your valor 
and indeed Your life.” 
All fourteen Räkñasas rushed at Räma. They roared loudly and hurled

196 
large iron darts. Räma stood His ground. Releasing fourteen arrows He 
cut down the darts as they flew at Him. The Räkñasas raised their swords 
and closed on Räma, their mouths open and their eyes bloodshot. Räma, 
moving more quickly than the eye could see, at once fired fourteen 
arrows one after another at each of the demons. His long, straight shafts 
were made wholly of iron with points sharpened on stone. They 
screamed through the air and hit each demon in the chest. Their hearts 
ripped apart, the Räkñasas fell to the earth, soaked in blood, like 
fourteen great trees felled by a storm. 
Shurpanakha was astonished to see Räma’s prowess. Surely He was not 
an ordinary man, nor His weapons those of an ordinary warrior. She ran 
away in fear and disappointment and fell again before Khara.  
Khara looked at her in surprise. “Why are you still crying?” he asked. “I 
have already sent fourteen brave fighters to oblige you. Those Räkñasas 
are unassailable and devoted to pleasing me. Without doubt they will 
satisfy your desire. With me and my army as your protector why do you 
wail?” 
Shurpanakha told her brother what had happened. She sat before him 
trembling, with blood encrusted on her face and clothes. Khara listened 
in amazement as she spoke.  
“Although your fourteen fighters were angry and impetuous, they were 
quickly slain by Räma. He exhibited fearsome energy and power. His 
arrows were like rods of death. All fourteen Räkñasas are now prostrate 
upon the ground, killed easily by Räma. O Khara, my mind is possessed 
by terror when I think of Räma. Be my protector!” 
Shurpanakha rolled about on the ground, beating her chest and 
shedding tears. She mocked her astonished brother, trying to goad him 
into battle with Räma. “What is the use of your idle boasts? Go out and 
face Räma in a fight. You will soon see your energy and pride humbled. 
Or if you actually do have any power, then let it be proved. Slay the two 
brothers today and avenge me and your fourteen servants.” 
Khara rose up like a serpent that had just been kicked. He screamed in 
anger. In the midst of the other demons he roared, “My fury is 
immeasurable! It cannot be held in check any more than a mighty ocean 
wave. By virtue of my strength I hold this human Räma of no account 
whatsoever. His life is already ended. Dry your tears, sister. Today you

197 
will see Räma sent to Yamaräja’s abode. After I sever His head with my 
axe, you will drink His hot blood.” 
Shurpanakha was delighted. She praised her brother as a giant among 
the Räkñasas. Despite his boasts, however, Khara considered Räma a 
formidable opponent. He gave instructions to his brother and general, 
Dushana. “O valiant one, prepare my chariot. Fill it with every kind of 
weapon. Order all of the fourteen thousand Räkñasas under my 
command to prepare themselves for battle. I myself will march at the 
head of the high-souled Räkñasas to destroy the arrogant Räma.” 
Dushana fetched Khara’s huge golden chariot, which shone like the sun 
and was drawn by a hundred spotted horses. It resembled a peak of the 
golden Mount Meru. In its center it had a large ensign pole made of 
cat’s-eye jewels. The chariot was bedecked with small gold bells and its 
sides were studded with red and blue gems and embellished with carvings 
of alligators, flowers, trees, mountains, lions, tigers and flocks of birds. 
Many flags flew from tall poles and it had eight golden wheels. Khara 
indignantly ascended the chariot and, raising his sword, ordered the 
army to advance. With a great clamor the vast army sallied forth from 
the Janasthana forest. Holding clubs, darts, razor-sharp axes, javelins, 
maces, swords, scimitars, bows and sharpened discuses, they moved off, 
all shouting their battle cries. 
Khara urged his charioteer to spur on the horses. The sound of the swift 
moving chariot filled the four quarters. The army followed behind 
Khara, some running on foot, some coursing through the air, others 
riding horses and still others on the backs of elephants. They were all 
seized with a desire to kill the enemy.  
As they drove forward, however, they saw various evil omens. The sky 
above them was covered with a huge grey cloud which poured down 
blood-red water. Khara’s horses stumbled and fell even on level ground. 
The sun appeared to be surrounded by a dark, red-edged halo. A 
gigantic, frightful vulture settled on Khara’s ensign pole. Carnivorous 
beasts and birds cried in discordant notes and jackals yelled. The wind 
blew violently and thick darkness covered the four quarters. Stars 
flashed in the sky and meteors descended with roaring sounds. 
Khara felt his left arm throbbing violently. His voice grew faint and his 
eyes were filled with tears. A sharp pain filled his head and he heard a

198 
loud ringing in his ears. Even though he saw these omens, however, out 
of folly Khara did not return. He laughed loudly and said to his 
followers, “Disregard these evil portents, O Räkñasas. They do not 
bother me in the least, although they are terrible and inauspicious. I am 
able to stand before Death himself. With my sharp arrows I can shoot 
the stars from the sky.” 
Khara railed foolishly, considering the omens to be sent by the gods, for 
whom he cared little. He raised his battle-ax and bellowed, making the 
earth shake. “How can I return without slaying Räma and Lakñman, who 
are so proud of Their strength? Today my sister will be gratified with the 
blood of those humans. I have never been defeated in battle and am 
unafraid even of Indra when he stands with the whole heavenly host.” 
The demons felt joy upon hearing Khara’s valiant speech. As if bound 
and dragged by the noose of death they raced toward Räma’s hermitage. 
In the sky many åñis assembled to witness the encounter. Gods, 
Gandharvas, Siddhas and Cäraëas came in their aerial cars. The 
celestial beings, who were friendly to all, spoke together. “May all be well 
with the Brahmins,” they said. “Even as Viñëu conquered the foremost 
demons with his discus weapon, may Räma annihilate the Räkñasas.” 
While the gods looked on, Khara, surrounded by his powerful generals, 
rushed forward, eagerly seeking combat. The Räkñasas suddenly 
approached the two princes, even as a group of planets might rush 
toward the sun and the moon. 
From his hermitage Räma had also seen the evil omens. “Behold these 
portents, O brother, foreboding the imminent destruction of the 
Räkñasas. These grey clouds are raining blood, while My arrows are 
shaking in Their quivers. This undoubtedly means death will soon 
overtake the entire Räkñasa horde.” 
Räma felt His right arm throb and His mind becoming enlivened. Such 
favorable omens indicated His victory, although all around Him He saw 
evil portents. He concluded that there would shortly be an encounter 
between Himself and the Räkñasas, from which He would emerge 
victorious. 
As Räma contemplated in this way He heard the distant crash of Khara’s 
advancing army. The sound of beating drums and roaring Räkñasas filled 
the air. Quickly taking Sétä by the hand, Räma said to Lakñman, “Take

199 
this delicate princess to some safe cave on the mountain. Please don’t 
hesitate.” 
Räma knew His brother was longing to confront the Räkñasas, but Sétä 
had to be protected. Lakñman obeyed Räma’s order immediately and 
took Sétä to a concealed cave which was difficult to reach. After placing 
Her inside He stood at the entrance holding His bow. 
Räma put on the golden coat of mail Agastya had given Him. He 
strapped on the two inexhaustible quivers of arrows and tied His sword 
to His belt. Standing rooted to the spot Räma looked like a brilliant 
flame suddenly appearing in darkness. He twanged His bow, which filled 
the quarters with its terrifying sound. 
The gods looked on, eager for the Räkñasas to be destroyed. They gazed 
at Räma, who stood fearlessly before the charging Räkñasas. He 
resembled the invincible Çiva seized with fury, but He was single-
handedly facing fourteen thousand terrible demons. Curious to see the 
outcome, the gods watched in anticipation. 
As the Räkñasa army rushed toward Räma they seemed like a mass of 
dark blue clouds. The forest animals fled, terrified by the sound of the 
approaching army. Räma suddenly saw the Räkñasas coming at Him from 
all sides. They screamed in fury and hurled their spears, darts and clubs. 
From his chariot Khara released a thousand flaming arrows and roared 
loudly. 
Räma stood firm. He was pierced with numerous arrows and His limbs 
were smeared with blood. With His own arrows He cut down the rain of 
weapons. Axes, swords, lances and spiked maces were thrown at Him 
with the force of a tempest. Räma whirled around and parried the 
weapons with His straight-flying arrows. As the foremost Räkñasas closed 
in on Him, mounted on elephants, Räma seemed like Mount Sumeru 
assailed by thunderclouds. He did not feel afflicted even though struck 
again and again. Fully hemmed in on all sides, Räma looked like the sun 
screened by evening clouds. 
The gods felt dejected and fearful, beholding Räma standing alone amid 
thousands of Räkñasas. They cried out, “Victory to Räma!” 
Understanding their fear, Räma resolved to kill the Räkñasas. He began 
shooting His gold-tipped arrows, three or four at a time, in all directions. 
With His bow drawn constantly into a circle, Räma moved with the

200 
speed of a hawk. An unbroken line of deadly shafts left his bow. Those 
arrows passed right through the bodies of a dozen Räkñasas before falling 
to the earth. Räma’s arrows smashed the Räkñasas’ weapons and chariots 
and tore apart their golden armors.  
With their arms, legs and heads severed, countless Räkñasas fell lifeless 
to the ground. Räma was enraged. He shot innumerable shafts that could 
not be intercepted or endured and which killed the demons by the 
thousands. Horses, elephants and Räkñasas lay mangled on the ground. 
Crushed by Räma, the Räkñasas sent up a piteous wail. 
Some fierce and brave Räkñasas, who were leaders of the army and 
possessed of terrible might, rushed at Räma, hurling their barbed missiles 
and iron pikes. But Räma smashed their weapons to pieces even as they 
flew at Him. With razor-headed arrows He cut off the Räkñasas’ heads. 
They toppled over like trees knocked down by a blast from Garuòa’s 
wings. The surviving Räkñasas, wounded and dispirited, ran to Khara for 
protection. Khara consoled them and ordered Dushana to attack Räma.  
The mighty Dushana was capable of contending with ten thousand 
warriors at once. With a great roar he urged his chariot forward. The 
Räkñasas were encouraged to see their leader advance. Uprooting trees 
and lifting massive stone slabs, they charged once more at Räma. 
The dreadful encounter between Räma and the Räkñasas was fearful to 
witness. Räma alone appeared like hundreds of warriors. The demons 
could not tell when He took out His arrows or placed them on His bow. 
They only saw Him pulling His bowstring and an endless stream of 
arrows being fired. The demons rallied themselves and rushed at Räma 
all at once from every side. They hurled trees and rocks with great force. 
A diverse shower of weapons fell upon Räma, along with volleys of 
barbed arrows. 
Smothered by weapons, Räma invoked the celestial missile presided over 
by the Gandharvas. As He released the weapon, all directions became 
covered by blazing shafts. Under a canopy of arrows, darkness enveloped 
the battlefield and the demons fell back in fear. Hundreds dropped dead 
at once. The ground was strewn with heads wrapped in turbans adorned 
with bright jewels. Severed arms still clutching weapons lay everywhere. 
Headless trunks spouting forth blood ran about wildly before falling to 
the ground. Everywhere were bodies of Räkñasas, horses and elephants,

201 
along with broken chariots, shattered weapons, rocks smashed into 
powder and trees torn to pieces. 
The surviving Räkñasas were unable to face Räma. They stood frozen 
with fear. Dushana, seeing his army routed, sent up a great battle cry. He 
ordered his five thousand personal guards to attack. These Räkñasas had 
never known defeat. They were energetic and never turned their backs 
on the battlefield. With terrible impetuosity they incessantly assailed 
Räma on all sides. Fearful showers of scimitars, spiked maces, huge rocks 
and long swords fell upon Räma. Räma, becoming increasingly enraged, 
intercepted the volley of weapons with His arrows. Some weapons He 
struck down with His whirling sword as He slayed the Räkñasas, who fell 
like so many great oak trees cut at their roots. 
Dushana then rushed toward Räma in his chariot, discharging 
innumerable arrows like thunderbolts. Räma released a razor-like arrow 
which split apart Dushana’s bow. With four more shafts He killed the 
four horses drawing Dushana’s chariot. He then released a crescent-
headed arrow which severed the head of Dushana’s charioteer. With 
three more arrows Räma pierced Dushana’s chest.  
The demon jumped down from his chariot holding a mace which 
resembled a mountain peak. The glowing club was studded with sharp 
iron pikes and belted with gold. It was capable of crushing the celestial 
army and smashing down the gates of their citadels. Dushana tightly 
grasped that weapon, which resembled a large serpent and was stained 
with his enemies’ blood. Raising it above his head, he rushed at Räma 
with a huge roar.  
As Dushana bore down on Him, Räma lopped off his arms with a pair of 
arrows. Along with his bejeweled arms, Dushana’s club fell to the 
ground. With a third crescent-headed shaft Räma cut off Dushana’s 
head. Seeing Dushana slain, the gods exclaimed, “Excellent! Well done!”  
Räma then swiftly dispatched all of Dushana’s five thousand warriors to 
Death’s abode.  
Khara was practically stupefied with anger. Seeing his army all but 
annihilated he charged Räma. He sent ahead of him his own guards, a 
dozen of the mightiest Räkñasas. As one might greet guests, Räma 
greeted each of those demons with His sharp arrows. Those mystical 
shafts, given by Agastya, were encrusted with gold and diamonds and

202 
they blazed like fire. They emitted smoke and sparks as they sped 
through the air. Tearing into the demons’ bodies, they split their hearts 
in two. 
Khara looked on in astonishment. Who was this human? Besides his 
personal guard, the three-headed Trishira was the only other demon 
alive. Khara advanced toward Räma but Trishira checked him. “Simply 
command me, O lord, and I shall vanquish this man,” Trishira said, 
raising his mace. “See him thrown down today by my might. This wicked 
one deserves death at the hands of all Räkñasas. I shall kill Him now, or I 
will lay down my life on the battlefield. Then you may march against 
Räma yourself. Therefore, order me to fight.” 
Trishira, who was wishing only for death, received Khara’s permission. 
He mounted his glittering chariot and rushed against Räma. The demon 
appeared like a moving three-peaked mountain. His volleys of arrows 
resembled a black cloud. As he charged at Räma, he roared like the crash 
of a gigantic drum. Räma met him with a profuse number of swift arrows. 
Although the arrows dug into Trishira’s body he simply laughed. He 
hurled a golden lance, tipped with steel and fastened all over with many 
small bells. The lance glowed like fire as it sped toward Räma. Firing 
three arrows at once, Räma cut the lance into four pieces. It fell at His 
feet like four shining stars dropped from the heavens.  
Trishira immediately shot three barbed arrows which struck Räma on 
the forehead. With blood gushing from His head, Räma appeared 
beautiful, like a mountain tipped with red oxide. Provoked by Trishira’s 
attack, He laughingly shouted, “Just see this demon’s strength and valor. 
But what will it avail him? His arrows, although fired with all his power, 
strike Me like so many flowers. O demon, now see My prowess!” 
Räma became excited. He shot fourteen serpent-like arrows into 
Trishira’s chest. With four more shafts He killed the Räkñasa’s four 
horses. Räma severed the head of his charioteer with a broad-headed 
arrow. He then struck down the demon’s ensign and shattered his 
chariot. As Trishira leapt from his broken chariot, Räma struck him on 
the chest with an arrow imbued with the force of a thunderbolt. The 
Räkñasa stood stunned by that arrow. Räma quickly fired three razor-
headed arrows which lopped off the demon’s three heads, and the heads 
rolled on the ground with their golden earrings glittering. Trishira’s

203 
body fell like an uprooted tree and the ground shook. 
Khara felt fear enter his heart. His entire army was slain. Fierce 
Räkñasas who could face even the gods now lay dead on the battlefield. 
He looked at Räma, who stood as immovable as the Himälayan 
mountains. Still Khara urged his charioteer forward. He drew his great 
bow to a full circle and fired innumerable arrows at Räma. His blood-
sucking shafts sped through the air like angry serpents. Khara then 
displayed his mystic power and filled the four quarters with arrows.  
Räma at once countered Khara’s shafts with His own. The sky was soon 
covered with arrows and not even the sun was visible. The two warriors 
fought furiously, the battle resembling a fight between a lion and an 
elephant. Like a driver striking a lordly elephant with a goad, Khara 
struck Räma with a number of fierce arrows. The demon stood firmly 
rooted in his chariot like Death himself with noose in hand.  
Thinking Räma tired, the Räkñasa felt the moment opportune for his 
victory. He stood tall in his chariot and raised his frightful-looking bow. 
Räma, however, was no more concerned than a lion would be on seeing a 
small deer. Khara approached Räma as a moth approaches a fire. 
Displaying his dexterity, he split Räma’s bow in two with a razor-faced 
arrow. With seven more shafts each resembling Indra’s thunderbolt he 
pierced Räma at His vital points. He then covered Räma with another 
thousand arrows fired with blinding speed.  
Hit hard by Khara’s shafts, Räma’s bright armor fell in pieces to the 
ground. With arrows piercing Him all over his body, Räma became 
enraged. He shone on the battlefield like a smokeless fire. Räma raised 
Viñëu’s terrible bow and darted toward Khara. He cut down the demon’s 
ensign with a dozen gold-winged arrows. That gold ensign descended to 
earth like the setting sun. Khara continued to rain arrows on Räma, 
aiming for the vulnerable parts of His body.  
Räma became more and more furious. Grasping His bow tightly, He fired 
six carefully aimed arrows. One struck the demon in the head, two in his 
arms and three in his chest. Räma then shot thirteen more shafts as if 
they were one. With one He cut the chariot yoke; with four He killed 
the horses; with the sixth He cut off the head of Khara’s charioteer; the 
next four arrows shattered the chariot; the twelfth cut Khara’s bow; and 
the thirteenth pierced him deeply in the chest. All this happened in a

204 
matter of seconds. Screaming in fury Khara leapt clear of his smashed 
chariot, and he stood on the ground, mace in hand.  
Collected together in the sky, the gods and åñis applauded Räma, 
encouraging Him to quickly slay Khara.  
Räma then said to the Räkñasa, “You have pursued a ruthless and wicked 
course, O Räkñasa. With your vast army you have inflicted pain on all 
created beings. Only those who are sinful and hard-hearted perpetrate 
such acts. Therefore, you deserve to die at the hands of all beings, even 
as a venomous serpent should be killed.” 
Even though challenging the Räkñasa, Räma felt no malice toward the 
demon. As a ruler, He saw it as His duty to punish the wicked to correct 
them. Like a father correcting an errant son, He apprised Khara of his 
sins even as He meted out his punishment. He continued to castigate the 
Räkñasa in a booming voice that echoed throughout the forest. “One 
who continuously commits sinful acts soon sees the terrible results, O 
night-ranger. Just as a man who eats poisoned food soon dies, so one who 
performs sinful acts is quickly dragged down by his sins. I am here to 
punish sinners like you, O Khara. Pierced through by My arrows, you 
will today follow the path of those ascetics whom you have killed. Fight 
to the best of your ability; I will strike down your head like a ripe fruit!” 
Khara laughed. He was impervious to any good instructions. Beside 
himself with anger, the demon roared back, “Having killed only ordinary 
Räkñasas, O human, why are You vainly ranting? Those who are truly 
brave speak nothing of their valor. Only the vulgar brag as You are 
doing, O disgrace to the royal class! Just as brass taken for gold reveals its 
baseness when placed in fire, so You have shown Your baseness now that 
the hour of Your death has arrived.” 
Khara raised his heavy mace. “Obviously You do not see me standing 
here wielding my mace and holding the earth, with her heavy load of 
mountains, in balance,” he bellowed. “I am capable of killing You along 
with all the creatures in the three worlds. But enough talk! You have 
killed fourteen thousand Räkñasas. Now I shall wipe away their relatives’ 
tears by slaying You.” 
Khara whirled the mace and released it for Räma’s destruction. As it 
coursed swiftly through the air it shot out searing flames which burned 
the surrounding trees to ashes.

205 
With twenty steel-tipped arrows Räma shattered Khara’s mace to pieces. 
It fell to the ground like an angry serpent checked by mantras. Räma 
laughed at Khara. “Is that your best effort, O vile demon? It seems you 
are bold only in speech. Even as Garuòa snatched nectar from the gods, 
so I shall snatch away your life. The earth will drink deeply your foaming 
blood. With your head severed you will lie closely embracing the earth, 
like a man embracing his lover.” 
Räma continued to taunt Khara, reminding him of the many sages he 
had killed. Closely watching the demon all the time, Räma said, “When 
you are laid low by Me in protracted slumber, this forest will again 
become a happy abode for ascetics. Your wives and kinsmen will grieve 
today, as do the kinsmen of those you have slain. Try again, if you will, 
for your death is near.” 
Khara’s anger was again incited by Räma’s words. He foamed at the 
mouth. Looking around for another weapon he screamed, “Your mad 
talk is born of vanity alone. It is said that at the moment of death one 
cannot discern right from wrong. I see this to be true. Evidently your 
mind is thrown into confusion as your death approaches.” 
Khara saw a large tree nearby. He tore it from the earth and hurled it at 
Räma, exclaiming, “You are killed!” 
Räma was unmoved. He met the fast-flying tree with a volley of arrows. 
It fell in splinters and a shower of leaves. Determining to kill the 
Räkñasa at once, Räma became violently angry. He was covered in 
perspiration, and His face shone brightly. He pierced Khara with a 
thousand arrows. Torrents of foaming blood ran from the demon’s 
wounds like rivulets running down a mountainside. Khara was 
maddened and ran furiously at Räma. Taking a few steps backwards, 
Räma took out a shaft resembling Yamaräja’s mace. He placed it on His 
bow and imbued it with the celestial force of Indra’s thunderbolt. When 
the Räkñasa was almost upon Him, Räma released the arrow. It struck 
Khara full on the breast with a sound like thunder. The demon fell to 
the ground, a huge burning hole in his chest.  
As Khara fell dead, the Cäraëas sounded their celestial drums as a 
shower of flowers fell upon Räma, while the gods applauded, saying, 
“These violent Räkñasas, unslayable by any other, have been slain by 
Räma in less than two hours. His resolve and power exactly resembles

206 
that of Viñëu!” 
The sage Agastya, standing in the sky at the head of a large group of åñis, 
also spoke to Räma, “At Indra’s prompting and for this very purpose of 
killing the Räkñasas, Sarabhanga had You sent here. The åñis will now 
again inhabit this region to practice their austerities.” 
Lakñman then came out of the cave where He had hidden Sétä. Along 
with the gods and great sages, He praised Räma’s achievements. Sétä ran 
to Her husband and embraced Him tightly. She ran Her cool hands over 
His many wounds, crying tears of joy to see Him victorious over the 
Räkñasas. As night fell, thousands of carnivorous animals and birds 
descended on the battlefield. Räma and Sétä retired into Their hut and 
Lakñman sat nearby, keeping a lonely vigil. 
Chapter 8 
Rävaëa’s Lust is Incited 
There was one Räkñasa named Akampana who escaped from Räma. 
After seeing all his companions killed, Akampana fled to Lanka to 
inform Rävaëa of the news. Going before the lord of the Räkñasas, who 
was the scourge of all created beings and who took pleasure in giving 
pain to others, Akampana fell at his feet and said, “O great king, your 
entire army which was stationed in the Janasthana forest is now no 
more. Even the mighty Khara and Dushana are dead. Only I have 
somehow survived.” 
Rävaëa shook with anger when he heard this news. He gazed with his 
ten heads at the disheveled and fearful Räkñasa lying at his feet. The 
demon king rose up quickly from his golden throne. He was pitiless and 
rough, and he felt no compassion for the trembling Akampana. As he 
spoke he appeared about to consume Akampana in his rage. “Who, with 
his life all but ended, is responsible for this rash act?” he demanded. “O 
weak Räkñasa, what fool would dare antagonize Rävaëa? Even Indra, 
Kuvera or the great Yamaräja would not be safe if they offended me. I 
can burn fire and kill even Death himself!”

207 
Under the protection of Brahmä’s boon Rävaëa had become utterly 
conceited and arrogant. He considered himself unconquerable. Even the 
principal gods had been forced to retreat in battle against him. None of 
them could contradict Brahmä’s order. They would therefore not kill 
Rävaëa, even if capable. He had thus ranged the universe creating 
havoc and fearing nothing. He grabbed hold of Akampana. “Tell me the 
name of the wicked wretch who has slain my followers. You need not 
fear, for whoever it is will certainly die at my hands today.” 
Akampana was reassured by Rävaëa’s words. At least the demon king 
was not going to vent his anger on him. He replied, “It was a man who 
carried out this astonishing feat of killing the Räkñasa army. He is a son 
of Daçaratha named Räma. Tall and powerfully built, the prince 
possesses matchless strength. He alone annihilated the entire host of 
Räkñasas.” 
Rävaëa listened in disbelief. How was it possible? One Räkñasa against a 
large number of men was easy to believe, but a single man killing 
fourteen thousand Räkñasas was incredible. Rävaëa hissed like an angry 
snake. “Was this Räma accompanied by Indra and all the gods?” 
Seeing Rävaëa’s incredulity, Akampana went on describing Räma’s 
power. “It is difficult to even look upon Räma as He stands on the 
battlefield. His golden-winged arrows fall in thousands with the force of 
a tempest. He has mastered the celestial weapons and looks like Death 
incarnate while fighting. Whichever way the Räkñasas ran, stricken with 
fear, they saw Räma standing in their front. No gods assisted Him, O 
great one; He alone devastated your army.” 
Rävaëa snorted derisively. He would not be humiliated by any mere 
man. He thought of his own power. Thousands of years ago he had gone 
to the Himälayas, intent on performing austerities in order to gain 
unmatched material opulence. It was then that he approached Brahmä. 
Surviving on air alone, he took only one breath a day. When he failed 
after a long time to propitiate Brahmä, he began a sacrifice. He cut off 
his twenty arms one by one and offered them into the fire to please 
Brahmä. When Brahmä still did not appear, the demon began to cut off 
each of his ten heads and place them in the fire. At last Brahmä 
appeared before him. Rävaëa then secured his boon, which he now 
recalled. He had not asked for immunity to humans, but how could any

208 
human even look at him, never mind fight with him? Even the gods fled 
in fear when he mounted his chariot for battle. This Räma sounded most 
unusual but, nevertheless, Rävaëa was proud of his hard-won strength 
and felt sure he could kill Räma without difficulty. Standing with his 
back to Akampana, he said, “I shall go immediately and finish this 
Räma.” 
Akampana was intelligent. He had already realized Räma’s irresistible 
strength when he saw Him fighting. The Räkñasa had thus stood back 
from the fight and made his escape. He considered that Rävaëa’s 
chances of defeating Räma were slight. Therefore he advised his king. 
“When Räma is enraged, He cannot be tamed by any warrior. In my 
opinion he could, by the force of His arrows, tear down the very heavens 
with the sun, moon and constellations. He could stem the current of a 
flooded river or break down the shores of the ocean and deluge the 
entire world. With His arrows Räma could lift the earth itself. Indeed, 
that illustrious man could dissolve all the worlds and then create them 
again.” 
Rävaëa turned and looked pensively at Akampana. Clearly Räma was no 
ordinary man. Akampana was himself a powerful commander of the 
Räkñasa forces. He knew how to estimate the strength of the enemy. The 
Räkñasa king listened carefully as Akampana continued. “I do not think 
you will be able to defeat Räma in battle, any more than a sinful man 
can attain the regions of heaven. However, there is a way by which you 
can probably overcome Him. Listen as I tell you.” Rävaëa sat on his 
throne and leaned forward attentively as Akampana went on.  
“Räma has come to the forest with His wife, Sétä. I have heard She is 
more beautiful than any goddess, female Gandharva or Apsarä. From all 
accounts She is a stunning jewel among women who cannot be 
compared to any other. Surely She is dearer to Räma than His own life, 
as He has brought Her with Him even to the lonely forest. O king, by 
means of some trick kidnap Sétä. Räma will be overcome by grief and 
either die or be weakened enough for you to defeat Him.” 
Rävaëa pondered Akampana’s suggestion. He liked the idea. Thanking 
Akampana, he decided to go the next day to find Sétä. He first needed to 
seek the help of Maricha, the son of Tataka, who was well known for his 
magical powers. Rävaëa mounted his chariot, which shone like the sun

209 
and was drawn by great mules with the heads of fiends. As he sat in his 
golden chariot, which had a white canopy spread over it, he was fanned 
by attractive maidens. His strongly built body was the color of glossy 
black gems. With his ten heads and twenty arms he resembled a ten-
peaked mountain. As his chariot rose up to the sky, he cast his splendor 
like a thundercloud with flashes of lightning. 
The mighty Räkñasa moved swiftly ahead, surveying the scene below. 
Heading north toward the Himälayas, he saw beneath him the beautiful 
coastline. It was crowded with hermitages and graced with numerous 
woods and lakes filled with lotuses. Many Siddhas, Cäraëas, Gandharvas 
and other divine beings sported in great joy in and around those lakes. 
Thousands of Apsaräs danced and played with the gods. Rävaëa saw in 
the sky wonderful aerial cars, like white mansions, adorned with celestial 
garlands and carrying the residents of heaven. From the cars came the 
sounds of delightful music, which enlivened the heart and mind. 
Passing over great forests, Rävaëa came at last to the northern 
mountains. There he found Maricha’s hermitage. Defeated and punished 
by Räma, Maricha had retired to the forest and dedicated himself to the 
practice of penance. He looked up in surprise as Rävaëa’s chariot 
descended from the sky. Maricha rose up quickly and greeted the 
overlord of all the Räkñasas. “Welcome, great king,” he said 
reverentially. “I hope everything is well in Lanka. What has brought you 
to this lonely forest, inhabited only by ascetics?” 
Maricha offered Rävaëa celestial foods unknown to humans. He sat him 
on a mat of kusha grass and served him personally. Rävaëa only looked 
at the food and said to Maricha, “My entire army of Räkñasas led by the 
powerful Khara has been destroyed by Räma, a son of king Daçaratha, 
contending single-handedly and on foot. I am here to seek your 
assistance in abducting Räma’s wife Sétä. By this means only will I be 
able to overpower Räma.” 
Maricha stood up with a start. “By what enemy in the guise of a friend 
have you been tendered this advice?” he asked in horror. “Who have you 
offended so that they should suggest that you kidnap Räma’s wife? That 
person clearly seeks to rid the world of the Räkñasas’ lord. Using you as 
his tool, he desires to extract a fang from the jaws of a serpent. Who is it, 
O king, who has dealt you a powerful blow on the head, even as you slept

210 
peacefully?” 
Maricha paced up and down, shaking his head. He had already been 
convinced of Räma’s incomparable power. Hearing that He alone had 
killed Khara and his army only confirmed it all the more. He trembled as 
he continued to speak. “O Rävaëa, you should not even think of staring 
at Räma. That lion among men, whose sharp teeth are His numberless 
arrows, easily kills small animals in the form of Räkñasas skilled in battle. 
Do not hurl yourself into the vast and dreadful ocean of the angry 
Räma, whose arms are its alligators and whose weapons are its tossing 
waves. Remain peacefully in Lanka, enjoying with your wives, and allow 
Räma to sport in the woods with His wife Sétä.” 
Maricha spoke passionately. He continued to argue against the wisdom 
of Rävaëa’s antagonizing Räma. Rävaëa listened thoughtfully. He again 
recalled his omission to ask Brahmä for invincibility against humans. 
The Räkñasa king asked Maricha why he considered Räma so powerful. 
Telling him about the incident of Viçvämitra’s sacrifice, Maricha 
replied, “I was ranging the earth, my body appearing like a mountain, 
with a huge iron club in my hand. My might exceeded that of a thousand 
elephants. I would roam about in the forest eating the flesh of åñis. 
Considering me more powerful than even the gods, the sage Viçvämitra 
sought only Räma as his protector. Räma was a mere boy at that time. 
When I saw Him in Viçvämitra’s hermitage, I disregarded Him, thinking 
Him to be simply a child. However, with a single arrow Räma hit and 
threw me eight hundred miles into the ocean, and He slaughtered all of 
my powerful companions.” 
Maricha told Rävaëa how he returned to the forest again. He assumed 
the form of a sharabha, a fierce eight-legged carnivorous beast capable of 
killing even lions. In that form, accompanied by two other Räkñasas in 
similar forms, he continued to terrorize the åñis. One day he again came 
across Räma seated in His hermitage. Räkñasas in the form of sharabhas 
rushed at Räma, remembering their previous enmity. In an instant Räma 
had lifted and strung His bow, releasing three gold-tipped arrows which 
sped like thunderbolts. Maricha’s two companions were killed outright. 
Maricha himself had dodged the arrows and retreated in fear. He then 
decided to abandon his life of antagonizing åñis and retire to the 
mountains.

211 
Concluding his speech, Maricha said, “My fear of Räma has made me 
adopt this life of asceticism. Indeed, I live in continuous dread of that 
prince. In every tree I see Räma, clad in barks and wielding His bow, 
looking like Death personified standing with noose in hand. I actually 
see thousands of Rämas all around me. Indeed this whole forest appears 
to have turned into Räma. I see Him everywhere, even in dreams and 
meditations. If someone speaks out a word beginning with ‘R’, I shake 
with terror. O king, under no circumstances shall I be convinced to 
again stand before Räma.” 
Rävaëa sat silently after Maricha stopped speaking. Out of pride, the 
Räkñasa king still felt capable of dealing with Räma. He was not going to 
be afraid of a mere human. However, seeing Maricha’s reluctance to 
assist him, he decided to return to Lanka and await another opportunity. 
He felt sure that his path would soon cross with Räma’s. 
Soon after he arrived back at Lanka, Shurpanakha visited him. As he sat 
atop his seven-storied palace, surrounded by his ministers, his sister 
came and fell at his feet. Wailing piteously, she rolled about on the 
ground. She looked up at Rävaëa, who sat on his golden throne glowing 
like a fire fed with abundant fuel. His huge blackish body was covered by 
celestial robes, adorned with jeweled ornaments taken from the gods. 
His twenty arms, which could arrest the movement of the planets, 
looked like great tree trunks. They were marked by scars made by Indra’s 
thunderbolt and the other weapons of the gods. He stared down at 
Shurpanakha with his twenty reddish eyes.  
Rävaëa told his sister to get up and asked her why she was lamenting. 
Shurpanakha, displaying her mutilated face, answered him harshly. “Do 
you not see my disfigured face? What kind of protector are you, O king? 
I am a helpless woman and your sister, but I have been humiliated at the 
hands of a man. Do you not care for this, O powerful Räkñasa?” 
The Räkñasé shook with fear and anger as she continued to address the 
demon king. “Everyone reviles a monarch who is licentious and overly 
attached to sensual enjoyment. Such a king, who fails to properly attend 
to his state affairs, is soon ruined. O Rävaëa, are you not aware that you 
are losing control of your territories? Having formed enmity with the 
gods and the Brahmins, how can you expect to rest here in peace, 
enjoying the pleasures of life? You are childish and without any

212 
intelligence. You do not know what should be done and will therefore 
lose your kingdom before long.” 
Hearing such a searing rebuke in the midst of his ministers enraged 
Rävaëa. Short-tempered and intolerant, he replied angrily, “Tell me 
who has attacked you, wretched woman? Why are you afraid?” 
Shurpanakha told Rävaëa what had happened. She also described to 
him Räma’s annihilation of the Räkñasas exactly as Rävaëa had already 
heard it from Akampana. Rävaëa’s curiosity about Räma was aroused. 
He said, “Tell me more about Räma. Why is he living in the forest? 
What is his strength and his weakness? How has he overpowered the 
unassailable Khara, Dushana and Trishira?” 
After telling Rävaëa that Räma had been sent to the forest by His 
father, Shurpanakha described how she had personally witnessed Räma’s 
power. “I could not see when Räma took up His arrows or bent His bow, 
which shone brightly like a rainbow. I only saw the Räkñasa army falling 
like hewn trees. The demons resembled a wheat field destroyed by a 
downpour of hailstones. I also saw by Räma’s side His brother Lakñman. 
He too seems exceptionally glorious and is clearly devoted to Räma. 
Indeed, He appears like Räma’s second self. I hold these two brothers to 
be practically unconquerable in battle.” 
Shurpanakha, as a Räkñasé, possessed celestial intelligence. Like 
Akampana, she was able to recognize Räma’s power, although she did 
not understand His identity. She spoke cunningly, wanting to incite her 
brother to confront Räma. “I saw by Räma’s side His beloved wife Sétä, 
whose beauty is hard to describe. Her dark eyes and hair contrast vividly 
with the hue and luster of Her body, which resembles molten gold. Her 
breasts, hips and thighs are exquisitely shaped and She shines like 
another Goddess Lakñmé.” 
Shurpanakha knew that her brother was lusty. He had absolutely no 
regard for moral laws and took pleasure in enjoying other’s wives. The 
Räkñasé went on describing Sétä. “Her countenance is like the full moon. 
With Her thin waist and delicate limbs, Sétä is beyond compare. I have 
seen no woman like Her on the face of the earth, be she a goddess, 
Gandharva or Yakña. Any man embraced with delight by Sétä will enjoy 
a happiness greater than that of Indra. Without doubt that peerless 
female, who is of a gentle disposition, would be a worthy consort for you,

213 
O king of demons.” 
Rävaëa’s mind was captivated by Her description. He considered how he 
might win Her. Arrogantly he assumed that She would be attracted to 
him, the great and powerful king of the Räkñasas. But how could She be 
taken from Räma? Rävaëa was beginning to think that he needed to 
exercise caution in his approach to Räma. He listened as his sister 
continued. 
“I wanted to snatch away Sétä and bring Her to you, O brother. But I was 
viciously attacked by the wicked and cruel-minded Lakñman. No one but 
you, O mighty king, will be capable of taking Sétä from Räma. Surely She 
should be your wife. Why not go the forest and see Her wondrous beauty 
for yourself?” 
Shurpanakha longed for revenge. Sétä was the cause of her being 
mutilated. The Räkñasa woman wanted the princess to be taken from 
Räma so that both Räma and Sétä would feel intolerable pain. Perhaps 
then Rävaëa would be able to overpower the grief-stricken Räma. 
Shurpanakha gazed imploringly at her brother. “Snatch away the 
incomparable Sétä from Räma. Then, standing in the forefront of battle, 
defeat and kill that human along with His evil brother.” 
Rävaëa was convinced. He was already angered by Räma’s killing of the 
Räkñasa army in Janasthana. Now here was his own sister, disfigured and 
humiliated by the human brothers. Rävaëa took that personally. He 
especially could not tolerate the sharp and taunting words Shurpanakha 
delivered in front of his ministers. He had to prove his power. And 
above all he wanted to have Sétä. Thinking again of Maricha, he called 
for his chariot. This time he would not be deterred from his purpose. 
Maricha’s refusal to help him was unacceptable. Rävaëa mounted his 
great chariot and rose up swiftly into the sky. 
Chapter 9 
The Kidnapping of Sétä 
Again arriving at Maricha’s hermitage, Rävaëa quickly sought him out.

214 
Maricha, clad in black deerskins and seated in meditation, spoke in 
surprise when he saw Rävaëa. “Why have you returned so soon, O king? 
I trust all is well in Lanka.” 
Maricha sat the Räkñasa king on a grass mat. He offered him food and 
drink, but Rävaëa waved it aside and said, “No doubt you recall my 
earlier request, O Maricha. I am here now to insist that you comply. Not 
only has Räma annihilated my army in the forest, but He has attacked 
and mutilated my sister Shurpanakha. He must by all means be 
punished. Prepare to leave. You will assist me in Sétä’s abduction.” 
Rävaëa had made up his mind. He told Maricha to come with him to 
Räma’s hermitage. Once there he should use magic to assume the form 
of an enchanting deer. Rävaëa calculated that Sétä, due to Her womanly 
nature, would become captivated by the deer. She would then send 
Räma to capture it. As soon as Maricha had taken Räma to a distance, 
he should further use his magical powers to allure Lakñman. Imitating 
Räma’s voice, the Räkñasa should cry out in distress. When Lakñman 
heard the cry He would come after Räma, leaving Rävaëa to abduct the 
unprotected Sétä. Rävaëa spoke derisively of Räma, knowing that 
Maricha considered the prince formidable. 
“This worthless human has been exiled by His father. Abandoning 
virtue, He caused my sister to be violently assaulted. He is a disgrace to 
the royal class and a threat to all beings. His time is now all but run out. 
Once he has lost His wife, His strength will be gone. I shall then make 
short work of Him.” 
Maricha’s face whitened. This was his worst fear. Rävaëa was bent on a 
purpose which would surely end in both their deaths. He stared at 
Rävaëa with unblinking eyes. His mouth felt dry and his limbs weak. He 
folded his palms and addressed the Räkñasa king in a trembling voice. 
“People speaking agreeable words are easy to find, O lord. On the other 
hand, rare are those who will speak words for one’s good which are 
nevertheless unpalatable. O Rävaëa, you have clearly not heeded my 
earlier advice. You have not sought to establish for yourself Räma’s 
actual power. This dereliction of your duty will lead to the extinction of 
the race of Räkñasas, there is no doubt.” 
Rävaëa’s expression hardened. He was not interested in Maricha’s 
advice. He listened impatiently as Maricha went on. “Räma has not been

215 
abandoned by His father nor is He devoid of virtue. Indeed, He is 
devoted to piety and truth. Listen as I tell you His history.” 
He told Rävaëa how the prince had gone to the forest to prove His 
father truthful. Both Maricha and Rävaëa understood that warriors 
derived power from virtuous behavior. Maricha made it clear that Räma 
was virtue incarnate. He again described Räma’s power and the 
consequences of facing Him in battle.  
“Do not cast yourself headlong into the fierce fire of Räma blazing on 
the battlefield,” Maricha beseeched the Räkñasa king. “Upon 
encountering, Räma you will relinquish for good your throne, your 
happiness and your very life. Räma’s glory is immeasurable. You will no 
more prove able to remove Sétä from Räma than you could take from the 
sun its brilliance. O Rävaëa, remain peacefully in Lanka. Do not bring 
about your own destruction, along with that of your relatives, friends 
and entire kingdom.” 
Rävaëa blazed up with anger. He cared nothing for Maricha’s well-
intended advice. Rising, he spoke harshly to the fearful demon. “Your 
words, like seeds sown in barren soil, are entirely fruitless. I cannot be 
deterred from my aim of kidnapping Sétä. O ignoble Räkñasa, I did not 
ask you about the merits or demerits of my intentions. Indeed, a king 
should never be advised except when he requests such advice. I have told 
you what I require. All that remains for you to do is to carry out my 
order.” 
Rävaëa reiterated his idea. He knew that Maricha could, by his unique 
magical abilities, transform himself into the most wonderful-looking 
creature. He felt sure his plan would work. Speaking slowly and 
deliberately he told Maricha the consequences of non-cooperation. 
“Perhaps upon approaching Räma you will face some danger, but if you 
reject my request then death at my hands will be certain and immediate. 
Carefully weigh things in the balance of reason, O Maricha, and do what 
you feel is best.” 
Maricha tried one last time to sway Rävaëa from his plan. “Whoever 
advised you to confront Räma should be executed, O king, not me. That 
sinful person obviously desires only your imminent ruin. The minister 
who counsels violent measures against a powerful enemy is himself the 
enemy. Such advice will lead to the destruction of the counseled along

216 
with the counselor, and indeed the state itself.” 
Maricha saw that Rävaëa was silent, fixed in his purpose. Obviously his 
counsel was useless. Maricha then realized that his death was near. 
Understanding the inevitability of his fate, he spoke fearlessly to 
Rävaëa. “Being a slave to your senses, cruel and evil-minded, you have 
adopted this course of action. People with leaders who are not self-
controlled cannot prosper any more than sheep protected by a jackal. A 
terrible and unforeseen calamity has arrived at Lanka’s door, O king, 
which will bring an end to the city as well as to you. Therefore I simply 
pity you. I shall fulfill your order. It is better to be killed by the enemy 
than executed by the king. Take me as already slain at the very sight of 
Räma, and consider yourself dead with all your followers the moment 
you bear away Sétä. Those on the verge of death cannot understand 
right from wrong. No advice can help them.” 
Maricha rose slowly and prepared to go with Rävaëa, saying, “Let us now 
depart.” Rävaëa became joyous. He had heard little of what Maricha had 
said. The Räkñasa king was thinking only of Räma and, more 
particularly, of Sétä. When he saw Maricha ready to follow his command, 
Rävaëa embraced him and said, “Here is my real Maricha. Before now, 
some other demon must have possessed you, robbing you of your valor. 
We shall proceed fearlessly on my chariot. Once you have bewitched 
Sétä with your magic, you may go wherever you please. I shall do the 
rest.” 
The two Räkñasas got aboard the great chariot; the goblin-headed asses 
bore it away into the skies. Moving swiftly they soon arrived at the 
Dandaka forest. As they circled overhead, they saw below Räma’s 
hermitage. They landed nearby and Rävaëa instructed Maricha, “Now 
work your wonderful magic, my friend. I shall wait here.” 
Rävaëa had no intention of immediately encountering the two brothers. 
He wanted first to steal and enjoy Sétä, anticipating that this would 
weaken Räma. Rävaëa knew that Räma would soon come after him, but 
that would give him the opportunity to gauge the strength and weakness 
of Räma and His forces. The Räkñasa felt confident that he could 
confront Räma from the security of Lanka, surrounded by his powerful 
troops. After transforming himself into a human ascetic wearing matted 
locks and simple dress, he waited in the woods near Räma’s hermitage.

217 
Meanwhile, Maricha turned himself into a magical deer. His head was 
partly white and partly dark with horns like bright sapphires. The upper 
part of his snout had the hue of a red lotus, while the lower part had that 
of a blue lotus. His perfectly formed body had slender white legs, with 
hoofs like glossy black gems. The deer’s belly was dark blue and its flanks 
golden. All over its shining skin were a number of jewel-like spots. Its 
tail resembled a rainbow and it glanced about with eyes that shone like 
diamonds. 
In that deer form Maricha wandered slowly about. Other deer 
approached him but quickly ran in all directions, sensing that this was 
not actually a deer. Maricha strenuously controlled his Räkñasa nature, 
which was impelling him to kill and eat the deer which came near to 
him. Nibbling at leaves here and there, he went into the region of 
Räma’s hermitage. Sétä was outside the hut plucking flowers. She 
immediately saw the wonderful-looking deer.  
Seeing that he had caught Her attention, Maricha playfully came near 
to Sétä and then moved away again. As the deer gamboled about, Sétä’s 
mind became enchanted. Her eyes opened wide in wonder as She 
surveyed the stunning form of that magical animal. It seemed to illumine 
the forest on all sides as it moved around with grace and elegance, 
making delightful sounds. Sétä called out to Räma, “Come quickly, My 
lord, and bring Lakñman! Here is a sight to behold.” 
Hearing Sétä calling out again and again, the two princes came to Her 
and saw the deer for themselves. Lakñman was immediately suspicious. 
“This animal cannot actually be a deer. Never has such a deer, looking 
like a bright jewel, been seen anywhere upon the earth. This must surely 
be a Räkñasa come in disguise. I suspect it is probably Maricha.” 
Lakñman recalled how Räma had spared Maricha’s life previously. He 
knew the demon was capable of great mysticism and strongly suspected 
that some evil plan was afoot. But Sétä was captivated. She interrupted 
Lakñman. “O Räma, this wonderful animal has stolen My mind. Please 
fetch it to Me. I would love to show it to My mothers-in-law and Your 
brothers. When We return to Ayodhya We can keep it in the palace as a 
pet. I do not think that such a beautiful creature can be a Räkñasa. My 
lord, I must possess this gentle animal.” 
Sétä repeatedly beseeched Räma to capture the deer, which remained

218 
close by. Räma felt obliged to satisfy His wife. He turned to Lakñman. 
“Dear brother, see how this deer has created such a burning desire in 
Sétä. I must try to catch it for Her. I have never seen a deer like this 
anywhere before. It defies description. If, as you say, it is a Räkñasa in 
disguise, then it must be put to death. Therefore I shall chase it through 
these woods. Either I will bring it alive or, having determined it to be a 
Räkñasa, slay it with My sharp arrows. Perhaps then I may take its superb 
skin for Sétä.” 
Räma asked His brother to stand close to Sétä and guard Her while He 
was gone. Like Lakñman, He also feared an attack from the Räkñasas. He 
told Lakñman that Jatayu was nearby and could assist Him if necessary. 
Räma then fastened His sword to His belt and, after tying on His two 
quivers, He grasped His bow. He then went toward the deer, which 
bounded away into the woods. 
In fear Maricha ran swiftly into the deep forest. Räma pursued him, 
moving through the trees with agility and speed. But Maricha kept 
ahead, sometimes appearing for a moment and then disappearing again. 
Acting exactly like a deer, he bounded high in the air and glanced about 
fearfully. In this way Maricha took Räma a long distance from His 
hermitage. Räma felt helpless, seeing the deer maintaining a constant 
lead over Him. He stopped and leaned on a tree, exhausted and 
perspiring. He decided that Lakñman’s assessment was correct. This 
could not be an ordinary deer. He would have captured it by now if it 
were. Räma concluded that the deer was certainly a Räkñasa. 
Spotting it emerging from a distant cluster of trees like the moon 
appearing from behind clouds, Räma took out an arrow. He imbued that 
shaft with celestial power and shot it at the deer. It streaked through the 
air glowing like fire, seeking out its target. In a moment it struck 
Maricha and pierced him in the heart. The Räkñasa bounded as high as a 
palm tree and screamed in pain. As he crashed to the ground he again 
assumed his actual form. 
Räma ran toward the dying Räkñasa. Maricha saw Him approaching and 
remembered Rävaëa’s instruction. With his dying breath he let out a cry 
that could be heard for miles. Perfectly imitating Räma’s voice, which he 
vividly remembered from their previous encounters, Maricha cried, 
“Lakñman! Help me! Alas, Sétä!”

219 
With that final cry the Räkñasa died, his gigantic form covered in blood 
lying prostrate on the ground. Räma stood before the dead Räkñasa, 
filled with apprehension. This was obviously a plot by the demons. 
When Lakñman and Sétä heard that cry, They would become confused. 
Räma looked at Maricha’s massive body. The voice of a Räkñasa was 
hundreds of times more powerful than that of a man. Räma had been 
chasing the deer for an hour at least and was miles from the hermitage. 
The only thing to do was to run back. Räma immediately began to 
retrace His steps. Thinking of Sétä, He feared the worst. 
At the hermitage Lakñman and Sétä had heard the Räkñasa’s cry. Sétä 
was struck with anxiety. Turning to Lakñman, who stood calmly, She 
said, “Did You not hear Your brother’s cry? Surely He has fallen into the 
hands of the demons, even as a bull might be seized by a group of lions. 
O Lakñman, go quickly to help Räma! My heart is all but stopping and 
My breath hardly comes. Please act swiftly!” 
Lakñman did not move. He remembered Räma’s instruction to guard 
Sétä. He did not at all fear for Räma and considered the cry to have been 
uttered by a demon. Sétä became even more anxious when She saw 
Lakñman unperturbed. Bewildered by fear, She spoke angrily. “O son of 
Sumitra, You are an enemy in the guise of a friend. It seems You are glad 
to see the plight of Your brother. Surely You desire to possess Me for 
Yourself. Therefore You do not rush to Räma’s aid. What is the value of 
protecting Me when Our leader is in such danger?” 
Sétä shook with fear and sobbed loudly. Lakñman felt pained by Her 
words and He tried to reassure Her. “Your husband cannot be overcome 
by the gods or demons assembled in any number, O gentle princess. 
Räma cannot be killed in a fight by any created being, of that there is no 
doubt whatsoever. Be at ease. Räma will soon return, having slain the 
Räkñasa who assumed the form of the deer and who no doubt uttered 
that cry.” 
Lakñman was certain that Räma was not in any danger. He could guess 
that the demon had been killed by Räma and had imitated Räma’s voice 
as he died. After Räma had annihilated the Räkñasa army at Janasthana 
the Räkñasas must have formulated a plot for revenge. Lakñman tried to 
explain this to Sétä, but She became even more angry. She stood blazing 
like fire, Her eyes red with fury. Because of Her fear for Räma, She was

220 
confused. Despite Her respect for the virtuous and gentle Lakñman, who 
had never once looked Her in the face, Her anxiety for Räma made Her 
rebuke Him harshly. 
“O ignoble and merciless Lakñman! It is obvious that You care nothing 
for Your brother. Indeed You are happy to see Him in peril. I can 
understand that You have been concealing Your true nature. Posing as 
Räma’s friend You have all the while been coveting Me. Your sinful 
desire shall never be fulfilled. I shall give up My life even in Your 
presence. Having become Räma’s wife, how could I accept an ordinary 
and wicked man like You?” 
Lakñman was deeply hurt. Sétä was as worshipable to Him as Räma. He 
could not even imagine what She was suggesting. His mind raced, 
confounded by agony. He could not remain with Sétä while She was in 
this mood. Her words were unbearable. How could She make such 
accusations? He had to look for Räma. But what would happen to Sétä? 
Fearful and angered by Sétä’s castigation, Lakñman controlled His mind 
and replied, “Your words pierce Me like a heated steel arrow. I cannot 
argue with You since You are a deity to Me, O princess. Alas, it seems 
that the nature of women is to be fickle and given to sentimentality. 
Although I feel sure I am right, I must nevertheless follow a dangerous 
course, driven by Your sharp words. I shall depart and search for Räma, 
but I fear I may not find You here when I return.” 
Sétä continued to cry out, saying to Lakñman, “I shall never remain with 
another man in Räma’s absence! I would sooner drown Myself in the 
river, fall from a high precipice or enter blazing fire.” 
Lakñman was enraged by Sétä’s insinuations. He tried consoling Her, but 
She would not say anything. He prayed to the forest deities to protect 
Her. Then, bowing to Her with folded hands, He left to look for Räma, 
Sétä’s words still ringing in His ears. 
As soon as Lakñman had gone Rävaëa came out of hiding. In a human 
form he approached Sétä, who was without Räma and Lakñman, even as 
thick darkness overtakes dusk when devoid of the sun and moon. He saw 
the youthful princess sitting and weeping in front of Her hut. As he 
came near, all the animals fled in all directions. Even the breeze did not 
blow and the river slowed her swift current till she almost stopped 
flowing. Appearing like a holy man, Rävaëa was like a deep well covered

221 
by grass. He looked intently at Sétä, marveling at Her beauty. As he 
gazed at Her the demon was pierced by Cupid’s arrow. Continuously 
chanting Vedic mantras he moved close to Räma’s beautiful consort. In 
his guise as a Brahmin ascetic he stood before Sétä and praised Her in 
various ways. 
“O most beautiful lady, You possess the splendor of gold and silver 
adorned with celestial gems.” Rävaëa spoke poetically, his deep voice 
resonating around the forest grove. “Your form is radiant and Your face, 
eyes and delicate limbs are like so many blooming lotuses. Are you a 
goddess or an Apsarä descended from heaven? Your body is perfectly 
formed and Your face resembles the full moon. With Your dark eyes and 
full lips playing over teeth resembling rows of pearls You have captured 
my heart. My mind is stolen away by Your beauty, which is surely 
unmatched anywhere in the three worlds.” 
Rävaëa thought that by praising Sétä he would attract Her to him. His 
mind was full of lust. With wide opened eyes he continued, “Why are 
You residing in a dark forest, frequented by wild beasts and haunted by 
Räkñasas? You deserve to live at the top of a magnificent palace of gold. 
Sweet-smelling gardens should be Your playground, not fearful forests. 
Tell me, O charming lady, who are You and who is Your protector? Are 
You the consort of some powerful deity? Why are You alone in this 
dangerous region?” 
Sétä looked up and saw Rävaëa dressed as an ascetic. She had 
encountered numerous Brahmins during Her stay in the forest and She 
was not surprised to see this one. The pious and open-hearted princess 
offered Rävaëa a seat and water to wash his feet. Acting perfectly in 
accord with religious codes, She fetched food from the hut and placed it 
before him, saying, “You are welcome.” 
Rävaëa watched Her closely. He was stunned by Her grace and elegance. 
He made up his mind to carry Her away by force if necessary. As She 
tended to Her unexpected guest, Sétä looked around for signs of Räma 
returning, but She saw only the vast green forest. She began to reply to 
Rävaëa’s questions. “I am the daughter of Janaka, the king of Mithila, 
and My name is Sétä. I am the consort of the high-souled Räma, a prince 
of Ayodhya. With Him and His powerful brother Lakñman I reside here 
peacefully.”

222 
With a guileless mind Sétä told him how She and Räma came to be living 
in the forest. She explained everything in brief and then said, “Soon My 
husband and His brother will return, bringing with Them varieties of 
forest produce. Rest here awhile and They will no doubt sumptuously 
entertain you. But tell Me, O sage, who are you and how do you come to 
be wandering this lonely forest?” 
Rävaëa decided to reveal his true identity. He stood up and replied 
proudly to Sétä, “I am Rävaëa, the celebrated ruler of all the Räkñasas. 
The gods, demons and human beings are struck with terror upon hearing 
my name, O Sétä. Now that I have seen You, O most beautiful woman, I 
can no longer find delight in my own consorts. Become my foremost 
queen! Roam with me at ease in my golden city, Lanka. You will live in a 
splendid palace adorned with jewels, and five thousand handmaidens 
will wait upon You.” 
Sétä was shocked. She became enraged and said to the Räkñasa, “I have 
taken a vow to follow Räma, who is as unshakeable as a great mountain, 
as powerful as Indra and as wise as Båhaspati. I cannot be swerved from 
Räma’s service. He is virtuous and always true to His word. I am 
dedicated to Räma, who will never abandon His devoted servant. I 
belong to that Räma who is like a mighty lion and destroys His enemies 
with ease and speed. How have you, O Rävaëa, a jackal, been so brazen 
as to covet Me?” 
Sétä looked disdainfully at Rävaëa, who stared at Her lustfully. She felt 
sickened. What a disgusting creature! How could he even imagine that 
She would go with him? How disgraceful that he should pretend to be a 
Brahmin ascetic, the holiest of men. She spoke with fury. “You could no 
more touch Me than you could the sun’s fiery orb. Your desire is sure to 
bring about your death, O vile Räkñasa. You seek to extract a tooth from 
the jaws of a powerful and hungry lion. You wish to carry in one hand 
the massive Mount Mandara. You desire to swim across the ocean, 
having tied around your neck a stone slab. You who would steal the 
beloved consort of Räma are trying to snatch away the sun and moon 
with your bare hands.” 
Sétä reproached Rävaëa again and again. She scorned and derided him 
with sharp words, warning him against his evil intentions. “After 
stealing Me away, where will you go? How will you retain Me while

223 
Räma stands on the battlefield, bow in hand? Your pathetic might is 
nothing against that of Räma’s. Next to Räma you are like a crow 
compared to Garuòa.” 
Sétä shook like a sapling caught in a storm. She turned away from 
Rävaëa and prayed for Räma to return quickly. The Räkñasa was 
provoked by Her harsh words and he began to boast about his own 
strength. “I have won from Kuvera the celestial city of Lanka, chasing 
him away by my own power. Why, I have even taken from him the 
Pushpaka, his celebrated and beautiful airplane which can range 
anywhere according to one’s will. Wherever I stand, the sun withholds 
its fierce rays, the wind blows gently and the rivers become still and 
calm.” 
Rävaëa tried to intimidate Sétä. He was annoyed that She was not 
interested in him. How could She remain attached to Räma, an 
insignificant human, when Rävaëa, the immensely powerful king of the 
Räkñasas, sought Her favor? Surely She did not know of his strength and 
exploits. Even the gods feared his angry gaze. And as well as power, what 
about his unlimited opulence? Rävaëa described the city of Lanka, with 
its innumerable gold palaces. 
“Come with me to Lanka, O princess. There You will enjoy human and 
celestial delights You have never even imagined. You will soon forget 
the mortal Räma, whose life is well-nigh ended. Räma has lost 
everything and, having no power, lives in fear in the forest. I can dispose 
of Him with a single finger. By Your good fortune Rävaëa is here in 
person to beseech Your love. Accept me, O Sétä, and abandon the 
worthless Räma.” 
Sétä could not even look at Rävaëa. She clenched Her fists and flushed a 
deep crimson, sharply rebuking the demon. She told him that once he 
had laid hands on Her, he would soon die at Räma’s hands. Crying and 
calling for Räma, She moved away from the Räkñasa. Rävaëa became 
furious. He struck one hand against another and roared. The Räkñasa 
then assumed his original form with its ten heads and twenty arms. He 
moved closer to Sétä. “Look at me, O proud lady! I can lift up the earth, 
drink the ocean and kill even Death himself.” 
Rävaëa’s red eyes burned like fire. Wearing a red robe and bedecked 
with fine gold ornaments, he looked like a dark cloud lit up by lightning.

224 
He had lost all patience and he spoke angrily to the trembling Sétä. 
“Here is a husband fit for You, O charming one. I shall take good care of 
You and never do anything You dislike. Leave aside the useless Räma 
and serve me. You do not deserve a life in the forest. Give up Your 
affection for the soon-to-die human and become the queen of Lanka.” 
Rävaëa had no intention of leaving Her behind, but Sétä was clearly not 
going to go with him willingly. He would have to force Her. The demon 
grasped hold of the delicate Sétä, taking Her hair in one hand and Her 
legs in another. Seeing him looking like Death, with mighty arms and 
sharp teeth, the forest deities all ran away. At that moment Rävaëa’s 
chariot appeared close by, drawn by its ugly mules. Rävaëa took Sétä in 
his arms, scolding Her sharply, and he placed Her in the chariot. Sétä 
writhed in Rävaëa’s grasp. As the chariot rose up She called for Räma at 
the top of Her voice. Distracted with grief and anguish, Sétä wailed like a 
mad woman. 
“O Lakñman, where are You? I am being seized by a vile Räkñasa. O 
Räma, Your life has been sacrificed for virtue. How then do You not see 
Me being unrighteously carried away? You always chastise the wicked. 
Why then do You not punish the evil Rävaëa?” 
Sétä began calling to the trees. She cried to the river and forest deities, 
to the animals and the birds, asking them all to tell Räma what had 
happened. Turning to Rävaëa she said, “The fruits of sinful deeds are 
not immediately received, O Räkñasa, but in time they destroy the 
perpetrator to his very roots. O Rävaëa, your time is all but over. Räma 
will certainly recover Me and end your life.” 
As the chariot rose higher, Sétä looked down and saw Jatayu perched on 
a large tree. She called out to him. “O bird, help Me! I am being seized by 
an evil Räkñasa! Don’t try to stop him. He is too powerful. Quickly find 
Räma.” 
Jatayu heard Sétä and looked up. He saw the chariot with Rävaëa and 
Sétä on board. From the tree he called out to the Räkñasa, whom he 
immediately recognized. “O Rävaëa, I am the king of the vultures, 
Jatayu. I possess might and am devoted to virtue. I shall not allow you to 
carry away Sétä in my presence. You who are also a king should not bear 
away another’s wife against the eternal codes of morality.” 
Jatayu flew up from his perch, continuously reproaching Rävaëa and

225 
reminding him of what had happened to Khara and Dushana. Soaring 
upwards, he kept pace with Rävaëa’s chariot. He spoke in a loud voice, 
disturbing the demon’s mind. “Release Sétä now, O evil-minded one! 
You have placed the noose of Death around your neck. You have tied a 
poisonous snake in your cloth. O fool, your act will bring you nothing 
but suffering. If Räma were here, you would no more be able to carry 
away Sétä by force than one could alter a Vedic text by the force of 
logic.” 
Jatayu was infuriated. He challenged Rävaëa. “I am here to stop you, O 
night-ranger! Stand and fight. Although I am old and weak I cannot 
watch you take away this princess. Struck by my bill you will fall from 
your chariot like a ripe fruit from a tree.” 
When Rävaëa heard Jatayu’s challenge he veered his chariot toward him 
and rushed angrily at the king of birds, raining him with blows from his 
twenty arms. But Jatayu swooped and avoided Rävaëa’s attack. Then he 
assailed Rävaëa with his sharp talons. As the great bird screamed, 
Rävaëa roared. The clash between the two combatants was tumultuous 
and frightening to witness. It resembled an encounter between two 
winged mountains. Rävaëa fired terrible-looking arrows that sped 
through the air like streaks of fire. Jatayu was suddenly struck all over 
with hundreds of sharp arrows. Ignoring his wounds, he rushed at 
Rävaëa, inflicting many wounds on him with his beak and claws. Jatayu 
then broke Rävaëa’s large jewel-encrusted bow, which fell glittering 
from the sky. Rävaëa swiftly strung another bow and shot thousands of 
arrows at Jatayu, entirely covering his body. The king of birds looked as 
if he had found shelter in a nest. He shook off the network of arrows 
with his wings and again flew at Rävaëa’s chariot. The great bird tore off 
the heads of Rävaëa’s mules. With a blow from his bill he killed the 
charioteer. Swooping again and again, Jatayu then smashed Rävaëa’s 
chariot. As his chariot fell in pieces, the Räkñasa grabbed hold of Sétä 
and dropped to the ground.  
The gods, witnessing the battle from above, applauded Jatayu. Then 
Rävaëa again rose into the air. In two of his arms he held Sétä, while in 
another hand he clutched his fierce-looking sword. He faced Jatayu, who 
again rebuked the demon. 
“Your act is condemned by all virtuous men,” thundered Jatayu. “It is

226 
not even heroic. You are simply a thief, and like a thief you will be 
caught and punished by Räma. O cowardly one, how do you hope to 
survive? Surely it is only for the annihilation of the Räkñasas that you 
have stolen Sétä. Wait a short while and Räma will return. Or fight me 
now, Rävaëa, for I shall never allow you to leave with Sétä.” 
Jatayu flew at Rävaëa. He tore the demon’s back with his talons and 
struck his heads with his beak. The fearless bird pulled the Räkñasa’s hair 
and dragged him about. Rävaëa shook with anger. His eyes blazed and 
his lips twitched with indignation. Tormented by Jatayu he decided to 
kill him. He rushed at the bird and struck him violently with his fists. 
Jatayu then tore off Rävaëa’s ten left arms. Even as the arms fell to the 
ground, ten more grew immediately in their place, like serpents coming 
out of an ant hill. The Räkñasa then placed Sétä on the ground. He 
darted toward Jatayu and began striking him with his fists and feet. 
Taking his razor-sharp sword, he lopped off Jatayu’s wings. The great 
vulture fell on the ground, dying. With his white breast reddened with 
blood, he resembled a large cloud tinged by the setting sun. Sétä cried out 
and ran toward him. Gently stroking his head, She called out to Räma. 
“My lord! Where are You? Do You not see this terrible calamity? The sky 
is filled with evil omens. Come quickly. Here lies the brave Jatayu, 
mortally wounded on My account. O Räma! O Lakñman! Save Me!” 
Sétä cried bitterly. From the sky, Rävaëa saw that his adversary was 
overcome. He descended swiftly and went toward Sétä. She ran away and 
embraced a tree, crying out, “Hold Me, trees, hold Me!” 
Rävaëa grabbed Her forcefully by the hair. In the grip of his own destiny 
he dragged Sétä away as She cried out, “Räma! Räma!” again and again. 
Pulling Her onto his lap, Rävaëa rose up into the sky. 
At that time the wind stopped blowing and the sun appeared lusterless 
and dull. The whole creation seemed out of order and a dense darkness 
enveloped the four quarters. Brahmä saw by his divine vision that Sétä 
had been seized violently by Rävaëa and he said to the gods, “Our 
purpose is accomplished!” The great sages in the forest also saw Sétä 
being taken. Knowing Rävaëa’s destruction to be imminent, they felt 
simultaneously agonized and joyful. 
Rävaëa held Sétä tightly and flew toward Lanka. With Her body shining 
like molten gold and adorned with jeweled ornaments, Sétä looked like

227 
lightning against a black cloud. Rävaëa appeared like a dark mountain 
illumined by fire as he traveled with haste toward his city. Sétä’s face 
pressed against Rävaëa, resembled the full moon splitting a cloud. She 
burst into tears again and again and called out for Räma. Lotus petals 
fell in showers from Her crushed garland. A bejeweled golden anklet 
dropped from Her foot like a circular flash of lightning. Her necklace of 
pearls fell from Her breast, appearing like the Ganges descending from 
the heavens. 
As Rävaëa soared over the treetops the leaves shook violently, seeming 
to say to Sétä, “Don’t be afraid.” Forest ponds, with their faded lotuses 
and frightened fishes, appeared sorry for the princess. Lions and tigers, 
along with birds and other beasts, angrily rushed behind, following 
Rävaëa’s shadow. The mountains, their faces bathed in tears in the form 
of rivulets and with arms upraised in the form of peaks, seemed to 
scream as the wind from Rävaëa’s passage rushed over them. Seeing Sétä 
held in the grasp of the ten-headed monster, the forest deities wept and 
their limbs trembled with fear.  
Sétä, Her face pale and Her eyes reddened, chastised Rävaëa. “Have you 
no shame at all? Resorting only to stealth and trickery, you have stolen 
away the chaste wife of another. O coward! You have killed the old and 
helpless Jatayu and now you flee in fear from Räma. You are proud of 
your valor, but people throughout the world will scorn and deride you, O 
vile demon!” 
Sétä struggled in Rävaëa’s grip. She preferred to fall to earth and die 
than be carried away by him. She censured Rävaëa continuously, 
goading him to turn and fight with Räma and Lakñman. The tearful 
princess told him that even if he carried Her to Lanka She would soon 
die, being unable to see Räma. Rävaëa, ignoring Her sharp words, 
continued to bear Her away through the skies. 
As they flew, Sétä looked down and caught sight of a group of large 
monkeys sitting on a mountain peak. She pulled off Her silken head 
covering and quickly bound up Her golden bracelets and other shining 
jewels, dropping the bundle as Rävaëa flew over the monkeys. Sétä 
hoped they would meet Räma and show Him the jewels. He would then 
know which direction Rävaëa had taken Her. The Räkñasa king did not 
notice Sétä’s cloth falling to earth.

228 
The monkeys caught sight of it as it fell. They looked up and saw Rävaëa 
speeding past with the beautiful princess held in his arms. The Räkñasa 
coursed through the air like an arrow shot from a bow. Delighted in 
mind, he raced toward his own destruction. Crossing over the fearsome 
ocean, which teemed with sharks and other fierce aquatics, he went in 
the direction of his celestial city. Even as he flew overhead the wind 
died and the ocean waves were stilled out of fear of him.  
The many Siddhas and Cäraëas in the sky who witnessed Rävaëa’s 
flight with Sétä said, “This marks Rävaëa’s end.” 
Soon Rävaëa arrived in Lanka and entered his palace, going straight to 
the inner section where he kept his many wives. There he spoke with 
the Räkñasas who were entrusted with guarding his women. “Take good 
care that no man looks upon Sétä. Give Her every item of enjoyment the 
moment She asks. Gold, gems, pearls, silks—whatever She may desire 
should be provided. Those who slight or upset her, knowingly or 
unknowingly, must not hold life dear.” 
Rävaëa then left and went to his own rooms. He called for eight of his 
most powerful generals. After praising them for their strength and valor, 
he said, “Armed with various weapons, go at once to the Dandaka. Seek 
out Räma and observe Him closely. Be wary, for Räma has single-
handedly destroyed the entire army I had stationed in that forest. 
Because of that I feel a rage that burns my insides. That rage will only be 
calmed when Räma lies dead, slain by me. Therefore you should learn of 
Räma’s strengths and weaknesses. Report these to me and I shall then do 
what is required.” 
Rävaëa gave them detailed instructions, repeatedly extolling them with 
pleasant words. The powerful Räkñasas then made their bodies invisible 
and set out toward the Dandaka forest. Rävaëa, having set up a bitter 
enmity with Räma, felt secure and rejoiced within himself. He decided 
to visit his inner quarters where Sétä was lodged. Stricken with love for 
the dark-eyed princess, he hurried to see Her.  
Rävaëa found Sétä bathed in tears and fallen to the floor amid the 
Räkñasés. She resembled a female deer beset by a number of hounds. 
Even though She was unwilling, Rävaëa had Her forcibly brought as he 
showed Her his palace. It comprised a large number of shining buildings 
supported by pillars of ivory, gold and crystal. The palace was

229 
astonishing to behold and highly pleasing to the mind. Rävaëa took Sétä 
up the magnificent central stairway of gold, showing Her the vast extent 
of his home. The walls were set thickly with celestial gems, which threw 
off a brilliant luster, lighting the whole palace. On each level of 
Rävaëa’s palace were differently furnished rooms, meant to evoke 
different moods. The palace resounded with the delightful music of 
kettledrums and other instruments. Various scents filled the air. There 
were fountains and ponds surrounded by flowers of every description.  
Hoping to seduce Her, Rävaëa spoke to Sétä. “I have under my control 
millions of Räkñasas. Ten thousand of them are my personal servants. 
My city extends for eight hundred miles and is constructed everywhere 
with gold and gems. Everything I have I now give over to You, O lovely 
princess. You are more dear to me than life. Become my wife and the 
queen of all the women who are mine. What is the use of remaining 
attached to Räma, who is deprived of His kingdom, given to austerities 
and travels the earth on foot?” 
Rävaëa tried at length to impress Sétä. He bragged of his power, telling 
Her how he could conquer even the gods in heaven. Rävaëa also derided 
Räma in various ways, saying that He would not be able to reach Lanka 
even in thought. Indeed, Rävaëa boasted, there was not a being 
anywhere in the three worlds who would now be able to rescue Sétä from 
Lanka. “Therefore, O delightful lady, share with me all these celestial 
pleasures. Range freely with me in the Pushpaka. Cast aside any thought 
of Räma, whose life is soon to end, for I alone am a husband worthy of 
You.” 
Sétä sat sobbing for some time, not looking at Rävaëa. She had no desire 
to speak to him, but seeing the Räkñasa’s insistence, She composed 
Herself and addressed him reproachfully. “O sinful demon, had you 
dared lay hands upon e in Räma’s presence, you would now be lying 
prostrate on the battlefield. Give up your vain boasting! Your life has all 
but ended. Your royal fortune is gone. Gone too is your strength and 
intelligence. Soon a shower of arrows will rain down upon Lanka, 
annihilating the Räkñasa forces. Thanks to you, O vile Räkñasa, this city 
will soon be filled with weeping widows.” 
Sétä spoke furiously to Rävaëa. How could he even dare to suggest that 
She abandon Räma for him? He was like a crow trying to steal a

230 
sacrificial offering from amid an assembly of Brahmins. Her mind would 
not for a single moment contemplate a sinful act. It was only with deep 
regret that She looked at Rävaëa at all. Obviously, virtue was entirely 
unknown to him. He could imprison Her or kill Her as he liked, for She 
had no use of life without Räma. 
Hearing Sétä’s stinging words, Rävaëa’s bodily hair stood on end. He 
spoke threateningly. “O most beautiful lady, hear my warning. If You do 
not yield to me within one year, You shall be killed by my cooks and 
served to me as my meal.” 
Rävaëa then stormed away. He instructed the Räkñasés to break Her 
pride. “By fearful threats alternated with soft words, tame this lady as 
one would tame a wild animal!” 
He told them to keep Her in his beautiful gardens, which were filled 
with trees laden with fruits and flowers. They should guard Her carefully 
and continue to inform Her of Rävaëa’s power and glory. Gradually Her 
mind would change. Otherwise She would be put to death. Rävaëa left 
in anger, his footsteps causing the earth to vibrate. 
Placed in the midst of a grove of trees, Sétä fell weeping to the ground. 
She felt Her limbs overpowered with grief and could find no peace of 
mind. Threatened by the Räkñasa women, who had misshapen faces and 
deformed figures, She was like a young deer fallen into the clutches of 
tigresses. With Her mind rapt in thought of Räma, She fell unconscious, 
oppressed by fear and sorrow. 
Chapter 10 
Räma’s Terrible Discovery 
Räma raced toward His hermitage. He was filled with foreboding. As He 
crashed through the bushes He heard a jackal’s fierce yell behind Him. 
Recognizing the evil omen He became even more anxious. Had Sétä been 
devoured by Räkñasas? Lakñman must have left Her when He heard 
Maricha’s cry; Sétä would have insisted upon it. The Räkñasas had 
plotted successfully. Surely they had now taken Sétä.

231 
Räma saw other frightening omens and His mind became even more 
distressed. As He rushed through the forest He suddenly saw Lakñman 
coming toward Him. Räma ran to Him and took hold of His hand. He 
spoke sternly. “My dear brother, what have You done? Why have You 
abandoned the helpless Sétä? Without doubt She is now dead or stolen 
by the Räkñasas.” 
Räma pointed out to Lakñman the various omens. He told Him about 
Maricha’s trickery. It was now obvious. The Räkñasas had arranged 
everything so they could abduct Sétä. Tears flowed from Räma’s eyes as 
He thought of His wife. If She were killed, He would give up His own 
life. Desperately He asked Lakñman, “Did you fail to protect Her? Where 
is that gentle lady who willingly gave up every happiness to follow Me 
here? Where is Sétä now? You should know that I cannot live without 
Her for even a moment.” 
Feeling dispirited, Lakñman replied, “I did not leave Sétä willingly. Urged 
by Her strong and painful words I came looking for You. She would by 
no means allow Me to stay with Her. Forgive Me, My lord.” 
Lakñman explained everything to Räma—how He had tried hard to 
convince Sétä of Räma’s invincibility, how She had accused Him of 
having ulterior motives—but Räma only became angry and reprimanded 
Him. Why had He taken Sétä’s words seriously when She was 
overwhelmed by sentiment? Why had He allowed Himself to fall prey to 
anger? He had failed to carry out Räma’s order. Now They would surely 
meet calamity. Räma turned and continued to run toward His 
hermitage, His mind fixed on Sétä. 
As Räma ran He felt a tremor run through His limbs. His left eye 
throbbed violently. Greatly perturbed by these baleful omens, Räma 
crashed through the forest. He seemed almost to fly, oblivious of the 
creepers and bushes which lashed Him. Breaking into the clearing where 
He had His hermitage, He ran about wildly, looking for Sétä. He called 
Her name again and again, but on finding no sign of Her, His heart 
sank.  
Räma examined His hut and the surrounding grounds closely. It 
resembled a lotus flower blighted by winter and deprived of its charm. 
The trees seemed to cry as they creaked in the wind. The flowers 
appeared faded and dull. Deer and birds were restless and ill at ease.

232 
Räma saw blades of kusha grass scattered around, along with flower 
petals fallen from Sétä’s garland. He wailed loudly. “Surely Sétä has been 
snatched away. Or perhaps She lies dead somewhere. Or has She gone 
out playfully, hiding now in sport?” 
Räma searched frantically, but Sétä was nowhere to be found. He feared 
the worst. This was surely the work of the Räkñasas. Even now Sétä must 
be in their clutches. Räma imagined Sétä as She was carried away. She 
must have cried out for Him in plaintive tones. As She was borne 
upwards, Her beautiful face streaked with tears, fear would have gripped 
that timid princess. Perhaps at that very moment She was being 
devoured by demons who were cutting open Her soft neck and drinking 
Her blood.  
As Räma ran from tree to tree, His eyes red from sorrow, He appeared 
almost crazy. He questioned the trees, “O Kadamba, O Bilva, O Arjuna 
tree, where is Janaka’s frail daughter? Is She alive or not?” 
In the madness of grief He spoke to animals, the river, the sky and the 
earth itself, but they all remained silent, heightening Räma’s anguish. 
The forest and river deities, remembering Rävaëa’s frightful form, were 
petrified with fear and could make no reply. As Räma gazed around, it 
seemed to Him that He saw Sétä in the sights of the forest. The yellow 
flowers looked like Her silk garment. The creepers flowing in the wind 
became Her limbs. Räma thought He saw His beloved wife everywhere. 
He ran toward Her crying, but found only the desolate and echoing 
forest. 
Räma rebuked Himself for leaving Sétä. What would He say to 
Kaushalya? How could He even look at Janaka, that ever-truthful 
monarch? Räma felt as if He would die. But then what would His father 
say upon seeing Him arrived in heaven, killed by grief? Surely the 
emperor would reproach Him for becoming a liar by not completing the 
term of His exile.  
Räma lamented piteously. “I shall never return to Ayodhya. Kaikeyi may 
rejoice, her purpose fulfilled. O Lakñman, You should embrace Bharata 
and tell Him to long rule over this wide earth, for Räma is no more. 
Without Sétä I shall not accept even heaven, what then of this world? 
With Sétä’s death has come Mine. For failing to protect that gentle 
princess I shall reach unending regions of hell.”

233 
Räma fell weeping to the ground. He censured Himself in many ways. 
Surely this awful misfortune was the result of sinful acts performed in a 
past life. It was undoubtedly His destiny. Such suffering—the loss of the 
kingdom, separation from His loved ones, the king’s death, and now 
Sétä’s loss—could only have been caused by His own past evil deeds. 
Räma tossed about in pain. 
Seeing Räma’s agony, Lakñman, Himself gripped by despondency, 
approached His brother and said, “Do not give way to despair, O mighty 
prince. Men of Your caliber are never bewildered by even the greatest 
disaster. We shall yet find Sétä. She cannot be far away. It is less than an 
hour since I left Her. Let Us continue Our search. 
Räma composed Himself and got up. He sighed and gazed about, 
wondering which way to go. As He looked at the seat outside His hut, 
He remembered how He had sat there with Sétä by His side—how They 
had talked and laughed together; how She had teased Him, pretending 
to be hurt by His words, or cajoling Him to fetch a particular flower from 
deep in the woods. As He thought of His lotus-eyed wife, Räma’s grief 
rose in repeated waves. 
A couple of large deer came close to the brothers. Räma asked if they 
had seen Sétä. The deer then stood with their heads pointed toward the 
south. Räma and Lakñman took that as a clue and sped off in that 
direction. They soon came upon a trail of flowers fallen on the ground. 
Räma dropped to His knees and picked up the petals. They were from 
the braid on Sétä’s hair. He cried out in a resounding voice, “Sétä! Sétä!” 
The two brothers kept running. Suddenly they saw enormous footprints, 
probably of a Räkñasa. Near to it were Sétä’s footprints going here and 
there as She evidently ran in fear. As they looked about they found a 
huge bow lying in pieces, along with many fearsome arrows tipped with 
blue steel barbs. A chariot lay smashed there, still yoked to great mules 
with goblin heads, some of which had been torn off in what was 
obviously a terrible fight. The headless body of the charioteer still sat 
holding the reins and whip. There were strands of gold fallen from Sétä’s 
ornaments, along with Her crushed garland. 
Räma pointed to the ground. “See here the many drops of blood! Look at 
these shattered weapons. And this mighty bow, encrusted with pearls 
and gems. Whose chariot is this, with its hundred-ribbed canopy torn

234 
apart? Look over there! Glowing golden armor studded with emeralds 
and rubies. All these items could only belong to gods or demons.” 
Räma fell to the ground wailing piteously. “O Lakñman, it is clear that 
Sétä is dead. Here at this place two Räkñasas fought for Her sake. The 
victor would surely have consumed My darling wife. Alas, I am lost.” 
Lakñman carefully examined the scene. There had obviously been an 
encounter between two very powerful beings. Perhaps Räma was right. 
But from the footprints there did not appear to be more than one 
Räkñasa. Lakñman felt that somehow Sétä was still living. He reassured 
Räma, telling Him to take heart, for Sétä would surely soon be recovered. 
As He checked His grief Räma felt consumed by anger. The corners of 
His eyes turned coppery as He stood holding His bow. “The Räkñasa race 
will soon be extinct. They have borne away Sétä even as She practiced 
virtue. How did the gods stand by and allow this to happen? Do they not 
fear My wrath? Do they think I am powerless? For too long I have been 
mild and compassionate. Today the world will see a different Räma!” 
Räma roared, giving vent to His anger. He would fill the heavens with 
His missiles. With His weapons He would annihilate the entire creation. 
All living beings would find themselves oppressed as He discharged 
endless flaming arrows. The planets would be brought to a standstill, the 
sun obscured and the moon brought down from the sky. The mountains 
would lie crushed to a powder and the oceans would be dried up. If the 
gods did not bring back Sétä, they would find no shelter anywhere in the 
universe. All the worlds would be torn to pieces by Räma’s arrows and 
nothing would remain. A blazing fire would rage through all the 
quarters, leaving total devastation in its wake. 
Räma tightened His clothes. His lips trembled and He pressed them 
against His teeth. He looked like Çiva intent upon the destruction of the 
universe at the end of an age. Taking from His quiver a dreadful-looking 
arrow, He placed it upon His bow. “Today I shall not be checked by 
conciliation or force. See now, dear Lakñman, as I bring down the gods 
from heaven.” 
Lakñman grabbed hold of Räma’s arm and stopped Him from releasing 
His arrow. With palms joined He spoke gently to the infuriated Räma. 
“You have always been dedicated to the good of all beings. Do not 
abandon Your nature today, O Räma. Do not be swayed by anger. You

235 
should not destroy the worlds for one person’s offense. Lords of this 
world are always just in their punishment. Therefore display Your 
forbearance, for it is as deep as that of the earth itself. Be calm and 
consider the situation with care.” 
Lakñman pointed out that They could see only the footprints of a single 
Räkñasa. It appeared that someone had fought against the demon, 
probably to protect Sétä. Whoever had abducted Sétä was obviously 
possessed of great power. Perhaps no one was able to prevent the 
kidnapping. After all, who would approve of the destruction or 
kidnapping of Räma’s spouse? The gods and Gandharvas, the rivers, seas, 
mountains and indeed all living beings were not capable of giving 
offense to Räma, any more than the priests at a sacrifice could offend 
the person for whom they were performing the ritual. 
Räma felt slightly pacified as Lakñman continued, “Let Us seek out the 
assistance of the great sages. With Me by Your side we shall search the 
whole earth with all its mountains and forests. If We still do not find 
Sétä We shall go to the depths of the ocean and up to the realms of the 
gods. O Räma, We shall not rest until We find Your beloved wife.” 
Lakñman suggested that if still They did not find Sétä, then Räma could 
let loose His venomous missiles upon the worlds. But first He should 
control His anger and seek His wife through peaceful means. Otherwise, 
what example would He set for the world? If the earth’s ruler 
immediately resorted to violence when under duress, then what would 
ordinary men do? Could they be expected to exercise any control when 
in distress? In this world calamities visited everyone in due course of 
time, but they also disappeared again. Happiness and distress follow one 
another in swift succession. One should not give way to either. Even the 
gods were subject to suffering. One should neither rejoice nor grieve for 
material things, but with a peaceful mind carry out one’s duties. This was 
the path to everlasting happiness. Lakñman looked into Räma’s eyes. 
“O Räma, You have often instructed Me in this way. Indeed, who can 
teach You, even if he be Båhaspati himself? I am only trying now to 
awaken Your intelligence, which has been dulled by grief. Dear brother, 
people like You do not give way to grief even when faced with the 
gravest perils. Therefore spare the worlds. Seek out only the sinful 
adversary who has stolen Sétä.”

236 
Räma put down His bow and replaced His arrow in its quiver. He was 
moved by His brother’s beautifully worded advice. Controlling His 
anger, He thanked Lakñman and asked Him what They should do next. 
Where should They begin to look? The two princes continued to walk 
south, discussing what to do. Soon They came upon Jatayu lying upon 
the ground. Seeing from a distance the mountainous bird drenched in 
blood, Räma exclaimed, “Lakñman! Here is a Räkñasa in the guise of a 
bird. Surely this beast has devoured Sétä. I shall make short work of it 
with My fiery arrows.” 
Räma fitted a razor-headed arrow to His bow and bounded toward 
Jatayu, but as soon as He recognized the great bird He lowered His 
weapon. Jatayu, close to death, saw Räma coming and raised his head. 
Vomiting blood he spoke in a strained voice. “O Räma, the godly Sétä 
and indeed my life have both been snatched away by Rävaëa. I flew to 
Her assistance and fought with the demon. Although I smashed his 
chariot and killed his horses, I was finally cut down by him.” 
Jatayu then described what had taken place. Upon hearing his story 
Räma fell weeping to the ground. He embraced Jatayu and stroked his 
head. In great pain Räma cried out, “Alas, who is more unfortunate than 
I? My sovereignty is lost, I am exiled, My wife is stolen and now My 
father’s friend lies mortally wounded, having tried his best to help Me.” 
Räma questioned Jatayu. Where did Rävaëa take Sétä? What did She say 
as She was being dragged away? How powerful was the Räkñasa and 
where was his abode? Räma spoke wildly in a tearful voice. 
Jatayu looked at Him fondly. Speaking in barely a whisper he replied, 
“The demon conjured up a storm as he flew in the sky. As I contended 
with him I soon became exhausted, being old and worn out. He then 
lopped off my wings. He sped away with his face pointing south.” 
The bird lay gasping. He reassured Räma that Sétä would soon be found. 
The Räkñasa had kidnapped Her at an hour which was favorable for Her 
return. “Although he knew it not,” Jatayu said, “it was the ‘vinda’ hour. 
According to scripture, a treasure lost during that time is again 
recovered.” 
Jatayu told Räma that Rävaëa was the son of the sage Vishrava and the 
half-brother of Kuvera. Although he was immensely powerful Räma 
would soon slay him; Jatayu was sure of it. As the old bird spoke he felt

237 
his life departing. Blood flowing continuously from his mouth, he looked 
at Räma with tears in his eyes. Repeating Räma’s name over and over, 
Jatayu gradually became silent. His head fell to the ground and his body 
slumped back. 
Räma stood with folded hands looking at His father’s dear friend. He 
cried out in anguish. “Speak more, O noble bird. Speak more!”  
But Jatayu was dead. Räma gazed at him sorrowfully. Turning to 
Lakñman He said, “Alas, this bird has laid down his life for My sake, dear 
brother. It is clear that valiant souls who practice piety and virtue are 
found even in the lower species of life and not just among humans. The 
pain of seeing this vulture’s death afflicts Me as much as that caused by 
Sétä’s loss.” 
Räma considered Jatayu to be as worthy of His worship as Daçaratha. He 
asked Lakñman to fetch logs so that They could build a funeral pyre. 
Räma looked at the bird and said, “You will attain unsurpassed realms of 
happiness, O king of birds. Never again will you take birth in this mortal 
world of pain and suffering.” 
The brothers placed Jatayu on the wood pile and set it alight. Räma 
personally recited the sacred mantras and performed the ritual, 
cremating Jatayu as He would His own relative. Both brothers then went 
to the Godavari and, after bathing in the river, offered its sacred water 
to Jatayu’s departed soul. When the ritual was complete Räma and 
Lakñman felt pleased, knowing that Jatayu had gone to divine regions of 
unending happiness. They fixed their minds on recovering Sétä. Going 
in a southerly direction They entered the deep forest, appearing like 
Viñëu and Indra going out to encounter the Asuras. 
Lakñman went ahead wielding His long sword and hewing down the 
shrubs and creepers that blocked Their progress. The forest was trackless 
and difficult to traverse, but the brothers moved swiftly. Distressed and 
eager to find Sétä, They looked on all sides, but saw only the dense 
forest. Lions roared and birds of prey screamed above them. Thick 
darkness enveloped Them as they penetrated deeply into the jungle. As 
They moved ahead vigorously and without fear, They began to perceive 
evil omens. Räma’s left arm throbbed and His mind became disturbed. 
Jackals howled and crows emitted shrill cries. Räma said, “Be wary, O 
Lakñman. These signs definitely indicate some imminent danger.”

238 
Even as He spoke a loud noise suddenly resounded from ahead of Them. 
It was deafening and it filled the four quarters. Räma and Lakñman, with 
swords in hand, ran toward the sound. Here must be the demon 
responsible for taking Sétä. They would soon dispatch him. Perhaps Sétä 
was still there. The brothers raced ahead. 
They suddenly broke into a clearing and saw a colossal Räkñasa seated 
there. Taller than the surrounding trees, the demon looked like a 
mountain peak. He had no neck or head and his huge mouth was in his 
belly. The demon was dark blue in color and covered all over with sharp 
bristling hair. At the top of his body was a single fearful eye which 
blazed like fire. His long pointed tongue darted in and out, licking his 
lips. He had arms eight miles long and they drew toward him all kinds of 
animals. As Räma and Lakñman looked on, the Räkñasa devoured bears, 
tigers and deer, which he crammed into his gaping mouth. 
The brothers saw the Räkñasa from a distance of a mile. They looked in 
amazement. As they stood there, the demon saw Them and reached out 
with his two arms, which snaked about like two enormous creepers. 
Tightly grasping both brothers he lifted Them high above the ground. 
Lakñman cried out to Räma, “Free Yourself, O Räma! Leave Me as an 
offering to this devil. Make good Your escape. I cannot release Myself 
from this demon’s clutches. After recovering Sétä and the throne of 
Ayodhya, always remember Me there.” 
Already torn by anguish due to having allowed Sétä to be captured, 
Lakñman was overcome by the demon. Räma replied to His distraught 
brother, “Do not yield to fear, O Lakñman. A man like You should never 
feel dejected.” 
The massive Räkñasa pulled the brothers toward him. “Who are you two 
with shoulders like those of bulls, dressed like ascetics yet wielding 
swords and large bows?” he boomed. “By the will of Providence You have 
fallen within the range of my sight at a time when I stand oppressed by 
hunger. Your life is now of short duration.” 
Räma felt despair. What would happen next? Was there no end to His 
suffering? He called out to Lakñman. “Powerful indeed is destiny. 
Calamity upon calamity is heaped upon Us. We are now threatened 
with death even before We could find the beautiful Sétä. What should 
be done now?”

239 
The demon spoke again. “Today You two shall serve as my food. Exert 
Yourself if You have any strength.” 
Lakñman, who had gathered Himself together, became infuriated. He 
shouted to Räma, “The strength of this repulsive demon lies in his arms 
alone. Let Us quickly cut off his vast arms with Our swords.” 
As Lakñman spoke the Räkñasa roared and opened his mouth wide. He 
began drawing the brothers toward him. Without delay They both 
brought Their swords down upon his arms with great force. The razor-
sharp weapons sliced through the demon’s flesh and his arms fell upon 
the ground, releasing Räma and Lakñman. Emitting a terrible bellowing 
scream, which echoed for miles, the demon slumped back, bathed in a 
stream of blood which gushed from the stumps of his arms. He called out 
to the princes, “Who are You?” 
Lakñman replied, “We are two sons of Daçaratha, in the line of Ikñväku. 
This is Räma and I am Lakñman. We are here at the behest of Our noble 
father. While My mighty brother wandered in the forest, His consort 
was stolen away by a Räkñasa, whom We now seek. But who are you? 
Why do you reside in this forest in such a form with a flaming mouth in 
your belly?” 
The demon became joyful upon hearing Lakñman speak. “Welcome, O 
tigers among men. It is my good luck that I see You here today. By good 
fortune only have my arms been severed by You.” 
The Räkñasa, whose name was Kabandha, told the brothers his story. He 
had previously been a Gandharva. Once, out of pride in his divine 
beauty, he had laughed at a åñi named Ashtavakra, whose body is bent in 
eight places. In order to free Kabandha from his pride the åñi had 
pronounced a curse, turning the Gandharva into a Räkñasa. Kabandha 
had begged for mercy and the åñi had said, “When Räma and Lakñman 
cremate you in a lonely forest, only then shall you be released from my 
curse.”  
Kabandha continued, “In the form of a Räkñasa I ranged the forest. 
After once performing severe asceticism, I received from Brahmä the 
boon of a long life. Becoming fearless I then challenged Indra to battle. 
That invincible god hurled his thunderbolt at me. It hit me and forced 
my head, arms and legs into my trunk. Although I begged him, Indra 
would not kill me, saying, ‘Let the words of Brahmä prove true.’

240 
“I asked Indra how I could survive in such a form, a mere trunk with no 
head or limbs. Out of compassion he gave me these two arms and this 
huge mouth. He then said, ‘When Räma and Lakñman sever your arms, 
you will ascend to heaven.’ 
“Thus have I sat here, stretching out my arms and pulling into my mouth 
lions, leopards, bears, tigers and deer. I always thought to myself, ‘One 
day Räma and Lakñman will fall within my grip.’” 
Kabandha implored the princes to throw him in a pit and cremate him. 
Räma asked that he first tell Them if he knew anything about Sétä’s 
whereabouts. He said to the Räkñasa, “We only know the name of Sétä’s 
abductor. We do not know where he lives, nor even his appearance.” 
Kabandha said he would be able to give Them good advice as soon as he 
could assume his original celestial form because only then would he be 
possessed of his former divine intelligence. The brothers dug a great pit 
next to the demon and placed in it many logs. They pushed Kabandha 
into the pit and set fire to the logs. As the Räkñasa’s body burned he 
looked like a large lump of ghee, with fat running down on all sides. 
Suddenly from the pit there arose a shining personality dressed in 
blazing yellow garments and wearing a bright garland. A splendid aerial 
chariot drawn by swans also appeared and Kabandha took his seat on it. 
He then spoke to Räma. “O Raghava, I shall now tell You how You shall 
recover Sétä. One who has fallen upon misfortune is served by another 
in the same circumstances. You must befriend someone who has suffered 
a similar fate as You.” 
Kabandha told Räma that He should seek out the monkey Sugréva. This 
monkey lived on a nearby mountain with four friends. He was powerful, 
intelligent, cultured and true to his promise. His enraged brother Vali 
had exiled him for the sake of sovereignty and he was in need of help. By 
forming a pact with Sugréva, Räma would render him good and in return 
the monkey would assist Räma in finding Sétä.  
Kabandha went on, “Having restored the kingdom to Sugréva, the 
monkey will send out thousands of his followers to search every part of 
the world. O Räma, even if Your wife has been taken to the highest or 
lowest planet, She will be found and returned to You with Sugréva’s 
help.” 
Kabandha then told Räma how He could find Sugréva. With his divine

241 
vision the Gandharva could see exactly what Räma would encounter 
and he told Him in detail. Räma would meet with the monkeys near the 
hermitage of the Åñi Matanga on the side of Lake Pampa, where there 
now lived only an old ascetic lady named Sabari. After explaining 
everything, Kabandha remained in the sky, shining like the sun. Räma 
thanked him and said, “Please depart now for your own abode. You have 
rendered Me excellent service.” 
Kabandha bowed his head and offered prayers to the brothers, 
recognizing who They were. His golden chariot then rose upwards. As he 
disappeared into the skies the Gandharva called out, “Enter an alliance 
with Sugréva.” 
Räma and Lakñman immediately headed west as suggested by Kabandha. 
After some time They reached Lake Pampa and stayed one night by its 
side. In the morning the princes looked about and located the site of 
Matanga’s hermitage. It was hemmed in by trees laden with fruits and 
flowers. Varieties of colorful birds played in the trees and their singing 
was beautiful. Deer, rabbits and other timid creatures moved about 
peacefully. 
The princes walked over the soft grass and soon found the hut where 
Sabari lived. She was seated outside the hut and rose respectfully as 
They approached. Joining her palms, the ascetic lady fell down before 
the brothers and clasped Their feet. Sabari offered Them grass mats and 
brought water to wash Their feet, saying, “You are welcome.” 
Räma and Lakñman sat at ease and Räma spoke. “O noble lady, is your 
asceticism proceeding without impediment? Have you mastered your 
senses? Are you fully freed from anger and is your diet controlled? O 
gentle one, has your service to your guru borne fruit?” 
Sabari looked at Räma with tear-filled eyes. She had been practicing 
austerities and yoga for many years. Being fully self-realized, she could 
understand the identities of the two princes. She spoke in a pleasing 
voice. “Today the full fruition of my asceticism and meditation has been 
attained. Today my life is perfected. My teachers have now been served 
and satisfied and I have achieved heaven. Indeed, O Räma, after seeing 
Your divine form I shall reach those realms that know no decay.” 
Sabari told Räma that her preceptor Matanga had not long before 
ascended to heaven. Before leaving he had informed Sabari that Räma,

242 
accompanied by Lakñman, would soon come there. She should serve the 
two princes and then, when they left, she would rise up to the eternal 
regions. With shaking hands Sabari began offering the brothers fruits 
and vegetables of every description.  
After graciously accepting Sabari’s offerings, Räma asked to be shown 
the hermitage. “I wish to see for Myself the glory of your guru,” He said. 
“Please show Me where he lived and worshipped.” 
Sabari took the brothers to where Matanga had his altar. It shone with a 
brilliant luster which illuminated the surrounding area. In a pond 
nearby were the waters of the seven oceans, brought there by Matanga’s 
ascetic powers. Flower garlands made by the sage lay on the ground, still 
fresh and unfaded.  
After she had shown the brothers around, Sabari said, “I long now to 
join those great åñis in heaven. I am ever their servant. Please permit me 
to leave, O Räma.” 
Räma and Lakñman looked around, saying, “Wonderful.” Räma turned 
to the old ascetic woman. “You have properly honored us, O blessed 
lady. Please depart at will.” 
Sabari bowed low to Räma and, approaching the sacrificial fire, cast 
herself into it. As her body was consumed she arose in a brilliant 
ethereal form. Adorned with celestial jewels and garlands, she appeared 
resplendent. Like a streak of lightning she rose into the sky, illuminating 
the whole region. She went upwards toward the holy realm now 
inhabited by the sages whom she had always served. 
Having watched Sabari depart, Räma spoke to Lakñman. “This 
hermitage shines with splendor. By simply coming here We have been 
freed of the stain of sinful karma. Dear brother, surely now Our fortunes 
will change. I feel that We shall soon meet with Sugréva.” 
Räma felt joy as He anticipated meeting the monkey. He remembered 
Kabandha’s words. Soon Sétä would be found, He felt sure. The two 
brothers left the hermitage and walked around the edge of the lake, 
carefully surveying the area. The sounds of peacocks and parrots 
perched on the trees nearby echoed all around. It was noon and the 
princes took their midday bath in the lake. The water was crystal clear 
and covered with innumerable lotuses, making it appear like a many-
colored carpet. The lake had gently sloping banks of golden sand

243 
covered with tall trees. Long creepers reached down to the water and 
shining fishes nibbled at their ends. 
As the brothers continued around the bank of the Pampa, which 
stretched for miles, They came to the foot of the Rishyamukha 
mountain. Räma gazed up at it. “Surely this is the mountain where 
Sugréva dwells. O Lakñman, My heart is torn with grief for Sétä. I feel I 
cannot live much longer unless the princess is found. Please quickly 
search for the monkey.” 
Thinking of Sétä, Räma burst into a loud wail. Where was Janaka’s 
daughter now? Perhaps She had pined away in His absence, dying of 
grief. As Räma looked around at the beautiful scenery His pain only 
heightened. Everything reminded Him of Sétä. The peahen’s mating 
dance brought to mind the way Sétä would approach Him in love. The 
fragrant breeze was like the scented breath of His beloved wife. Yellow 
champaka flowers resembled Her shining silk garment. Bright red tree 
blossoms looked like the princess’s full lips. Deer moved about with their 
mates, piercing Räma’s heart as He remembered how He would wander 
with Sétä. The white swans reminded Räma of His wife’s complexion. 
Indeed, He saw Her everywhere He looked. 
Räma cried out in anguish, His heart burning with the pain of 
separation. Lakñman comforted His brother, again reassuring Him that 
Sétä would be found. As he spoke to Räma his voice rose in anger. “The 
sinful Rävaëa will find no shelter, even if he enters the darkest region of 
the universe. I shall seek him out. Either the Räkñasa will yield Sétä or 
meet with his end at My hands. Throw off Your grief, dear brother, and 
together We shall strenuously exert Ourselves to find Sugréva. High-
class men never give way to despondency, even when faced with the 
most terrible calamities. Rather, they become more and more 
determined to overcome their difficulties.” 
Räma was heartened by Lakñman’s assurances. The two brothers 
continued Their search for Sugréva.  
Chapter 11

244 
Räma Meets the Monkeys 
High on a peak of the Rishyamukha hill, Sugréva had heard Räma’s cries. 
He looked around and saw the two princes on the edge of the lake. He 
was immediately seized with fear. The two humans appeared like a 
couple of powerful gods. Sugréva wondered if They had been sent by his 
brother Vali, who bore him constant enmity. The princes’ large bows 
and swords struck fear into Sugréva’s heart. He ran back to his cave and 
said to his four companions. “Two mighty warriors, disguised as ascetics, 
have come here. Surely this is Vali’s doing. Dispatched by him with the 
purpose of seeking me out and killing me, those two heroes will soon 
arrive here. What should I do?” 
The five great apes, who were all incarnations of the gods and who 
belonged to the celestial race of Vanaras, sat together and discussed. 
They decided to ascend a high peak and observe the warriors. Coming 
out from their cave they leapt from crag to crag. As they bounded 
impetuously upward, they broke down large trees with their powerful 
arms. Tigers and leopards dashed away in fear, seeing the apes jumping 
about the side of the mountain. After reaching a high place, they came 
together and gazed down upon Lake Pampa. Sugréva’s main advisor, 
Hanumän, who was a son of the wind-god Väyu, then said, “What cause 
is there for concern, O Sugréva? Here are only two men. I do not see 
Vali, the actual source of your fear, nor can Vali ever come here because 
of Matanga’s curse.” 
Hanumän advised Sugréva to closely observe the warriors. From their 
movements and gestures he would be able to ascertain their actual 
purpose. He should not give way to unnecessary fear. Perhaps the two 
men had come as friends. 
Sugréva was still not sure. He had experienced Vali’s malicious anger on 
numerous occasions. He replied to Hanumän, “No trust can placed in 
kings, O wise one. They will never rest until all their enemies are 
destroyed. I feel that these two warriors are Vali’s emissaries. Even if 
They exhibit friendship, we should be wary. Otherwise, having gained 
our trust, They will then fulfill my brother’s wicked purpose.”

245 
Sugréva told Hanumän to assume the form of a Brahmin and meet with 
the warriors. He should study Them carefully and then report back. 
Hanumän, who accepted Sugréva as his king, bowed respectfully and left, 
leaping down to the base of the mountain. As a son of Väyu, he 
possessed great mystic power. He thus assumed a human form and, 
appearing as a wandering mendicant, approached Räma and Lakñman.  
Hanumän prostrated himself before the princes and inquired in 
respectful tones, “What brings you two shining ascetics to this region? 
You appear like a pair of royal sages fit to rule the entire world. Your 
massive bows glow like rainbows, Your swords appear dreadful, and Your 
arms are like the trunks of mighty elephants. Yet You are dressed as 
Brahmins. And why do You wail so despondently? Why do You search 
about this lake? Your presence here is a mystery, although You are 
indeed welcome. You seem like the sun-god and moon-god descended to 
earth, illuminating this large mountain by Your own luster. Perhaps You 
are even powerful expansions of the Supreme Lord.” 
The astute Hanumän closely examined the two brothers. He could 
understand They were not ordinary men. The monkey had a deep 
devotion for Viñëu and as he looked at Räma, he felt his love being 
awakened. It seemed he had known this human all his life, although he 
had never met Him before. Hanumän thought carefully. Surely this was 
the Lord incarnate. What profound purpose had brought Him here?  
Hanumän decided to reveal his identity. Folding his palms he told Them 
he was Sugréva’s minister. Sugréva was the king of the Vanaras, but he 
had been banished by his brother. He now sought the princes’ friendship 
and was waiting high upon the mountainside.  
The brothers were relaxed and smiling. They had listened attentively to 
Hanumän. Räma had become cheerful upon hearing his words and He 
said to Lakñman, “This meeting is fortunate indeed, dear brother. Here 
stands Sugréva’s minister, who is the monkey We seek. My heart and 
mind are moved by this noble Vanara’s speech. Surely he has studied 
every facet of Sanskrit grammar, for his words were faultless and 
delivered in a gentle and highly poetic style. Even an enemy with 
upraised sword would be made friendly by such a speech.” 
Räma asked His brother to reply to Hanumän. Lakñman then informed 
the monkey that They had heard about Sugréva and wished to meet with

246 
him in friendship. Hanumän smiled. Realizing that the two godlike 
brothers were seeking his master’s assistance, he felt that Sugréva’s 
kingdom was already recovered. The monkey joyfully spoke again. “Pray 
tell me Your purpose in having come to this lonely forest region in the 
first place.” 
By gestures Räma urged Lakñman to explain everything to Hanumän. 
Lakñman told him in brief all that had happened to Räma from the point 
of His being exiled. The narration of Räma’s many misfortunes 
distressed Lakñman and He spoke with tears streaming from His eyes. 
Describing how Kabandha had directed Them to find Sugréva, the 
prince concluded, “This Räma, whose father Daçaratha was daily 
honored by all the kings of earth and who himself possesses limitless 
virtues, now seeks the refuge of Sugréva, the lord of monkeys.” 
When the prince stopped speaking, Hanumän stood with folded palms. 
He looked at Räma and said, “Fortunate indeed is Sugréva that You have 
sought him as an ally. He too is fully afflicted by grief, having lost his 
home and family at the hands of his powerful brother. He now lives in 
fear on this high mountain. Come, I shall take You to him.” 
Räma and Lakñman looked at each other joyfully. Hanumän then 
assumed his form as a monkey and, kneeling, told the princes to mount 
his shoulders. Then the powerful ape leapt up the mountainside, 
carrying both Räma and Lakñman with ease. 
Within a few minutes Hanumän reached Sugréva. Setting the brothers 
down, he introduced Them to the monkey chief. He told Sugréva all that 
Lakñman had said about Their exile and search for Sétä. Hanumän 
praised the princes highly and recommended to Sugréva that he accept 
Their proffered friendship. 
Sugréva looked at the two brothers, his mind awed by Their brilliance 
and obvious power. Like Hanumän, he felt a strong love and devotion 
awakening in his heart. He stood up and spoke to Räma. “I am highly 
honored that You have sought my alliance, O Räma. Your righteousness, 
Your virtues and Your kindness to all beings is well known. It is my gain 
only that You have arrived here today. O noble one, if my friendship is 
acceptable to You, then please take my hand. Let us enter into an 
abiding pact.” 
Sugréva extended his hand to Räma, who clasped it firmly in His own.

247 
Räma vigorously embraced the monkey and they both felt great 
happiness. Hanumän then lit a fire and sanctified it with Vedic mantras. 
Räma and Sugréva sat by the fire and swore their alliance together. They 
went clockwise around the fire, hand in hand. As they gazed happily at 
each other, Sugréva said, “May our friendship last forever. Our woes and 
joys are now one.” 
Hanumän broke off a large bough from a flowering sal tree and set it on 
the ground as a seat for Räma and Sugréva. He broke off another from a 
blossoming sandalwood tree and offered it to Lakñman. When they were 
all seated Sugréva began telling Räma about himself. “I have been 
banished and antagonized by my elder brother Vali, O Räma, and I move 
about these woods in great fear. He has stolen my wife and wrested the 
kingdom from me. Even now he seeks to destroy me. Please grant me 
security from my hostile brother.” 
Räma laughed heartily and replied, “Certainly service is the fruit of 
friendship, O mighty monkey. You need have no fear from Vali. That 
immoral monkey will soon lie dead, killed by My infallible arrows. You 
will see Vali struck down and lying on the earth like a shattered 
mountain.” 
Sugréva was reassured. He was certain he would soon recover his wife 
and kingdom. He again clasped Räma’s hand and thanked Him. Sugréva 
assured Räma that he would search out and find Sétä, whether She was 
in the bowels of the earth or the vaults of heaven. “You should know for 
sure,” he said, “that neither god nor demon can hold Sétä any more than 
a man can digest poisoned food.” 
Even as that friendship between Räma and Vali was forged, the left eyes 
of Sétä, Vali and Rävaëa all throbbed violently and simultaneously, 
foreboding good to the princess and evil to the other two. 
After the brothers and the monkeys had eaten a meal of cooked roots 
and forest vegetables prepared by Hanumän, they again spoke together. 
Sugréva told Räma that he had seen, not long ago, a great Räkñasa flying 
overhead clutching a crying lady. He had heard Her plaintive calls of, 
“Räma! Lakñman!” This must surely have been Sétä being stolen by 
Rävaëa. Sugréva continued, “I saw the princess wriggling like a snake in 
the demon’s grasp. She spotted me sitting with my four companions on 
the mountaintop. She then threw down Her jewels wrapped in a cloth.”

248 
Räma grasped the monkey’s arm. “You saw My beloved Sétä? Where are 
those jewels? Bring them quickly!” 
Sugréva got up and entered deeply into his cave. After a few minutes he 
returned, holding the cloth bundle Sétä had thrown. He laid it out before 
Räma and the brilliant jewels shone in the bright sunshine. Räma 
dropped to His knees and began sobbing. “Sétä! My darling!” He pressed 
the jewels to His bosom. Thinking of His kidnapped wife He began to 
hiss like a serpent provoked in its hole. He turned to Lakñman, who had 
knelt by His side. “See here, O Lakñman, Sétä’s bright jewels. The 
Räkñasa must have carried Her this way.” 
Lakñman gazed at the jewels and replied to Räma. “I do not recognize the 
armlets or earrings, for I have never looked at the face or body of the 
princess. But I recognize the anklets, which I saw each day as I bowed at 
Her feet.” 
Räma stood quickly and spoke to Sugréva. “Tell Me where the demon has 
taken Sétä? Where does he dwell, O Sugréva? On account of that demon 
I shall exterminate the entire Räkñasa horde. By carrying off Sétä he has 
opened wide the portals of death. Let me know his whereabouts and I 
shall dispatch him to Death’s presence this very day, accompanied by all 
his followers.” 
Sugréva’s head fell. He told Räma he had no knowledge of Rävaëa’s 
whereabouts. The city of the Räkñasas was unknown to the monkeys, as 
it was to humans. Perhaps it even lay on some other planet, for the 
Räkñasas could move freely anywhere. But Sugréva solemnly swore that 
he would find Sétä. Räma should not lament. Whatever it took to locate 
the princess, Sugréva and his monkeys would undertake.  
Sugréva reassured Räma. “Do not allow grief to overpower You, O great 
hero. Wise men face every calamity with fortitude and do not yield to 
sorrow. Only the foolish are overcome by lamentation, losing their 
intelligence and strength and sinking like an overloaded boat. O Räma, I 
am here to help You. Cast away Your grief.” 
Räma wiped His face with His cloth and smiled at Sugréva. He felt 
comforted by the monkey’s words and thanked him for his counsel. He 
urged Sugréva to begin the search for Sétä immediately and He again 
promised to kill Vali. Sugréva and his ministers felt immense pleasure to 
hear Räma’s promise and they considered their purpose accomplished.

249 
Sugréva vowed his unending and unswerving friendship and service to 
Räma, who then asked, “Tell me how you came to be exiled, dear friend. 
Why do you tarry here on this lonely mountain, suffering grief and 
fear?” 
Sugréva then told Räma his story. “Although I had ascended the throne 
of the monkeys under the instruction of Vali’s ministers, I was deposed 
and chased away violently by Vali. Even my dear wife was stolen by my 
powerful brother. Still he antagonizes me. Many times I have killed 
monkeys sent by him for my destruction. Thus it was that I feared even 
You when I first saw You arrive here.” 
Räma wanted to hear all the details about Vali. He asked Sugréva to 
relate the whole history. What were Vali’s strengths and weaknesses? 
Why had he insulted Sugréva? Räma was already feeling anger toward 
Vali. He wanted to know everything about the arrogant monkey. Then 
He would take the necessary steps. He again reassured Sugréva. “Speak 
with confidence. Soon you will see My arrow streak toward Vali’s chest 
and him falling like a cleft mountain.” 
Sugréva, feeling delight, said, “Vali and I are the two sons of Riksaraja, 
the king of the monkeys. My father and I always held Vali in the highest 
esteem. When the king died it was Vali, as the elder prince, who was 
duly installed as the ruler. I always remained subservient to my brother, 
standing by his side.” 
Sugréva described how, one day, a demon named Mayavi had come to 
Kishkindha, the monkeys’ city. He had a dispute with Vali over a woman 
and he stood outside the city gates, bellowing fearfully and challenging 
Vali to a duel. Vali was sleeping and Mayavi’s roars woke him. He got up 
furiously and immediately rushed out of the city with Sugréva by his side. 
When Mayavi saw the two huge monkeys emerging from the city he 
became fearful and ran away. Vali and Sugréva gave chase and were 
gaining on the demon when he suddenly entered a large hole in the 
earth. 
Upon reaching the hole, Vali decided to go after Mayavi and he told 
Sugréva to wait for him. Although Sugréva implored his brother to take 
him, Vali went alone into the hole. He bound Sugréva on oath to remain 
at the entrance of the hole until he returned.  
A year passed and Sugréva waited. There was no sign of Vali. Sugréva

250 
began to fear his brother had been killed. He stayed at the hole, feeling 
misgivings. Then, as he sat watching the hole, a large amount of foaming 
blood began to seep out. Sugréva also heard the roaring sound of the 
demon, but he could not hear his brother’s voice. Thinking carefully, 
Sugréva concluded with great sorrow that Vali must have been killed. 
Not wanting the demon to escape, Sugréva placed an enormous boulder 
over the hole. He then returned grieving to Kishkindha. 
Vali’s ministers then installed Sugréva on the throne, although he was 
reluctant to accept it. However, after only a short time elapsed, Vali 
returned, having killed the demon. When he saw Sugréva on the throne 
he became enraged. He bound the ministers in chains and spoke harshly 
to Sugréva, explaining that he had found Mayavi after a full year of 
searching and had slain him and all his kinsmen. He then turned back, 
only to find the entrance to the hole blocked and Sugréva gone. 
Sugréva was full of reverence toward his brother and bowed before him, 
touching his feet with the crown. He told Vali how pleased and relieved 
he was to see him returned. Sugréva would again happily become his 
brother’s servant, but Vali would not be placated. He accused Sugréva of 
deliberately shutting him up in the hole out of a desire to gain the 
kingdom. He threw Sugréva out of the city with only a single cloth 
wrapped around him. Vali also stole his brother’s wife. 
Sugréva concluded his story. “Thus it was that I came to be wandering 
about, accompanied by only a few close friends and advisors. Ranging 
the earth in fear of Vali, I finally sought shelter upon this mountain, 
knowing that he cannot come here due to a curse.” 
Räma smiled at Sugréva. Once more He gave him every assurance that 
the cruel and immoral Vali would soon be punished. “I will soon dispel 
your grief at losing your wife, O king of monkeys, even as the sun dispels 
a morning mist.” 
Sugréva looked at Räma. With His powerful frame and huge bow he was 
truly an impressive sight. Surely He could easily overpower even the 
mightiest of warriors. But Vali was no ordinary opponent. Although 
raised by Riksharaj, Vali had been born the son of Indra. He possessed 
strength beyond compare. No one could face him in battle. Therefore 
Sugréva felt uncertain. He began to describe Vali’s prowess. “Each day 
upon rising, Vali, for exercise, strides from the western to the eastern

251 
ocean. Then he moves to the southern shore and again bounds from 
there to the northernmost coast. He knows no fatigue and climbs to the 
tops of mountains, hurling down their huge peaks with his bare hands. I 
have seen Vali snap numerous massive trees as if they were small sticks.” 
Sugréva then told Räma about Vali’s encounter with another celestial 
demon named Dundubhi. This demon was accustomed to roam about in 
the form of a terrible-looking buffalo. He possessed the strength of ten 
thousand elephants and was wandering around looking for a suitable 
opponent. Coming to the god of the seas, the demon challenged him to 
battle, but the god declined, saying, “I am not competent to fight with 
you.” The deity sent Dundubhi to the Himavan mountain, telling him 
that he would get battle there, but the mountain also declined to fight 
with Dundubhi. The demon roared angrily and demanded to know who 
could possibly face him. Himavan then said that Vali would prove a 
worthy combatant for him, and he directed Dundubhi to Kishkindha. 
The furious demon, still in the form of a tremendous buffalo, rushed 
toward Vali’s city. He appeared like a black cloud racing through the 
skies in the rainy season. Dundubhi arrived at the gates of Kishkindha 
and thundered like a large drum being violently beaten. That sound 
reverberated for miles and it broke down the surrounding trees. Vali was 
enjoying with his wives in his palace. Drunk with wine and passion, he 
stood up and gazed about with reddened eyes. He was intolerant by 
nature and the sound of the demon maddened him. He ran out of his 
palace, followed by his wives. Going before Dundubhi he said, “Why do 
you bellow like this, O demon? If you are challenging me, then you had 
best flee immediately before I take your life.” 
The demon laughed loudly. He said to Vali, “You should not challenge 
me in the presence of ladies. O gallant monkey, fight with all your power 
and I shall kill you today. Or, if you prefer, you may remain for this 
night with your wives and we shall fight tomorrow. It is improper to 
fight one who is drunk or blinded by passion. Return to your city and 
gaze upon it for one last time. Say fond farewells to your near and dear 
ones. Install your son upon the throne and then come out for battle. 
Soon you will lie dead upon the earth.” 
Vali laughed to hear this arrogant boasting. He sent his wives back into 
the city and said to Dundubhi, “Do not make excuses to hide your fear.

252 
Take my inebriety to be the drunkenness of a warrior just prior to a 
battle. We shall fight now!” 
Vali tightened his cloth and stood like a mountain in front of Dundubhi. 
The demon roared and, lowering his pointed horns, charged furiously at 
Vali. The monkey at once seized Dundubhi by his horns and swung him 
around, throwing him down on the ground. Blood flowed from the 
demon’s ears and he got up and charged again. Rising up on his hind 
legs, he began pounding Vali with his hooves, making a sound like 
thunderclaps. He thrust his horns into Vali’s body, but the monkey stood 
firm. 
The battle raged for some time as the two opponents beat each other 
furiously. Vali struck the demon with fists, knees, feet, rocks and trees. 
Gradually he overpowered Dundubhi, who became exhausted. Vali then 
took hold of his horns and dashed him to the ground with great force. 
He whirled the lifeless demon around and tossed him to a distance of 
eight miles. As he flew through the air large amounts of blood flowed 
from his smashed body. Some drops fell upon the hermitage of the sage 
Matanga. The åñi stood up in a rage and looked around. He saw 
Dundubhi’s carcass and by his mystic vision could understand that Vali 
had thrown the dead demon there. He immediately uttered a curse: “If 
the monkey who threw this corpse ever steps within a four-mile radius of 
this hermitage, he will immediately turn to stone.” 
Thus Sugréva explained why Vali did not dare come near Rishyamukha. 
He pointed to what appeared to be a massive heap of shining white 
rocks. “Here are Dundubhi’s bones, tossed away by Vali. Even these bare 
bones can hardly be moved by any other person.” 
Lakñman laughed contemptuously. “What feat have you seen that Räma 
cannot easily equal? O Sugréva, I have not heard anything yet to 
indicate that this brother of yours is formidable.” 
Sugréva assured Lakñman that he was convinced of Räma’s prowess, but 
he had not yet seen any demonstration of Räma’s power, while on many 
occasions he had witnessed the power of Vali. He asked Räma to show 
him His strength by kicking away Dundubhi’s skeleton. 
Räma laughed again and with His foot He playfully lifted the huge 
bones, flicking them high into the sky. That skeleton flew out of sight, 
landing some eighty miles away. Seeing the bones vanishing into the

253 
distance Sugréva was impressed, but he still remained doubtful. He said 
to Räma, “You have thrown the dried-up bones of Dundubhi, but he was 
hurled by Vali when still a carcass full of flesh and blood. O Räma, 
forgive me, but there is one other test I should like to witness.” 
Sugréva showed Räma and Lakñman seven sal trees, each more than 
thirty arms’ length in diameter. In the past Vali had easily broken down 
many such trees. Sugréva asked Räma to show His strength by piercing 
one of those trees right through with an arrow. 
Räma smilingly took up His bow and strung it, placing on the string a 
dreadful-looking arrow. He took aim and released the arrow which 
passed cleanly through all seven trees. The arrow, gilded with gold, 
entered the earth and descended to the subterranean regions. Forcing its 
way back up and out of the earth, it again entered Räma’s quiver. 
Sugréva was astonished and fell flat on the ground at Räma’s feet. He 
considered Vali as good as slain. Kneeling before Räma he said, “You 
could kill with Your arrows the gods and demons combined. Who can 
stand before You in battle? With You as my ally, my grief has totally 
dried up. O Räma, let us go quickly and make short work of Vali.” 
Räma agreed and they all left immediately for Kishkindha. Räma told 
Sugréva to go ahead and challenge Vali to a fight and He would wait 
nearby. When Vali came out of the city, Räma would kill him. 
Sugréva stood outside Kishkindha and began to roar. Vali heard his 
brother and rushed out to fight. The two monkeys began a tumultuous 
and terrible combat that resembled a clash between Mars and Mercury 
in the heavens. Blinded by anger they threw blows like thunderbolts at 
each other. Striking with their fists, palms and feet, they pummeled each 
other, screaming with fury. 
Räma watched closely, bow in hand. He could not distinguish who was 
who. The two monkey brothers resembled each other closely, like the 
twin Açviné gods. Räma did not therefore release His arrow for fear of 
hitting Sugréva. 
Vali soon got the upper hand and the battered Sugréva ran for his life. 
He dashed back to the Rishyamukha, closely followed by Vali, who 
stopped at the edge of the forest near to Matanga’s hermitage, saying, 
“Today you are spared.” 
Sugréva lay gasping on the ground as Räma ran up to him. The monkey

254 
looked at the prince in surprise. “Why did You not say truthfully that 
You had no intention of slaying Vali? Look at me now. I have been half-
killed by that fearful ape. O Räma, had I known You were reluctant I 
would not have moved from this place.” 
Räma consoled Sugréva, explaining that He was unable to distinguish 
the monkey from his brother. Their features, dress and ornaments were 
too similar. He suggested that Sugréva again challenge Vali, but this time 
wearing some distinctive mark so that Räma could tell one from the 
other. Lakñman tied round Sugréva’s neck a flowering creeper. 
Reassured, Sugréva got up and left again for Kishkindha. 
Lakñman and Sugréva strode in front, followed by Räma, Hanumän and 
the other three monkeys. They soon reached the city and again Sugréva 
went to the gates. He looked at Räma, still feeling fearful. The beating 
from Vali had shaken him.  
Räma saw Sugréva’s anxious expression. He took the monkey by his 
shoulders and said, “Do not hesitate. Vali will presently roll in the dust, 
struck down by My arrow. I have never uttered a falsehood, even though 
I have been in adversity for a long time. Let go your mighty shout, O 
Sugréva, and Vali will quickly proceed to this spot. How can he brook a 
challenge in the presence of women? This shall be his last battle and 
indeed his last day on earth.” 
Sugréva accepted Räma’s firm assurance. While the two princes 
remained concealed in a clump of bushes, he again began to shout out 
his challenge. His roar rent the air pitilessly. Animals fled confused in 
all directions like women assailed by wicked men due to the failure of 
leaders to protect them. Birds dropped from the sky like gods whose 
pious merits have been exhausted. As Sugréva emitted his fierce cry he 
sounded like the ocean lashed by a gale.  
Vali was in his inner chambers with his wives. Hearing Sugréva’s 
challenge, he sat up in surprise. How had his brother returned so soon? 
Was he not satisfied with one thrashing? This time there would be no 
escape for that arrogant monkey. Vali was seized with fury. His limbs 
trembled and his eyes turned crimson. Grinding his teeth he leapt from 
his bed and ran toward the door.  
His wife Tara, seeing him about to go out, ran to him and held his arm. 
Her womanly intuition told her something was wrong. She spoke

255 
fearfully. “My lord, shake off this anger. Do not enter another combat 
with Sugréva. Although you are more powerful than your brother, I 
nevertheless feel misgivings. How has Sugréva become so fearless even 
though he was only just beaten by you? Why does he now stand there 
roaring like a monsoon cloud? Surely he has found a powerful ally.” 
Vali stopped and looked at his beautiful wife. She told him that she had 
heard how Sugréva had formed a friendship with two princes from 
Ayodhya. Tara described the power and glory of Räma, which she had 
heard described by Aìgada, Vali’s son. Räma was unassailable in battle 
and capable of crushing vast armies. He was the supreme resort for the 
afflicted and had given an assurance of safety to Sugréva. The Vanara 
queen begged her husband not to go out and fight. Instead he should 
welcome Sugréva and install him as the Prince Regent.  
Tara implored her husband. “I consider Sugréva to be your foremost 
friend. You need not maintain this animosity. Bring him close with gifts 
and kind words. Along with Räma he will prove your greatest ally. O 
valiant monarch, please do not enter another combat with Sugréva, for I 
fear it will be your last.” 
Gripped by death, Vali could not accept his wife’s wise advice. He 
reproached her as she stood before him weeping. “How can I tolerate 
this insolence? For a warrior who has never known defeat, brooking an 
insult is worse than death. I am not able to stand the arrogance of the 
weak Sugréva, much less his roar. O timid one, I shall not tarry here 
longer. Sugréva shall meet his end today.” 
Vali told Tara she need not fear on Räma’s account. He knew about the 
human prince. Räma was devoted to virtue and piety; He would never 
commit the sin of killing an innocent person. Nor could He intervene in 
the fair fights of others. Vali ordered Tara to stay in the palace. He was 
going out to face Sugréva and would soon return, having either killed his 
brother or sent him flying in fear. The queen bowed her head and, 
praying for her husband, returned sorrowfully to her rooms. 
Filled with rage and breathing heavily, Vali rushed out of the city gates. 
He saw Sugréva standing firm like a mountain, his reddish brown body 
glowing like fire. Vali tightened his loin cloth. Raising his fist he 
charged furiously at his brother, shouting, “This iron-like fist, hurled at 
you like a mace, will return after taking your life!”

256 
Remembering his brother’s treatment of him, Sugréva was also worked 
up with anger. He threw a great punch at the onrushing Vali. The two 
monkeys clashed together roaring like maddened bulls. Struck a 
swinging blow on the chest by Vali’s two clenched hands, Sugréva 
vomited blood and looked like a mountain covered with a cascade of red 
oxides. He tore up a sal tree and dashed his brother over the head. Vali 
shook like a ship tossed in the ocean. He fell upon Sugréva and began 
pounding him with his knees and fists. The two monkeys fought fiercely 
and gradually Vali once more gained the upper hand. 
Sugréva, with his vanity shattered, began fearfully looking about for 
Räma. He was becoming weaker and weaker. From behind the bush 
Räma saw His chance. Vali stood over his collapsed brother, his arms 
upraised. Räma swiftly placed an arrow on His bow, releasing it with a 
sound resembling a crash of thunder. The arrow sped like a streak of 
lightning and hit Vali on the breast, sounding like another thunderclap. 
Vali fell to the ground like a hewn tree, uttering a great cry. He lay 
unconscious with his body bathed in blood. Although struck by Räma’s 
powerful arrow, the monkey did not die, as he was wearing a gold chain 
Indra had given him. By Indra’s blessings that chain was capable of 
preserving the life of whoever wore it. Lying there with his scattered 
garments and shining ornaments, and the glowing arrow of Räma 
protruding from his chest, Vali looked like a colorful banner suddenly 
dropped to the ground. 
Räma and Lakñman slowly approached the mortally wounded monkey. 
Vali opened his eyes and looked up at Räma, who was smiling at him. 
The fallen monkey spoke with difficulty. “You are famous for Your truth 
and virtue, O Räma. How then have You committed such an abominable 
act? What was my crime that I should be punished in this way? I did not 
attack You. Indeed I was engaged in fair combat with another. Why then 
have You killed me, remaining concealed at a distance?” 
Vali accused Räma of irreligion, saying that He only posed as a virtuous 
person. This heinous deed surely proved Him to be otherwise. He had 
lost control of His mind and senses, overcome by desire and swayed by 
sentiment. Out of friendship for Sugréva, He had abandoned 
righteousness.  
Gasping for breath, Vali went on, “I cannot understand why You have

257 
acted in this way, O Räma. What did You have to gain by killing me, a 
mere monkey living in the forest on wild fruits? The scriptures condemn 
the eating of monkey flesh or the using of their skins. There was no 
reason to slay me. I have done You no harm at all. Surely this act will be 
condemned by all holy men and You will go to hell.” 
Vali censured Räma at length, speaking passionately. After some time he 
closed his eyes and fell back exhausted. He felt regret. Why had he not 
listened to Tara? She had tendered him wise advice. By ignoring her he 
had reaped the results of his impetuosity. The arrow in his chest burned 
like fire. Vali was shocked. How could the virtuous Räma have 
perpetrated such a vile deed? 
Räma waited for Vali to regain a little strength. When the monkey again 
opened his eyes, Räma said, “O Vali, you clearly do not understand 
righteousness and religion. This entire earth belongs to the descendants 
of Manu, having been bequeathed to them by that great deity and 
speaker of religious codes. Bharata now rules this world and We, his 
brothers, are His servants. It is thus Our duty to roam the earth, 
promoting virtue and punishing the wicked. You, O proud monkey, are 
indeed wicked.” 
Räma then explained to Vali rules of morality. The younger brother 
should be regarded as one’s own son, and his wife as one’s daughter-in-
law. Vali had therefore been guilty of a great sin in punishing the sinless 
Sugréva and co-habiting with Ruma, Sugréva’s wife. The scriptures 
prescribed death as the punishment for one who has illicit sexual 
relations with his own daughter or a wife of his younger brother. There 
was no doubt that Räma’s punishing him was just.  
Räma continued to address the pain-stricken Vali. “You are now freed 
from the sinful reaction which would have sent you to hell. A person 
punished by the king is released from all sins and ascends to heaven, but 
if the king fails to punish a sinner, then he himself incurs the sin. O 
Vali, you should not grieve, for you have been fortunate to receive the 
proper punishment, making you eligible for the higher planets after 
death. Nor did I act wrongly by remaining concealed. Since you are a 
monkey, this was the appropriate way to kill you. Just as when hunting 
the king shoots arrows at animals while hidden from view, so I shot you.” 
Vali could not argue. He had always felt remorseful for the way he had

258 
treated Sugréva, but had denied those feelings, remaining fiercely 
antagonistic toward his brother. Now he had finally received the result. 
All creatures had to accept the fruits of their own acts alone. No 
suffering or happiness came other than as a result of one’s former acts. 
Understanding this, Vali accepted Räma’s words as true and gave up his 
anger and grief. With difficulty he replied, “How can a dwarf argue with 
a giant? O Räma, You are the best knower of all religious principles. I am 
justly punished. Please forgive my harsh words spoken earlier out of 
sorrow and confusion. I have certainly strayed from the path of virtue.” 
Vali feared that after his death his brother Sugréva would be 
antagonistic to his son Aìgada. He begged Räma to establish a 
friendship between the two monkeys. Räma assured Vali that Sugréva 
would rule the Vanaras with righteousness, treating Aìgada like a 
younger brother. 
Vali lost consciousness, his life all but ended. At that moment Tara ran 
out of the city crying for her husband. She saw the monkeys who were 
Vali’s followers running about in all directions, seized with fear of Räma. 
Tara stopped some of them and asked them why they were fleeing. 
“See there your mighty husband struck down by Räma’s arrow,” they 
replied. “Death in the form of Räma is bearing him away. Leave quickly 
with us, for soon Sugréva will take over the city and drive us out, assisted 
by Räma’s deadly arrows.” 
Tara looked around and saw Vali lying on the ground. Nearby Räma 
leant on his great bow. With a wail she ran toward her fallen husband, 
beating her breast and head. She fell at Vali’s feet. The lordly ape 
resembled a mountain struck down by Indra’s thunderbolt. Crying out, 
“My lord!” she rolled about in agony. Aìgada also came there and 
dropped to the ground at his father’s feet, overwhelmed with grief.  
Tara lamented loudly. “Get up, O tiger among monkeys! Why do you not 
greet me? Come with me now and lay upon your excellent couch. The 
bare ground is no place for a king to lay. Alas, it is obvious that the earth 
is more dear to you than myself, for you lie there embracing her with 
your outstretched arms. What shall I do? Where shall I go? I am lost!” 
Crying like a female osprey, the intelligent Tara thought how her 
husband had banished Sugréva and stolen his wife. Surely this was the 
fruit of those sinful deeds. How could she live now as a widow under the

259 
care of Sugréva, Vali’s enemy? What would happen now to her dear son 
Aìgada? Tara held Vali’s feet, who still lay unconscious and was barely 
breathing. 
Hanumän gently comforted Tara. “This is the sure end of everybody, O 
gentle lady. All of us shall reap the results of our own deeds only, good or 
bad. As such, we gain nothing and do nothing for others by lamenting. 
Vali has reached the end of his allotted life span and will now rise to the 
higher regions. Do not grieve.” 
Tara cried out in pain. She had no desire to live without Vali. Laying 
next to her husband she determined to fast until death, following the 
path taken by Vali. 
As Tara sobbed, Vali opened his eyes and looked slowly about. Seeing 
Sugréva he spoke to him affectionately. “O brother, please forgive my 
evil acts against you. Destiny did not decree that we should share 
happiness together. Accept now the rulership of the monkeys. I shall 
soon depart for Yamaräja’s abode.” 
Vali asked his brother to be kind to Aìgada. He also asked that Sugréva 
carefully protect Tara, always seeking her advice on important matters. 
Räma’s order should be closely followed and Sugréva should always seek 
to please him. 
Sugréva, feeling despondent, nodded in assent to Vali’s instructions. Vali 
then took off his celestial gold chain and gave it to Sugréva. Turning to 
Aìgada he said in a whisper, “Dear son, I shall now depart from this 
world. Remain ever devoted to Sugréva’s service, seeing him as you do 
myself.” 
With his eyes rolling in pain and his teeth exposed, Vali gave up his life. 
His head fell to the side as his last breath gasped out. A great howl of 
sorrow went up from the many monkeys who stood surrounding Vali. 
“Alas, our lord is gone! Who will protect us now? Who can equal Vali in 
strength and splendor?” 
Tara and Aìgada embraced Vali’s body, wailing loudly. Sugréva was 
filled with remorse. He went before Räma and said, “I am a wretch who 
has caused the death of my own brother. Although he was always 
capable, my brother never killed me. But at the first opportunity I have 
had him slain. How can I take the kingdom now, stained as it is with 
Vali’s blood? How can I tolerate seeing Tara and Aìgada weeping

260 
bitterly on my account?” 
Sugréva became overwhelmed by his feelings. He felt sure he would reap 
the terrible results of the sin of fratricide and indeed the killing of a 
king. Vali was noble and had ruled the monkeys with justice and 
compassion. Having killed him, Sugréva was not fit to himself become a 
monarch. Everyone would simply condemn him. His only recourse was 
to enter fire along with the body of his brother. Sugréva begged Räma’s 
permission to give up his life. The other monkeys could assist Räma in 
finding Sétä. 
Räma was moved to tears upon hearing Sugréva’s piteous lamentations. 
As He considered the monkey’s sorrowful words, Tara approached him 
and said, “O all-powerful one, I too shall enter the fire along with Vali. I 
have no desire for life without my husband. Surely he will miss me, even 
among the Apsaräs in heaven, for I have always been his most devoted 
servant.” 
Tara begged Räma to kill her with the arrow which had slain Vali. “O 
Räma, the wife is always considered one with her husband. Therefore 
you need not fear the sin of killing a woman. You will only be 
completing the task of killing Vali by taking my life. I cannot tolerate 
the pain of separation from my spouse. Surely You know only too well 
what that terrible pain is like.” 
Räma looked compassionately at Tara, who had fallen to the ground. He 
consoled her most gently. “O wife of a hero, do not think in this way. 
This entire creation yields happiness and distress one after another for 
all created beings in accord with their destiny. Where will you go to 
avoid your fate? Be peaceful here; having duly mourned for your 
husband, you will soon enjoy as much delight under Sugréva’s protection 
as you did with Vali. Your son will become Prince Regent and you will 
be honored. All this is ordained by Providence. O Tara, the wives of 
heroes never lament as you are doing now.” 
Räma instructed Tara according to the moral codes which applied to her 
race. On the death of her husband, she should accept his brother as her 
spouse and serve him as she had Vali. Tara became silent, gazing at 
Räma, who now turned to Sugréva to comfort him.  
Räma told Sugréva to take heart and attend to Vali’s funeral. The soul of 
the monkey king would not be helped by simply grieving for him. “The

261 
time for grieving must soon end and duties must be performed,” Räma 
said gravely. “Time controls everything. Vali has succumbed to all-
powerful Time, going to the regions he has earned by his own acts. Now 
Time is urging you to perform your religious duties toward your brother.” 
Sugréva stood looking at Räma. His mind was bewildered with grief and 
remorse. Lakñman took hold of the monkey’s arm and told him to 
proceed with Vali’s cremation. Lakñman gave detailed instructions to 
the confused Sugréva. Hearing the prince speak, Sugréva’s attendants ran 
to carry out his orders.  
Räma again spoke to the grieving Tara. “O Vanara queen, carefully 
consider whether or not this dead body of Vali was ever related to you. It 
is nothing but a collection of inert chemicals. The real person is the soul, 
not the body. In ignorance only do we form relationships based upon 
bodily considerations, calling others ‘husband,’ ‘son,’ or ‘friend.’”  
Räma explained that the soul is without designations. It is eternal and 
dwells for only a short time in the body. During our brief sojourn in our 
bodies we form so many illusory relationships, but all of these will 
undoubtedly be broken by the force of time. The soul’s real happiness 
lies in its relationship with God. Vali had now moved closer to that 
eternal relationship and no one need lament for him.  
As Räma spoke, Vali’s grieving relatives felt relief. Gathering themselves 
together they prepared for Vali’s funeral. A beautiful wooden palanquin 
was fetched. Vali’s body was carefully laid on it and it was lifted up by 
eight powerful monkeys. Vali looked like a fallen god. The palanquin 
was adorned by numerous carvings of birds, trees and fighting soldiers. 
Over its top was lattice work covered with a net and many garlands and 
jeweled ornaments. The sides of the palanquin were daubed with red 
sandal-paste, and lotus flowers were laid out all along its edges. 
Sugréva and Aìgada bore the palanquin along with the other monkeys. 
Sugréva had regained his composure and he issued orders to the 
monkeys. “Walk ahead of us, scattering the ground with jewels of every 
description. Let learned monkeys recite the scriptures and we shall 
proceed slowly to the cremation ground.” 
The procession moved off, heading toward the river bank. A great wail 
was sent up by the many females who walked in front. Gradually they 
came to the river and a funeral pyre was built on its bank. The

262 
palanquin was set down next to the pyre and Tara again fell to the 
ground, crying mournfully. “O hero! Why do you not cast your glance 
upon me today? See here your wives, all weeping, who have trodden the 
long path behind you. Here are your ministers, sunk in a sea of 
dejection. O Vali, dismiss your counselors now as you did in the past. 
Then we shall sport together, intoxicated with love.” 
The other women gently raised Tara, who was overwhelmed with 
sorrow. With the help of Sugréva and the weeping Aìgada, they lifted 
Vali’s body onto the pyre. Aìgada then lit the pyre and walked around 
his father, who had set out on his journey to the next world. All the 
others joined him in slowly circumambulating the blazing pyre. 
Everyone then entered the river and offered sacred water to Vali’s soul. 
After the obsequies were performed, Sugréva and his counselors 
surrounded Räma and Lakñman.  
Hanumän, who resembled a golden peak of Mount Meru, folded his 
hands and said to Räma, “By Your grace, O Raghava, has Sugréva 
acquired the ancestral kingdom of the Vanaras. Please enter this city of 
Kishkindha in state and, with Your permission, we will perform the 
coronation ceremony.” 
Räma looked stern as He replied. “Commanded by My father I shall not 
enter even a village for fourteen years, much less a city. You may 
proceed into the city and duly install Sugréva as your king. I shall remain 
outside, finding some suitable cave for My residence.” 
Räma instructed Sugréva to remain in Kishkindha for the coming few 
months. It was the beginning of the monsoon season, so it would be 
impossible to search for Sétä. When the rains ended Sugréva should 
dispatch the monkeys in all directions to look for Rävaëa and the 
princess. 
Sugréva took leave of Räma and went into his city, which was situated 
within a vast mountain cave. In accordance with scriptural injunctions, 
a grand coronation ceremony was performed. Everyone repeatedly 
extolled Räma and Lakñman, feeling honored by the friendship of the 
two princes from Ayodhya. Sugréva was reunited with his wife, Ruma, 
and he entered Vali’s magnificent palace. Awaiting the end of the rainy 
season he lived happily, surrounded by his wives and ministers.

263 
Chapter 12 
The Search Begins  
Räma and Lakñman moved to the nearby Mount Prashravana and sought 
out a large cave close to its summit. They settled in, spending Their time 
talking together and performing sacrifice. But Räma’s mind rarely left 
Sétä. His only consolation was to describe Her qualities to Lakñman. He 
longed for the rainy season to end so that he could search for His 
beloved wife. Gradually the rains subsided. The sky cleared and the 
resonant cries of cranes filled the air. Although the monsoons were over, 
however, Sugréva still did not prepare his army to search for Sétä. 
Realizing this, Räma discussed the situation with Lakñman. 
“It seems the Vanara king has forgotten his debt to Us, noble brother. 
Why have his messengers not arrived here with news of their search? O 
Lakñman, I fear that the gentle Sétä is lost forever. What is She doing 
now? Surely Her mind dwells on Me, even as Mine never leaves Her. 
Surely She weeps in agony, even as I weep here.” 
Räma’s grief was as strong as it had been when Sétä was abducted four 
months ago. Räma felt powerless. He was still no closer to finding Sétä 
than the day She was kidnapped, and now Sugréva, upon whom his 
hopes were resting, was letting Him down. Räma sat distracted by 
sorrow. Lakñman reassured Him. “This is not the time to grieve, dear 
brother. We must strenuously exert Ourselves to find Sétä. With You as 
Her protector, no one can hold the princess for long. Compose Yourself, 
Räma! Let Us do what must be done.” 
Räma sighed and looked around. On a plateau beneath His cave, a large 
pond had been formed by the rains. Swans and cranes sported joyfully in 
the water among clusters of white and red lotuses. Räma could hear the 
croaks of frogs and the cries of peacocks. In the distance He heard the 
trumpeting sound of elephants in rut. Large black bees droned around 
the bright forest flowers, intoxicated with nectar. The sky was a deep 
blue and the wind, which had blown fiercely during the monsoons, had 
become a gentle breeze. The sights and sounds of autumn were visible

264 
everywhere. Räma was reflective. Where was Sugréva? Had he forgotten 
his promise now that his own problem had been solved? How could he so 
ungrateful? Räma’s brow furrowed with anger and He turned to 
Lakñman. 
“These past four months have seemed like a hundred years for Me. I 
have longed for the end of the rains, O Lakñman, so that We might find 
Sétä as We agreed with Sugréva. Although I have rendered him a great 
favor, the evil-minded monkey king obviously holds Me in contempt. 
Seeing Me forlorn and deprived of My kingdom, living helplessly like an 
ascetic in the forest, the wicked fellow entirely disregards Me.” 
Räma told Lakñman to go to Kishkindha. He should tell Sugréva that 
there is no viler being than one who is ungrateful. Had he forgotten the 
favor Räma had done for him, and the promise he had made in return? 
Did he wish to again see Räma’s golden bow drawn to its full length? Did 
he desire to see Räma angry on the battlefield? Did he long to hear again 
the crash of Räma’s bowstring sounding like so many claps of thunder? It 
was strange that Sugréva seemed to have forgotten how Vali was slain by 
a single arrow from Räma, although Sugréva himself could never 
overcome his brother. Räma’s eyes were crimson with anger as He spoke. 
“It is clear that Sugréva is lost in sensual pleasures, having regained his 
kingdom after a long time. Drunk and surrounded by women, he has all 
but forgotten his pledged word to Me. Tell him, O brother, that the path 
taken by Vali still lies open. Along with all his kinsmen, Sugréva may 
proceed along that path if he does not care for his promise. He should 
take heed of this warning. Otherwise he will meet again soon with Vali.” 
Lakñman Himself became furious as He listened to Räma. He told Räma 
that He would go immediately to Kishkindha. With upraised weapons 
He would dispatch Sugréva to Death’s abode. Clearly the licentious and 
unvirtuous Sugréva was not fit to rule a kingdom. Aìgada should be 
installed as king and he could organize the search for Sétä. Sugréva 
should be punished without delay. 
Lakñman stood up and reached for His weapons. Räma, whose anger had 
already begun to subside, then checked His brother. “I think it not 
fitting that You kill Sugréva. Try at first to pursue a gentler path. 
Remind him of our friendship and his promise. O Lakñman, do not use 
harsh words immediately. After all, Sugréva is but a monkey. Perhaps

265 
You can awaken him to a sense of his duty by conciliatory speech.” 
Lakñman bowed in assent to Räma’s words, although He could not 
subdue His anger. He left the cave and began running toward 
Kishkindha, thinking of what He would say to Sugréva. He could not 
disobey Räma’s order, but He would not tolerate any resistance from 
Sugréva. If that lazy monkey did not immediately set about his duty, he 
would be sorry. How dare he be so negligent of his promise to Räma! 
Who did he think he was? Lakñman bit His lips in fury as He bounded 
down the mountainside. 
* * * 
In the city of Kishkindha, Hanumän had also noticed the season change 
and Sugréva not stirring. The intelligent minister thought carefully 
about the situation. Räma would certainly take stern action if Sugréva 
failed to fulfill his pledge. Hanumän approached the Vanara king, who 
was absorbed in sensuality, and spoke to him in a friendly and pleasing 
manner. 
“You have regained sovereignty, fame and prosperity, O Sugréva. It now 
remains for you to win the goodwill of your allies. The dominion, fame 
and glory of a king who acts well toward his allies will always grow. That 
king who regards equally his exchequer, his army, his allies and his own 
self, will gain a great kingdom. However, he who fails to take care of any 
one of these meets with disaster.” 
Hanumän then reminded Sugréva of his promise to Räma. The time had 
arrived to begin the search for Sétä. The king should immediately send 
out monkeys in all directions. Räma should not need to ask. It would be 
shameful if Sugréva did not act quickly to repay a debt to his friend and 
ally. 
Sugréva thanked Hanumän for his wise and timely advice. The monkey 
king realized his laxity and he immediately summoned his ministers and 
counselors. He issued orders. “Let all the Vanara generals be quickly 
assembled. Swift-footed and energetic monkeys are needed. Ten 
thousand of my army should immediately depart for every country where 
the Vanaras dwell. Have them fetch the very best of the monkey 
warriors here to Kishkindha. Anyone sent out and failing to return 
within fifteen days should be executed.” Ordering Hanumän and

266 
Aìgada to organize the army, Sugréva again retired to his rooms. 
Within a few days the monkey hordes began to assemble outside the city. 
Monkeys resembling elephants, mountains and clouds gathered together. 
Those powerful Vanaras were like mighty tigers and were all heroic. 
They were dark and terrible and they made one’s hair stand erect just to 
see them. Some were as strong as a hundred elephants, some ten times 
stronger than that, and others ten times stronger again. They stood 
awaiting Sugréva’s orders. 
As the monkeys milled about in their tens of thousands outside 
Kishkindha, they noticed Lakñman approaching in the distance. When 
they saw the prince running toward the city, His face glowing with 
anger and His bow grasped tightly, they became fearful. Some of them, 
not recognizing Him, lifted up trees and boulders, ready to defend 
Kishkindha. Others ran in all directions as Lakñman arrived near the 
city gates, holding aloft His bow and calling for Sugréva. Seeing the 
monkeys prepared to attack Him, Lakñman became even more angry. He 
heaved deep and burning sighs and licked the corners of His mouth.  
Aìgada quickly came out of the city and, checking the monkeys from 
fleeing, went before Lakñman. Räma’s brother appeared to the monkey 
prince like the blazing fire of universal destruction. In great fear he 
bowed low at Lakñman’s feet and greeted Him respectfully. Although 
furious, Lakñman contained His anger and spoke kindly to Aìgada. 
“Pray tell Sugréva of My arrival, dear child. I stand here tormented by 
grief due to Räma’s plight. Please ask the king to hear from Me Räma’s 
advice.” 
Aìgada bowed again and left swiftly, running to Sugréva. He burst into 
his chambers and told him to come quickly. But Sugréva was asleep, 
groggy from the night’s pleasures. He lay upon his bed with only garlands 
as his dress. As he slowly stirred, many more monkeys came near his 
room, raising a great clamor. They were terrified of the wrathful 
Lakñman. Sugréva heard the tumult and came to his senses. He stood up, 
troubled in mind, and Aìgada explained the situation. 
Sugréva told Aìgada to bring Lakñman immediately. “Why have you left 
Him standing at the gates?” he demanded. “He should be offered every 
respect, even as much as myself.” Aìgada, joined by Hanumän, quickly 
left to fetch Lakñman.

267 
Within a few minutes Lakñman was led into Kishkindha by Aìgada and 
Hanumän. Still fuming, the prince surveyed the city. Great mansions 
and temples lined the wide avenues, each building set with celestial 
jewels of every description. The city was illuminated by the jewels’ glow. 
Rivulets flowed by the avenues and groves of trees grew here and there, 
yielding all kinds of delightful fruits. As he went along the main 
highway, Lakñman saw the large white palaces of the chief monkeys. 
They shone like clouds lit by the sun. Long wreaths of flowers hung from 
those palaces and the scent of aloe and sandalwood issued from the 
latticed windows. 
Lakñman was led into Sugréva’s palace, the most magnificent of all. After 
passing through seven heavily guarded gates, he entered Sugréva’s inner 
chambers. Here and there were numerous gold and silver couches, 
spread with costly silk covers. Many beautiful Vanara ladies, wearing 
garlands and gold ornaments, moved about, their anklets tinkling. As 
they reached Sugréva’s private chambers Lakñman heard the strains of 
celestial music from within. He became even more annoyed with 
Sugréva. The insolent monkey was reveling while Räma suffered agony! 
Lakñman twanged His bowstring, and the sound reverberated through 
the entire palace. 
Sugréva was startled. Realizing at once that Lakñman had arrived, he 
spoke urgently to Tara, who sat by his side. “Go quickly and greet 
Lakñman. He will never display anger in the presence of a woman. Pacify 
Him with gentle words. Only then will I be able to face Him.” 
Tara rose up and went out of the room. The gold string of her girdle 
hung loose and she tottered slightly from intoxication. Bending her 
slender body low, she covered her head with her cloth and respectfully 
greeted Lakñman. As soon as He saw Tara, Lakñman looked down 
modestly. His anger abated as Tara spoke gently. “My lord, what gives 
rise to Your angry mood? Who has disobeyed Your order? Who has 
recklessly gone before a forest fire while it rushed toward a thicket of 
dried trees?” 
Still annoyed, Lakñman replied, “This husband of yours appears to have 
forgotten his duty. He seems intent only on pursuing pleasures. Four 
months have already passed since Räma left and We still see no signs of 
Sugréva keeping his word. He remains drunk here, enjoying with you

268 
and unaware of the passage of time. O Tara, drinking is always 
condemned by the wise as the root of irreligion. Please remind Sugréva 
of his religious obligation.” 
Tara begged Lakñman to forgive Sugréva. After all, he was but a monkey. 
It was no surprise he had fallen a victim to lust. Even great sages in the 
forest were sometimes overcome by desire. What then of a monkey 
living among beautiful women? One under the sway of carnal desire 
loses all sense of time and place. Forgetting his duty, he casts decorum to 
the winds and absorbs himself in pleasure. Tara told Lakñman that 
Sugréva was regretful. He was always Räma’s devoted servant and he 
longed to fulfill Räma’s order. Even now he was waiting eagerly to speak 
with Lakñman. 
Tara led Lakñman into Sugréva’s chamber. As the prince entered the 
apartment He saw Sugréva seated on a golden couch next to his wife 
Ruma. He was surrounded by youthful Vanara ladies adorned with 
shining jewels and heavenly garlands. His eyes were bloodshot and his 
limbs were smeared with sandal-paste. Sugréva’s costly silk garment hung 
loose on his powerful body, and Vali’s brilliant gold chain shone from his 
chest. 
Seeing Sugréva absorbed in sensual delights, Lakñman’s anger was 
rekindled. His eyes opened wide and His lips set in a firm line. The 
furious prince breathed heavily and wrung His hands, looking with 
blood-red eyes at Sugréva. The monkey king jumped from his couch, like 
a tall flag suddenly raised in honor of Indra. He went before Lakñman 
with folded palms and bowed at his feet.  
Lakñman addressed him in angry tones. “Who is more hard-hearted than 
he who makes a false promise to a friend, especially when that friend has 
done him a great favor? O lord of the monkeys, one who ungratefully 
fails to repay the service of friends deserves to be killed!” 
Lakñman quite forgot Räma’s request to first speak kindly to Sugréva. He 
glared at him. This selfish monkey deserved no pity. He lay here at ease 
while Räma was pining away. Lakñman vented His fury, His voice 
thundering about Sugréva’s spacious chamber.  
“Ingratitude is the worst of all sins, O thoughtless one! You are lustful 
and a liar. You have achieved your own ends, made some empty promise, 
and then simply abandoned yourself to pleasure. Surely you will regret

269 
your omission when Räma’s blazing arrow speeds toward you. Before long 
you will meet with Vali again!” 
Tara again beseeched Lakñman to be patient. Sugréva was an ordinary 
being subject to the sway of his senses. No one could easily avert the 
strong urges of the body. Even the great Viçvämitra had once lost 
himself in sexual pleasure for a hundred years, thinking it to be a day. 
Sugréva had now been awakened to his duty. He had taken action and 
sent out many monkeys to raise an army to find Sétä. 
Tara spoke passionately to the angry Lakñman. “Vali told me there are a 
hundred million powerful Räkñasas in Lanka. These must be overcome if 
Rävaëa is to be defeated. Therefore Sugréva is now amassing a force 
sufficient to encounter all the Räkñasas. The army will be ready within 
some days. Do not be angry. The search for Sétä will soon begin.” 
Lakñman was pacified when He heard that Sugréva had already made 
arrangements. He nodded His head and relaxed. 
Seeing Lakñman relaxing, Sugréva said, “Everything I have depends upon 
Räma. How can I ever repay Him? Räma alone is powerful enough to 
recover Sétä and is merely using me as His instrument. This again is His 
kindness on me. I only wish to serve Him in whatever way I can. Please 
forgive any transgression on my part, for there is no servant who is 
without fault.” 
Lakñman began to feel ashamed of His angry outburst. He spoke kindly 
to Sugréva. “With you as His supporter My brother is blessed in every 
way, O gallant monkey. I feel sure He will soon destroy His enemy with 
your assistance. Please forgive My harsh words, for I am sorely afflicted 
by My brother’s plight.” 
Lakñman asked Sugréva to come with Him to see Räma. Sugréva 
immediately had a large palanquin fetched and he mounted it along with 
Lakñman. Accompanied by Sugréva’s ministers, they departed toward 
Prashravana. 
The golden palanquin, covered by a white canopy, was carried swiftly 
toward the mountain where Räma waited. Conches and kettledrums 
were sounded as the procession of monkeys moved in state. Sugréva was 
surrounded by many warlike monkeys bearing weapons in their hands. 
He was fanned on both sides by his servants and eulogized by bards as 
they traveled.

270 
They soon arrived at Räma’s cave. Sugréva jumped from the palanquin 
and prostrated himself at Räma’s feet, who lifted the monkey and 
embraced him with love. Räma seated Sugréva on the ground and, sitting 
next to him, spoke in a gentle voice. “A wise king is he who pursues in 
their proper order religion, wealth and pleasure, allotting proper time to 
each. He who pursues only pleasure, neglecting the other two, wakes up 
after falling, like one asleep on a treetop. The king who wins pious allies 
and destroys sinful foes gains great religious merit, O Sugréva. The time 
has come for you to make an effort for merit. What then has been done, 
O King?” 
Sugréva replied that he was ever indebted to Räma for His kindness and 
favor. The Vanara king explained how he had dispatched thousands of 
monkeys to gather an army. Soon there would be millions of fierce 
monkeys, bears and baboons gathering at Kishkindha. All of them were 
sprung from the loins of gods and Gandharvas and all were terrible 
warriors capable of changing their forms at will. Sugréva would have at 
his command a vast army, countless in number. They would quickly find 
Rävaëa, completely uproot him, and recover Sétä. 
Räma was delighted and He looked like a blue lotus in full bloom. He 
embraced Sugréva tightly. “It is no surprise that one of your caliber 
renders such good to his friends. With you by My side I shall easily 
conquer My enemies. O Sugréva, you are My greatest well-wisher and are 
fit to help Me in every way.” 
Räma and Sugréva discussed for some time, planning how to make their 
search. Sugréva then left to meet with his emissaries who were returning 
with the troops they had gathered. 
As millions of fierce monkey warriors came to Kishkindha the earth 
vibrated. A massive dust cloud rose up and veiled the sun. The trees 
shook, sending down showers of leaves and blossoms. The entire region 
for miles around became thickly populated by monkeys who looked like 
mountains. Some were golden-hued like the rising sun, some were as red 
as copper and some blue as the sky. Others were as white as the moon 
and still others as blackish as thunderclouds. All of them, like great 
mountain lions, had frightening teeth and claws. 
The troop leaders approached Sugréva and asked for his command. 
Sugréva took all of them and went again into Räma’s presence. One by

271 
one he introduced the Vanara chiefs, and they all bowed low at Räma’s 
feet. Sugréva concluded, “These warriors are righteous, brave and 
powerful. They can move on land, water and through the air. They have 
conquered fatigue and are famous for their exploits. All of them have 
arrived bringing thousands and millions of followers. O Räma, these 
Vanaras are ready to do Your bidding. Please give Your command.” 
Räma stood up and embraced Sugréva. “It must be ascertained whether 
or not Sétä still lives. O noble one, find out where Rävaëa’s land is 
located. Once we have this information we shall then do what is 
necessary.” 
Sugréva then assigned four parties to search the four directions. He gave 
detailed descriptions of the countries where they should look and then 
added, “This search should be conducted only over the next month. 
Then you should return. Anyone returning after a month will be subject 
to death. Räma and His great purpose should be constantly remembered 
by all of you. May success be yours!” 
Sugréva had asked Hanumän to assist Aìgada in leading the search party 
to the south. This was the direction where Rävaëa would most likely be 
found, as he had been seen flying that way with Sétä. Sugréva spoke with 
Hanumän just before he left. “There is nothing on earth or in the 
heavens that can obstruct your movement, O valiant son of the wind-
god. You are no less than your great father in prowess. There is no 
created being on earth equal to you in strength and vigor. On you rests 
my main hope of finding Sétä.” 
Räma heard Sugréva speaking with Hanumän and He saw his eager 
expression. It was clear he was confident of success, as much as Sugréva 
was sure that his minister would find Sétä. Räma was overjoyed. He went 
to Hanumän and gave the monkey a ring inscribed with His name. 
“Take this token, O jewel among monkeys, and show it to Sétä. This will 
reassure Her that I sent you. I feel sure you will soon see the princess.” 
Hanumän took the ring and touched it to his head. He prostrated 
himself at Räma’s feet and prayed for His blessings. Then, looking like 
the full moon surrounded by a galaxy of stars, he left with his party. 
The Vanaras and bears all left with great haste. Shouting and howling, 
thundering and roaring, growling and shrieking, they ran in the four 
directions. The monkey chiefs cried out in different ways. “I shall

272 
destroy Rävaëa and bring back Sétä!” 
“Single-handed I shall kill that demon and rescue Janaka’s daughter, 
even from the fires of hell.” 
“I shall smash down trees, cleave great mountains and churn up the 
oceans. I will certainly find the princess!”  
“I can leap across the sea a distance of eight hundred miles.” 
“I will bound up Mount Meru and enter the bowels of the earth until 
Sétä is found!” 
While boasting of their power in this and other ways, the monkeys 
gradually disappeared. 
After the monkeys had left, Räma spoke to Sugréva. “I was surprised to 
hear your extensive descriptions of this earth. How do you know it so 
well?” 
Sugréva replied that he had seen every part of the world while running 
away from Vali. “My angry brother chased me in all directions,” he said. 
“As I dashed away in fear I saw every part of the wide earth as if it were 
the impression of a calf’s hoof. With Vali always behind me I ran with 
tremendous speed. Finally I remembered Matanga’s curse and came to 
the Rishyamukha, whereupon Vali left me alone.” 
Räma laughed to hear Sugréva. The two friends sat speaking together for 
some time, then Sugréva left for Kishkindha to await the return of the 
search parties. 
* * * 
The monkeys dispatched by Sugréva began their search. They scanned 
cities, towns and villages. Scouring woods and forests, they climbed 
mountains and dived into lakes and rivers. They explored deep caverns 
and entered holes in the earth. Going as far as possible in the directions 
they were assigned, they scrupulously searched everywhere for Rävaëa 
and Sétä. Even after searching for a month, however, they were not 
successful. One by one the parties returned, fearful, to Sugréva.  
From the north came Satabali, disappointedly reporting his failure. 
Vinata returned from the east, also without success. From the west came 
Sushena, again without having discovered Sétä’s whereabouts. 
In the south Hanumän and Aìgada and their party had traveled a great 
distance. The month had almost passed and still there were no signs of

273 
Sétä. They reached the plains surrounding the Vindhya mountains. It 
was a desolate region, full of caves and thick forests, waterless and 
uninhabited. The whole area had been rendered a wilderness by the 
curse of a sage many years previous who had been angered by his young 
son’s death.  
Thousands of monkeys combed the entire terrain. Penetrating more and 
more into the frightful area, they suddenly came upon a huge Räkñasa. 
Seeing the demon, who looked like a hill, the monkeys stood with their 
loins tightly girded, ready to fight. The demon saw the monkeys and 
bellowed out, “You are gone!” 
Aìgada thought the demon to be Rävaëa. He became enraged and 
rushed straight toward the roaring Räkñasa, who raised his massive hand 
to strike the monkey. Aìgada leapt high and dodged the blow. Swinging 
his powerful arm as he flew, the Vanara hit the Räkñasa on the head 
with his outstretched palm. The blow was tremendous and the demon 
vomited blood and fell to the ground. After examining the dead Räkñasa 
and realizing that it he was not Rävaëa, the monkeys continued their 
search. 
The vast Vindhyan range was filled with innumerable caves. The 
monkeys systematically entered each and every one. They climbed every 
mountain and scoured all woods and groves. Gradually they moved 
further and further south. Not finding Rävaëa or Sétä anywhere, they 
became more and more fatigued and disappointed. The month allotted 
by Sugréva passed and still they had no clue as to where Sétä had been 
taken.  
One day when they were exhausted and wracked by thirst, they came 
upon the entrance to a huge cavern. They saw birds emerging from it 
with their wings dripping with water. The monkeys decided to enter the 
dark cave. They formed a long, eight mile chain to avoid getting lost. 
Bats shrieked and birds flew past them. Occasionally the growl of a lion 
or tiger was heard. 
As they went deeper into the cave they saw ahead of them a bright light. 
They moved quickly toward the light and came upon a huge open area, 
brilliantly lit by thousands of shining golden trees. The trees were 
adorned with brightly colored flowers and leaves, and they bore fruits 
which shone like rubies and emeralds. The trees hemmed in large lotus

274 
ponds of clear water, filled with golden fish. The monkeys saw palaces of 
gold and silver, set with cat’s-eye gems and covered with lattices of 
pearls. 
On all sides were spacious couches and seats studded with various kinds 
of gems. Mounds of gold and silver vessels lay here and there, as well as 
piles of colored jewels. There were collections of sandalwood and aloe-
wood carvings, as well as many first class palanquins lying about. Piles of 
costly ethereal textiles of indescribable beauty lay on the floor. Celestial 
food and drink of every kind was spread on gold tables, and there were 
dazzling heaps of gold everywhere. 
The monkeys were stunned by the sight and they stood looking all 
around, their mouths hanging open. Then they saw an ascetic lady clad 
in black deerskins sitting some distance from them. She shone with 
yogic power as she sat in meditation. Hanumän approached her and 
respectfully inquired who she was and in whose cave they now found 
themselves.  
The woman’s name was Swayamprabha, and she explained that the cave 
and all its wonders had been created by Maya, the architect of the 
celestial demons. He had dwelt there for some time, being finally slain by 
Indra for the sake of an Apsarä whom Indra himself had coveted. The 
Apsarä had lived in the cave with Swayamprabha as her servant. She 
had now returned to heaven, leaving Swayamprabha to her meditations. 
The ascetic lady gazed at the monkeys. She could understand that they 
were Räma’s servants. She had seen Räma in her meditations and 
understood His divine identity. She was pleased to have the opportunity 
to serve Räma by entertaining His servants. The yogini gave the 
monkeys delicious food and drinks, which invigorated them. As they ate 
they told her of their mission. 
When they had finished eating the hermitess asked them to close their 
eyes and she would take them out of the cave. The monkeys complied 
and in a moment they mysteriously found themselves again standing at 
the entrance to the cavern. Swayamprabha told them to continue their 
search and then took her leave, disappearing back inside. 
The monkeys stood outside the cave, amazed but refreshed from their 
celestial repast. They carried on vigorously searching and soon reached 
the southern ocean. Realizing that they had looked everywhere in the

275 
whole southern region without success, they fell prey to anxiety. It was 
now more than six weeks since they had left. The monkeys were fearful 
of Sugréva’s anger when they returned and they sat together discussing 
what to do.  
Aìgada spoke, “The king will certainly have us all put to death upon our 
late return, unsuccessful in our mission. Therefore I suggest that rather 
than return in shame we sit here and fast until life leaves our bodies. 
How can we go back and face execution in front of our near and dear 
ones?” 
Some of the monkeys agreed and others recommended they continue 
searching for some time before giving up. One of them suggested they re-
enter Swayamprabha’s cave and live out the rest of their days happily. 
This met with approval from other monkeys, but Hanumän disagreed. “I 
don’t approve of this course of action, O Vanaras,” he chided. 
“Forgetting our master’s cause, and actually forming an enmity by 
abandoning him, is not at all a wise move. Nor will Räma and Lakñman 
tolerate it. Those princes will tear Maya’s cave asunder in no time. Their 
arrows fall with the force of Indra’s thunderbolt. All of us will be 
annihilated.” 
Hanumän continued to speak, praising Sugréva’s qualities. “We need not 
fear the monkey king. He regards all his subjects with love and would 
certainly not kill Aìgada, the son of his dear wife Tara. Nor will Sugréva 
be harsh toward you others. We have all tried our best to find Sétä and 
should now return to Kishkindha, reporting to the king for further 
orders.”  
Aìgada did not appreciate Hanumän’s speech. He especially disliked 
hearing Sugréva praised. The monkey prince became angry. “No good 
qualities are to be found in Sugréva. Indeed, that worthless monkey has 
taken to wife his mother in the shape of Tara. He locked up my father in 
a cave and usurped his kingdom. Although Räma rendered him a great 
favor, that ungrateful wretch soon forgot his debt to the prince of 
Ayodhya. What piety does he possess? He only instigated this search for 
Sétä out of a fear of Lakñman.” 
Aìgada still burned within from the killing of his father brought about 
by Sugréva. How could Sugréva ever be kind toward the son of his mortal 
enemy? Now there would be more than sufficient excuse for him to

276 
punish Aìgada, who had failed in his mission and had committed 
treason by sowing dissension among the other monkeys. He was sure 
that Sugréva would either kill him outright or cast him into chains for 
the rest of his life. 
Aìgada determined to sit there on the beach and fast until death. He 
sank to the ground weeping, his mind confounded by grief and despair. 
With the exception of Hanumän, the other monkeys sat next to him, 
denouncing Sugréva and praising Vali. They all sat on kusha grass with 
their faces turned to the east. Thinking of Sugréva’s fury and Räma’s 
prowess, they prepared for death. 
As they sat there roaring in dismay, they suddenly saw an enormous bird 
come out of a mountain cave. The bird looked upon the line of monkeys 
appearing like a row of mountain peaks on the plateau beneath him. 
Realizing they were observing the praya vow of fasting until death, he 
said to himself, “Surely this food has been ordained for me by 
Providence. After a long time I shall eat sumptuously, feasting upon this 
line of monkeys one by one as they fall dead from starvation.” 
The bird dropped down and perched near the monkeys. Seeing him 
there Aìgada turned to Hanumän and said, “Surely this is Yamaräja 
come in person to punish us for failing to serve Räma’s purpose. This 
bird reminds me of Jatayu, about whom we have heard from Sugréva. 
That glorious bird laid down his life for Räma in a fierce battle with 
Rävaëa. We shall also now give up our lives in Räma’s service. Alas, like 
that heroic vulture we too have failed to save Sétä.” 
The great bird heard him speak. He called out to Aìgada. “Who is this 
who mentions Jatayu? Where is that younger brother of mine? I have not 
seen him for so long. My heart trembles as I hear you speak of his death. 
How did he encounter the king of the Räkñasas? If it pleases you, O 
monkey, pray tell me everything you know.” 
The bird told them that his name was Sampati. He lived high in the 
mountains, unable to fly because his wings had been burnt by the sun. 
He had lost touch with his brother Jatayu for many years. 
Aìgada told the bird everything about himself and his companions. He 
narrated the story of how Jatayu had died protecting Sétä. Now they 
were searching for the princess and had given up hope. Thus they sat 
there, fearful of Sugréva and Räma, and awaiting only death.

277 
Sampati cried out in anguish. His eyes filled with tears and he said to 
Aìgada, “Jatayu was dearer to me than life. Now he is killed by the 
Räkñasa and I can do nothing to avenge him. O monkeys, I am old and 
worn out. What then can I do upon hearing this terrible news?” 
Sampati explained how a long time ago he had flown with Jatayu to 
heaven. “As we soared upwards we perceived the earth with her 
numerous mountains as if she were covered with pebbles. Her rivers 
looked like so many threads. Great cities seemed like chariot wheels and 
forests like grassy plots.” 
Tears fell from the bird’s eyes as he recounted how he had lost his 
brother. “We had wanted to follow the sun as it coursed through the 
heavens. When we reached the track of that fiery globe, however, we 
became overpowered by its rays. Jatayu had grown weak from heat and 
exhaustion. I therefore covered him with my wings to protect him. We 
then fell back to earth, where we became separated. I fell onto the 
Vindhya mountain, with my wings completely destroyed by the 
scorching rays of the sun.” 
Aìgada looked at the wingless bird. He must know all the regions of the 
universe. Surely he knew where Rävaëa lived. Perhaps there was still 
hope. The Vanara asked Sampati, “Can you tell us where lies the abode 
of that vilest of all beings, Rävaëa?” 
Sampati had slumped down in sorrow. But upon hearing Aìgada’s 
question he lifted his head and opened wide his eyes. “Although I am an 
old and useless bird I can still render some service to Räma, if only with 
my speech. I do indeed know where Rävaëa lives. In fact as I lay upon 
this mountain some while back I saw him flying by, holding Sétä. The 
princess was constantly crying out, “Räma! O Räma! Lakñman! Help!” 
The bird told Aìgada that Rävaëa dwelt in Lanka, which was situated 
in the midst of the southern ocean eight hundred miles away. The 
princess was being held captive in Rävaëa’s garden, guarded by fierce 
Räkñasés. Sampati possessed the ability to see Lanka even as he spoke to 
the monkeys. He said, “Although my wings are broken, my vision is not 
impaired. We vultures are capable of sighting objects at a great distance. 
Furthermore, by my intuition I can understand that one of you will soon 
see Sétä, and then you will return again to Räma’s presence.” 
Requested by Sampati, the monkeys took the bird to the seashore where

278 
he offered water to the departed soul of his brother. He then told them 
more about himself. When he had first fallen to the Vindhya mountain 
he had spoken with a åñi named Chandrama, who was living there. The 
bird had fallen at the sage’s feet and related his sad tale. Weeping, 
Sampati had said that he wished to throw himself from the mountain 
peak and end his life. The åñi restrained him, telling him that in the 
future some monkeys would arrive at that spot, searching for Räma’s 
divine consort. “Although I am able to give you your wings back, I will 
not do so, as you are destined to render a service to Räma through those 
monkeys. You must remain here and tell them where to find Sétä. At 
that time your wings will again be restored.” 
Sampati said the åñi had then enlightened the bird with spiritual 
knowledge. He had told him that bodily sufferings must be borne by 
everyone as a reaction to their own past deeds. One should nevertheless 
realize that the real self is different from the body. Without being overly 
attached to the body one should try to fix the mind on the Supreme 
Lord, with whom all beings have an eternal relationship. Thus Sampati 
should not lament for his broken body. He should live there patiently, 
thinking of Räma and waiting for his chance to render him some service. 
Sampati concluded, “That was eight thousand years ago and I have 
survived here all this time, being brought food by my son. Now at last I 
have performed my service to Räma.” 
Even as Sampati spoke a beautiful pair of wings sprouted from his body. 
He rose at once into the air and called down to the monkeys. “O 
Vanaras, Chandrama Åñi told me you would succeed in your mission. 
Indeed he said that the servants of Räma could easily cross the terrible 
ocean of birth and death; what then of this small sea? Take heart and go 
to the south. Cross the ocean and you will find Lanka, where Sétä is 
held. Farewell.” 
The bird disappeared into the sky, leaving the monkeys to continue 
their search. They were overjoyed. Abandoning all thoughts of fasting 
until death, they leapt into the air, raced down to the beach and roared 
with glee. Then they saw the billowing waves. How could they possibly 
cross the ocean? They did not possess the power of flight. The vast sea 
stretched into the distance looking as insurmountable as the sky. 
Aìgada asked, “Which one among us can leap across this sea? Who shall

279 
become the deliverer of the monkeys today? If any among you can jump 
over the ocean and reach Lanka, speak out and remove our fears.” 
The monkeys all remained silent, gazing with unblinking eyes at the 
roaring sea. Aìgada spoke again, trying to inspire them with confidence. 
“I have no doubt any one of you is capable of this feat. As far as I am 
concerned, I can certainly leap eight hundred miles, but I do not know if 
I shall be able to return safely.” 
Aìgada looked around at the party. Among them was Jambavan, a great 
leader of the bears, who replied, “It is not right that you, our Prince 
Regent, should go on this expedition, although you could leap a 
thousand or even ten thousand miles if you wished. One of us should go 
instead.” 
Jambavan said that he himself could only cover seven hundred miles, 
having grown old. Each of the monkeys then stated how far he could 
leap. Some said one hundred, some two hundred and some five hundred 
miles. But none said they could leap the full distance and return again. 
Jambavan then spoke to Hanumän who was sitting silently. “O valiant 
monkey, you have not told us of your strength. I know you to be 
possessed of tremendous ability.”  
Jambavan described Hanumän’s birth and power. The monkey was 
begotten by Väyu and soon after his birth he had leapt into the sky for 
thousands of miles, wanting to catch the sun. At that time he had been 
struck down by Indra. Hanumän’s father, the wind-god, became 
aggrieved at seeing his son killed and had ceased to blow. All created 
beings then began to suffocate due to the stoppage of air in the universe. 
The gods sought to appease Väyu by bringing Hanumän back to life. 
They had also blessed the monkey with many wonderful powers. 
On the strength of the gods’ blessings Hanumän had become fearless 
even as a young child. He had played in the hermitages of the åñis, 
mischievously throwing about their paraphernalia and stopping their 
sacrifices. To check him the åñis had uttered an imprecation. “You will 
forget your great power. Only when you hear your powers described by 
another will you again remember them.” 
Jambavan concluded his narration about Hanumän. There was no doubt 
that he could leap to Lanka. Why then was he sitting there 
indifferently? Could he not see the monkeys plunged in despair?

280 
Hanumän stood up. Jambavan’s speech had ended the åñis’ curse. He 
remembered his great prowess and felt encouraged by Jambavan. With a 
great roar he said, “I shall jump across this mighty ocean!” 
He then expanded his body to fifty times his normal height. Stretching 
his arms and yawning, he spoke in a voice that resounded like thunder. 
“I claim my descent from the mighty Väyu, who circulates through all of 
space and easily smashes down mountain peaks. I could leap to the outer 
limits of the universe. I am quite able to overtake the blazing sun as it 
moves from the east across to the western mountain. Today I shall leap 
from Mount Mahendra, scattering the clouds, shaking the mountains 
and drying up the sea. I will swiftly and easily reach Lanka in one great 
bound. Have no fear.” 
Hanumän roared again and again, filling the monkeys with joy. 
Jambavan replied, “Our grief is now dispelled. We are depending on you, 
O gallant monkey. We shall stand on one foot in yogic meditation here 
upon the seashore, praying for your success, until you return.” 
Hanumän reassured the monkeys further. He asked them what he should 
do. Should he annihilate the entire Räkñasa horde and rescue Sétä? Or 
should he single-handedly kill Rävaëa, uproot Lanka and carry it, along 
with Sétä, back to Räma? 
Aìgada asked him to first locate Sétä and then report back, for that was 
Sugréva’s order. In consultation with Räma and Sugréva they could then 
decide on their next course of action. 
Hanumän bowed to that instruction and bounded to Mount Mahendra a 
few miles away, its peak piercing the clouds. He ranged up the side of the 
mountain and stood on its summit. As he stood there roaring, gods and 
Siddhas assembled in the sky above him uttering benedictory hymns. 
They dropped celestial flowers and beat their drums. 
The huge monkey folded his hands to the east and offered respects to 
Väyu, his father. He concentrated his mind and gazed south toward 
Lanka. Hanumän felt honored to have such an opportunity to render 
Räma a service. From his first meeting with the prince he knew Räma to 
be his eternal master. He felt Räma’s ring bound in his cloth. Sétä would 
be overjoyed to receive that token and know that Räma would soon 
arrive to rescue Her. With a sense of elation Hanumän contemplated 
approaching Räma with news of Sétä. He squatted down and prepared to

281 
jump. 
With a great cry of “Victory to Räma!” Hanumän sprang upwards with 
tremendous force, pressing the mountain deep into the earth. Animals 
rushed down the mountainside in all directions. The åñis engaged in 
meditation in the mountain forests were startled and rose into the air. 
Great serpents moving about on the side of the mountain became 
furious and bit the rocks, which then glowed red from the serpents’ 
virulent poison. All the trees shook and shed their blossoms, and the 
whole mountain appeared covered with flowers. Large fissures appeared 
in the mountain and different colored streams issued out. As Hanumän 
leapt upwards, Mount Mahendra presented a beautiful sight and the 
monkeys gazed up in wonder and awe. Then they went down onto the 
beach to begin their wait for Hanumän’s return. 
Chapter 13 
Hanumän Leaps to Lanka 
Hanumän flew forcefully into the morning sky. Trees, shrubs and 
flowers flew behind him in the wind raised by his movement, like 
relatives following a dear one setting out on a long journey.  
Hanumän thought of Räma. Sampati was right. Simply by remembering 
Räma’s name at the end of life, anyone could cross the entire ocean of 
material suffering. These eight hundred miles were nothing. Hanumän 
felt confident of success as he soared toward Lanka. Soon he would 
reach Sétä and reassure Her. If any Räkñasas tried to stop him, that 
would be their last act on earth. He would dispense swift justice to the 
Räkñasas. Then, returning to Räma’s presence, he would await further 
commands. 
As the flowers following Hanumän fell into the dark blue ocean, they 
made the sea appear like the star-spangled firmament. The trees dropped 
with great splashes like meteors fallen from heaven. Hanumän’s 
outstretched arms looked like a pair of five-hooded serpents risen from 
the mountaintop. The great monkey seemed as if he were drinking up

282 
the vast ocean and swallowing the sky. His eyes blazed like two sacrificial 
fires and his coiled tail flew behind him like a flag. His reddish brown 
face shone like the sun, and the wind rushing past his armpits thundered 
like a cloud. He seemed like a comet moving through the heavens with 
its fiery tail. 
Hanumän’s reflection in the blue sea appeared like a ship rocking with 
speed over the large waves that were raised by the wind of his flight. As 
the sea rose up it revealed whales, sharks and serpents, thrown about in 
confusion. Hanumän rushed through the sky like a winged mountain, 
drawing behind him white and red-hued clouds. As he entered and came 
out again from the clouds, he appeared like the shrouded and visible 
moon. Gandharvas with their wives rained flowers on him. Even the 
sun, honoring his service to Räma, did not scorch him. The wind-god 
raced with him, fanning him with a gentle breeze. Gods and åñis extolled 
him, along with Nägas, Yakñas and other celestial beings. The god of the 
ocean observed Hanumän flying above him. He considered how to 
render him a service, thereby pleasing Räma Himself. In his depths there 
was a large mountain named Mainäka. The ocean-god approached 
Mainäka and asked him to rise above the waters, offering his peaks to 
Hanumän as a resting place. The mountain assented and began to grow 
upwards. It emerged from the sea with a great roar, foaming billows 
falling with a crash on all sides. The golden-peaked mountain rose 
swiftly and shone beautifully, with Nägas and Kinnaras sporting on its 
slopes. 
Hanumän saw the mountain ahead of him filling the whole sky, and he 
thought it to be an obstruction. He prepared to strike it with his chest. 
The mountain deity assumed a human form and stood on its peak: “O 
Hanumän, requested by the god of the seas who wishes to serve Räma, I 
am here to offer you shelter. The sea-god was formerly rendered a 
service by Räma’s ancestor, Sagara, who filled the ocean when it had 
been dried up by the angry Agastya Åñi. I too am indebted to your father 
Väyu, who once saved me from Indra.” 
Mainäka told Hanumän that, in a long past age, many mountains flew in 
the sky. Afraid of the mountains, the åñis asked Indra to cut their wings 
with his thunderbolt. Väyu had saved Mainäka from Indra. The 
mountain therefore wished to repay his debt to Väyu by serving

283 
Hanumän. He asked the monkey to alight on his peaks and rest for a 
while.  
But Hanumän was not inclined to stop. He replied to Mainäka, “I am 
grateful and I thank you for your offer, but the time for resting has not 
yet arrived. My duty is not yet done. Please forgive me. You have already 
rendered me service by your kind words. Now please allow me to 
continue.” 
Hanumän respectfully touched the peak of the mountain and then rose 
still higher into the sky. The mountain and the sea-god both looked up 
at him and offered prayers and benedictions for his success. 
Indra and the other gods also watched Hanumän. They were astonished 
to see his power. Desiring to test him and see more of his prowess they 
approached Surasa, the mother of the Nägas. They asked the snake 
goddess to assume the form of a Räkñasé and stand before Hanumän. 
Indra said, “We want to see his power, as well as further expand the fame 
of this great servant of Räma. Let us see how he overcomes you, O Näga 
lady, for he will be greatly tested when he reaches Lanka.” 
Surasa went into the sea and suddenly rose up in front of Hanumän in 
the form of a vast and terrible Räkñasé. She boomed out to Hanumän, 
“The gods have ordained you to be my food. O jewel among monkeys, 
quickly enter my mouth. Brahmä has granted me a boon that none who 
come before me can escape being eaten!” 
Surasa opened her cavernous mouth, which was set with rows of fierce 
teeth. Hanumän smiled and said to the Näga goddess, “I am on a mission 
to serve Räma, the lord of creation. You should not impede me. If I must 
be eaten by you, then pray wait here. Once I have completed my duty I 
shall doubtlessly return and you may devour me then as you please.” 
The Näga replied that he would not be able to pass her by, for such was 
the boon given by Brahmä. She expanded her mouth even more as 
Hanumän came closer. Her jaws stretched for eight miles, but Hanumän 
quickly grew to sixteen miles. She then expanded her mouth to twenty 
miles and Hanumän again exceeded that size with his body. As the Näga 
grew even further Hanumän suddenly contracted himself down to the 
size of a thumb. Entering her mouth he went inside her throat and 
quickly came out again. He returned to his normal size and said, “I have 
honored Brahmä’s boon. Now let me pass and fulfill my mission. I wish

284 
you well.” 
The Näga goddess resumed her original form and praised Hanumän, 
blessing him to be successful in his quest. Hanumän moved on with the 
speed of Garuòa. He saw many celestial chariots drawn by lions, tigers, 
elephants, birds and serpents as he coursed along the heavenly airways. 
Gandharvas, Yakñas, Vidhyadharas and other celestial beings were 
thronging the skys. Great heroes, who had lain down their lives in 
battle, rose upwards through the lofty region, their ethereal bodies 
shining like fire. 
As Hanumän shot through the sky he was seen from below by a Räkñasa 
woman called Simhika. She gazed hungrily upon the monkey’s enormous 
body. Desiring to devour him, she used her mystic power to suddenly 
seize his shadow as it sped over the water. Hanumän felt his progress 
arrested. He looked all around and saw beneath him Simhika’s hideous 
form rising up from the sea, her terrific mouth open wide to swallow 
him. She thundered like a mass of clouds. Hanumän fearlessly entered 
her mouth. As he entered her body the Siddhas and gods cried out, 
“Alas!” 
But Hanumän, whose body was as hard as a diamond, began to tear the 
demon’s vital parts. He cleft her heart in two and burst out from the side 
of her body. The Räkñasé screamed and fell dead into the sea. Seeing 
Hanumän unscathed and flying onwards, the gods praised him saying, 
“Your success is certain. He who possesses firmness, vision, 
understanding and skill never fails in his undertakings.” 
Hanumän continued on, adored by the divine beings. Soon he saw in the 
distance a large island which appeared like a mass of clouds on the 
horizon. As he came closer he saw the shore of Lanka, skirted by forests 
and high mountains. Hanumän returned to his normal size in order to 
avoid being seen. Flying over the island he came upon the city of Lanka, 
which was perched on the summit of Trikuta mountain. As he climbed 
down the mountainside he considered how to best enter the city. 
Hanumän surveyed the region. It was covered with beautiful woods filled 
with flowering and fruit-bearing trees of all kinds. There were meadows 
and lotus ponds and pleasure groves of every description. The aroma of 
flowers wafted on cool breezes and the sounds of various birds filled the 
air. Hanumän made his way to the edge of the city, which was encircled

285 
by a wide, deep moat. A golden wall ran around the city. Large pennants 
with small golden bells tied to them blew in the wind atop that wall. 
Ferocious Räkñasas ranged on the ramparts that ran along the wall. In 
their hands they held formidable-looking bows and other fierce weapons. 
Behind the wall Hanumän could see lofty mansions and palaces, some 
golden and others as white as the moon. He climbed a high tree and 
gazed upon the city. Hundreds of tall and impressive buildings ran along 
elevated white-tiled roads. In front of them were many wonderful golden 
archways adorned with flowering creepers. The city gave off a roaring 
sound and appeared like the capital of the gods. To Hanumän it seemed 
to be sailing in the air. Lanka, which had been constructed by the 
celestial architect Viçvakarmä, was inconceivably splendid and it awed 
Hanumän’s mind. 
Reaching the northern gate Hanumän sat in thought. He looked upon 
Lanka, which was guarded by innumerable gallant and terrible Räkñasas, 
as one might view a cave full of venomous serpents. As he gazed up at 
the high wall Hanumän reflected. How would the monkeys ever 
overpower this city? For a start, only he, Sugréva, Aìgada and Néla, the 
monkey general, could even cross the ocean and reach there. Then they 
would only be four against an uncountable horde of Räkñasas, headed by 
the invincible Rävaëa himself. What would they do? 
Hanumän decided to first find Sétä and ensure that She was safe. After 
all, those were his instructions. Then he could consider further action. 
He pondered deeply how to go about searching for the princess and yet 
not be discovered. Having taken such a great leap over the ocean, he did 
not want to fail now. It would be best to enter Lanka under the cover of 
darkness in an inconspicuous form. Hanumän decided to wait until 
sunset and enter the city as a small monkey. Going from house to house, 
he would locate Sétä and then decide how to approach Her. 
That night the full moon rose in a clear sky, appearing like a swan 
swimming in a lake. Hanumän stood up, ready to enter the city. As he 
approached the wall, however, the presiding deity of Lanka came before 
him. She was fierce and ugly and she gave out a horrible yell. In a 
discordant voice she asked Hanumän, “Who are you, trying to covertly 
enter this city? You shall never be allowed to pass by me, O monkey!” 
Hanumän cared little for the Räkñasa goddess. He did not reveal his

286 
name but rather asked her to first identify herself. She replied in harsh 
tones that she was Rävaëa’s servant. She guarded Lanka and would now 
kill Hanumän for his insolence in trying to assail the city. 
Hanumän stood as firm as a mountain. He replied that he would enter 
the city no matter who tried to prevent him. The Räkñasé immediately 
struck him with her hand. Unmoved by that blow and becoming furious, 
Hanumän clenched his fist and hit her but without his full force, as she 
was a woman. Nevertheless, struck by Hanumän, the demon goddess fell 
prostrate to the ground. After some moments she recovered and begged 
Hanumän to spare her. She revealed to Hanumän that Brahmä had told 
her the end of the Räkñasas would come soon after she was overpowered 
by a monkey. That time had clearly arrived. The words of Brahmä could 
never prove false. The time for the destruction of Rävaëa and the 
Räkñasas was nigh. 
The Räkñasé told Hanumän to proceed into the city and then she 
disappeared. Hanumän assumed a form no bigger than a cat. Springing 
up, he climbed over the outer wall and began to penetrate the city. He 
moved along the main road, which was lit by celestial gems studding the 
golden archways along its sides. The road was covered with brightly 
colored flowers. From the houses he heard sounds of laughter and music, 
as well as the tinkling of ornaments and jewels. Those houses had crystal 
entrances and verandas of coral and lapis lazuli. They were adorned with 
golden images of thunderbolts and planets, and lattice windows of gold 
embedded with diamonds, rubies and emeralds.  
Hanumän went quickly from house to house, searching for signs of Sétä. 
He saw many demons engaged in amorous activities in their houses with 
damsels resembling Apsaräs. In some places there were groups of 
Räkñasas praising Rävaëa. In other places some Räkñasas known as 
Yatudhanas were studying the scriptures and chanting sacred hymns. In 
public squares Hanumän beheld wrestling matches between Räkñasas of 
huge proportions, roaring at each other in anger. Hanumän also saw 
thousands of Räkñasa warriors, holding bows, swords and other terrible-
looking weapons. As he moved unnoticed along the city streets, 
Hanumän, himself a military expert, could recognize Rävaëa’s many 
variously disguised spies. 
Gradually he approached Rävaëa’s palace. In front of it was a garrison of

287 
soldiers, one hundred thousand in number. The palace itself stood on 
the summit of the Trikuta mountain, looking like a great white cloud. It 
was circled by a number of moats adorned with lotuses and lilies. 
Hanumän swam across the moats and, in his diminutive form, easily 
entered through the latticed gates in the gold brick walls. Thousands of 
exceptionally powerful Räkñasas stood on guard, but they paid him no 
heed. 
As Hanumän moved through the first courtyard he saw numerous 
wonderful conveyances such as golden chariots, palanquins and large 
aerial cars. There were thousands of horses, some as black as night, some 
red-hued and others as white as snow. Massive elephants bedecked with 
jewels stood looking like clouds with flashes of lightning. 
Within the courtyard were mansions occupied by arrogant and 
intoxicated demons. Hanumän could hear them laughing and shouting 
at one another in diverse tones. He silently entered each of the 
mansions, looking everywhere for Sétä. Within every house he saw many 
women, some embracing their partners, some adorning themselves with 
excellent dresses, some sleeping and others, angered out of love, hissing 
like serpents. All of the women were highly attractive, with 
countenances like the full moon, and their dark eyes covered by curling 
lashes. Although Hanumän saw innumerable women, he did not see Sétä 
anywhere. 
Hanumän wandered through dozens of seven-storied mansions and 
finally entered the inner palace building where Rävaëa kept his women. 
It was embellished everywhere with pearls and gems of great value. The 
scent of aloe and sandalwood incense wafted and the sound of celestial 
music could be heard. Hanumän padded over the highly polished marble 
floor, which was spread with celestial textiles. The walls were made of 
gold decorated with silver carvings studded with gems. Thousands of 
exquisitely beautiful maidens moved about, their tinkling gold 
ornaments sounding together like the gentle waves of the sea. Adding to 
that delightful sound was the deep vibration of meghas and kettledrums. 
Hanumän considered Rävaëa’s palace to be the ornament of Lanka. In 
some rooms he found galleries of heavenly paintings and carvings of 
every kind. Sometimes the palace opened out to large grassy enclosures 
with ponds full of swans, surrounded by blossoming trees full of peacocks

288 
and other colorful birds. Hanumän saw sacrificial fires attended by 
ascetic Räkñasas who chanted Vedic mantras. Here and there were heaps 
of precious stones and other collected treasures. Couches, seats and beds 
were all of the most wonderful design and made of gold, coral and 
celestial woods. With his mind awed, Hanumän moved on without 
stopping, intent on discovering Sétä. 
He found the Pushpaka chariot lying in the center of Rävaëa’s palace. It 
resembled a large mansion and shone like the midday sun. The chariot 
was embellished with every kind of celestial jewel and adorned with 
carvings of gold and silver. Birds made of cat’s-eye, as well as others 
fashioned of coral and silver, decorated the chariot, along with lovely 
serpents made of jewels. Horses and elephants made entirely of refined 
gold stood on the sides of the Pushpaka. There were also large gold and 
crystal pleasure houses containing many excellent seats. Golden 
stairways led up to platforms radiant with sapphires and emeralds. 
Garlands and wreaths of heavenly flowers hung everywhere. Seen on 
the spacious central floor of the chariot was a lotus pond, in which a 
number of carved elephants stood, holding golden lotuses in their trunks 
and offering worship to a breathtakingly beautiful form of Goddess 
Lakñmé. 
Hanumän was astonished to see the mountain-like chariot, which hung 
suspended in the air. The monkey moved on quickly, searching Rävaëa’s 
apartments, which covered four miles in width and eight in length. 
Everywhere were powerful looking Räkñasas who held terrible weapons 
and looked alertly in all directions. By his powers of illusion Hanumän 
kept himself invisible to all the guards. He then entered Rävaëa’s 
personal bedchambers. Its floor was covered with slabs of crystal, inlaid 
with figures made of ivory, pearls, diamonds, coral, silver and gold. Large 
pillars of gems rose up to the roof, which was studded with innumerable 
jewels and looked like the star-spangled sky at night. On the walls were 
carvings of eagles with huge outspread wings. Murals depicting the 
heavenly planets hung there on the walls and the floors were covered by 
large silk carpets embroidered with designs of mountains, forests and 
rivers. 
The odor of celestial foods reached Hanumän’s nostrils, calling him like 
a loved one beckoning a dear relative. He felt all five senses being

289 
simultaneously attracted by the delights in Rävaëa’s palace. The monkey 
considered that he had entered the highest abode of Paradise. He 
compared it only to Indra’s palace or the abode of Brahmä himself. 
Fixing his mind upon his purpose, like a consummate yogé meditating on 
the Supreme, Hanumän continued to search for Sétä.  
As he went into each separate chamber Hanumän saw many maidens 
looking like heavenly nymphs. They were half-dressed and lying asleep, 
overpowered by intoxication and lovemaking. Adorned with jeweled 
girdles and anklets, they emitted a fragrance like lotus flowers. Their 
large lips, red like copper, parted slightly showing rows of teeth that 
resembled pearls. Crushed garlands lay here and there, along with 
discarded silk raiments. The delicate-limbed ladies lay with their clothes 
and necklaces thrown about, and other ornaments fallen to the floor by 
their beds. With their large, dark-lashed eyes closed, they looked like 
lotuses with their petals closed at night. To Hanumän they appeared like 
a number of brilliant meteors fallen from heaven and united there in 
Rävaëa’s chambers. 
Although Rävaëa’s wives, who were daughters of Gandharvas, åñis and 
powerful demons, were beautiful beyond compare, Hanumän considered 
them nothing in comparison to Sétä. His mind did not waver even 
slightly from his mission upon seeing them. As he went by the sleeping 
maidens, he came to a prominent dais made of crystal and bedecked with 
precious stones. It appeared like a celestial structure with a large gold 
and ivory couch placed on it. Over the top of the brilliant couch a hung 
a white canopy wreathed with garlands of lotuses and red ashoka 
flowers.  
Lying there fast asleep was Rävaëa himself. Hanumän saw he was 
extremely handsome, with a complexion like a dark cloud. He was 
adorned with bright flashing earrings and clad in robes of gold and 
crimson. His limbs were smeared with red sandal-paste and he resembled 
a cloud reddened by the sunset and lit by flashes of lightning. Decorated 
with garlands and jewels he seemed like Mount Mandara covered with 
clusters of trees and flowers. 
Hanumän looked with disgust upon the great demon, who lay snoring 
like an elephant. He shrank back and gazed upon the demon from a 
distance. Rävaëa was only displaying one of his ten heads and two of his

290 
arms. To Hanumän those arms appeared to be a couple of large five-
hooded serpents lying asleep in a cave on Mount Mandara. They were 
well-muscled and as thick as tree trunks, scarred from the many battles 
Rävaëa had fought with the gods. On his head Rävaëa wore a brilliant 
diadem, and around his neck hung a string of pearls and gold chains. As 
the demon breathed out, the odor of liquor mixed with mango and 
nutmeg filled the room. 
At his feet were many youthful women. They had all fallen asleep in 
various positions, one of them hugging her véëä, another seated with a 
small drum under her arm, and another clutching a pair of tambourines. 
Next to Rävaëa on the couch was a lady of astounding beauty, golden-
complexioned with exquisitely formed limbs decorated with the best of 
jewels. Seeing her lying there, endowed with celestial splendor and the 
exuberance of youth, Hanumän thought for a moment that she might be 
Sétä. Filled with delight, he leapt about, waving his arms and kissing his 
tail. Displaying his monkey nature, he frolicked around, climbing the 
pillars and dropping to the floor, pacing back and forth and flipping over 
again and again. 
Suddenly he paused and thought, “This surely could not be Sétä. 
Separated from Räma, the princess would never be able to sleep or eat or 
even adorn Herself. Nor would She consort with another man even in 
Her mind, even if he be the lord of the celestials himself. None could 
equal Räma, that divine lady’s beloved husband.” 
Hanumän examined the sleeping maiden by Rävaëa’s side closely. Her 
face showed no signs of grieving or sorrow. There was no doubt; this 
could not be Sétä. He moved on quickly, keener than ever to locate the 
princess. 
He continued searching Rävaëa’s vast bedchamber. There were 
thousands of women lying everywhere. All of them were beautiful and 
adorned with blazing golden ornaments. Hanumän saw tables spread 
with every kind of food and drink placed in gold and crystal vessels. The 
floor was strewn with celestial flowers and looked most charming, 
shedding a bright luster into that great hall. But although he 
scrupulously examined every part of the room, he did not see Sétä 
anywhere. 
As Hanumän looked upon the many semi-clad women, he felt a grave

291 
misgiving. Was this not sinful? To look upon the wives of others, 
especially in such a condition, was always condemned by scripture. Even 
looking upon the sinful Rävaëa, who had stolen other’s wives, was itself 
sinful. Hanumän felt disturbed, but he considered his mission. Where 
else could he find Sétä? He had to look for her among Rävaëa’s women. 
And he had not looked at them with even a slight tinge of lust. His mind 
was steady, firmly fixed on Räma’s service. It was not possible that sin 
could overcome him in such circumstances. 
Feeling reassured but simultaneously despondent at not finding Sétä, 
Hanumän came out of the bed chamber. Where should he look now? 
How could he return without finding Sétä? What would he say to 
Sugréva and Räma when they asked him, “What did you accomplish 
upon reaching Lanka?” Maybe that sorrowful lady had died of grief. Or 
perhaps the Räkñasas had devoured Her. Hanumän could not bear such 
thoughts. He had to keep looking. If he could not find Sétä, then he 
would fast until death. 
Thinking in this way he went along the paths outside the palace. As he 
walked he saw ahead of him the palace gardens. They had not yet been 
searched. Hanumän prayed to the gods that he might at last succeed in 
finding Sétä. He paused as he reached the gardens and thought of Räma. 
Thrilled at the prospect of finding the princess, he leapt up onto the top 
of the surrounding wall.  
From his vantage point Hanumän surveyed the lovely grove, which was 
lit by the moon. A sweet fragrance reached his nostrils as he looked over 
the large enclosure. He saw blossoming trees of every kind, as well as 
silvery creepers and golden shrubs. Flowers grew everywhere along the 
sides of immaculate lawns. Peacocks and parrots perched on the trees, 
along with many other varieties of colorful birds. Hanumän ran quickly 
along the wall, carefully examining the garden. He jumped from tree to 
tree and they shed their flowers, making the earth appear like a richly 
adorned woman. As he leapt he awoke flocks of birds who flew upwards, 
shaking the branches of the trees and showering Hanumän with 
blossoms. 
Hanumän moved impetuously, anxious to find Sétä. He saw ponds of 
different shapes full of lotuses and sleeping swans. There were bathing 
pools with golden steps leading down to them and banks of fine sand

292 
made entirely of crushed pearls. Rivulets ran between silver trees 
covered over by flowers of gold. Fruits such as Hanumän had never seen 
hung from the boughs of the trees. Everywhere the monkey looked he 
was wonderstruck at the opulence. In the center of the garden he came 
upon a large simshapa tree. He climbed to its top and gazed around in all 
directions, eager to catch sight of Sétä. At a distance away he saw a 
temple situated in a large grove of ashoka trees. Those trees, with their 
thousands of bright red blossoms appearing in every season, seemed as 
though made entirely of flowers. Simply by looking upon those splendid 
trees, a man would feel his grief dispelled. The lofty temple amid the 
trees was standing on a thousand marble pillars. It looked like Mount 
Kailäsa, Çiva’s glorious abode. Steps of coral rose up to a large terrace of 
refined gold. 
Hanumän spotted a woman lying near the temple. She was surrounded 
by Räkñasés and tossing about on the ground. Hanumän leapt through 
the trees to take a closer look. The woman was clad in soiled garments, 
but She was beautiful, like a diamond covered in dust. Her slender body 
was smeared with dirt. She lay repeatedly sighing and seemed distraught, 
Her face streaked with tears. 
This was surely Sétä. Hanumän felt his heart leap with joy, but it was 
agony to see Her in such a wretched condition, appearing in every way 
like the eclipsed moon. Although fallen to the ground and weeping, She 
spread about Her a golden luster. Enmeshed in a mighty web of grief, 
She seemed like a flame intertwined by smoke. Her dark eyes, with their 
long black lashes, darted about helplessly, like those of a fawn snared by 
a hunter.  
Hanumän gazed upon Her. He recognized the celestial yellow garment 
he had seen waving in the breeze when Rävaëa had passed over the 
Rishyamukha. This was undoubtedly the lady seized by that demon. The 
monkey gazed with sorrow at the princess. How powerful and inscrutable 
was destiny! Sétä was the daughter of a king and the wife of an 
invincible hero, yet She was now suffering torment. She was gentle, kind 
and always virtuous, undeserving of any pain. How then had She been 
placed in such terrible circumstances? It was inconceivable. 
Hanumän thought of Räma. How could he now best fulfill his Lord’s 
purpose? Sétä was difficult to approach because She was surrounded by

293 
hundreds of fierce Räkñasés. Hanumän examined them carefully. All of 
the Räkñasés were ugly and grossly misshapen. Some had one eye in their 
foreheads, others had huge ears that covered their bodies, some had 
heads like boars, tigers, buffalos, goats, deer or foxes. Some had their 
head sunk into their chests. They were all sizes, some very tall, others 
dwarf humpbacks. Some had the legs and feet of elephants, camels or 
horses. Some had abnormally long and twisted noses, some had large 
pointed ears or fierce lion-like teeth. Others had hair down to their feet 
and hands with claws. 
The sight of the Räkñasés made one’s hair stand on end. They clutched 
various types of weapons and stood or sat about Sétä, watching in all 
directions. In their midst the noble princess seemed like the moon 
besieged by malevolent planets. Hanumän thought carefully. He 
remained hiding among the boughs of the tree. Dawn was approaching 
and the sky to the east was beginning to lighten. 
Just at that time Rävaëa was being awakened. Musical instruments were 
played and poets sang his glories. The demon rose up with his hair and 
garments in disarray, still intoxicated by the strong liquors he had drunk 
the night before. Immediately he thought of Sétä. Quickly arranging his 
dress and adorning himself with every kind of ornament, Rävaëa went 
out of his rooms toward the gardens and made his way hastily to the 
ashoka grove. Behind him came one hundred beautiful maidens, their 
large hips and breasts swaying as they struggled to keep up with him. 
They carried whisks with golden handles, oil torches, pitchers of wine 
and pure white umbrellas. Their gold ornaments jangled together and 
flowers fell from their hair and garlands as they ran. Moving behind the 
demon they appeared like flashes of lightning following a cloud. 
Although he possessed great power, the evil-minded Rävaëa was a slave 
to his lusty desires. With his mind fixed upon Sétä, he passed through 
the golden, gem-encrusted arches at the entrance to the ashoka grove. In 
a god-like human form he headed straight for the place where Sétä lay, 
longing to get another sight of the divine princess. As he walked he 
composed poetic phrases in his mind to win Sétä over. 
Hanumän, concealed in his tree, heard the tinkling of ankle bells 
approaching. He looked around and saw Rävaëa making his way along 
the path, illumined on all sides by bright torches. The demon moved

294 
quickly with his slanted coppery eyes staring straight ahead. He was 
adjusting his upper garment of pure white silk embellished with flowers 
and pearls. Preoccupied with his thoughts of Sétä, he got his golden 
armlet entangled with his necklace of shining jewels, and he struggled to 
release it as he strode along the path. 
Hanumän remained completely still as Rävaëa passed by the tree where 
he was hidden. Once the group of women had passed him, however, 
Hanumän leapt down and silently followed them toward Sétä. The 
monkey hid behind the trunk of a large tree close to Sétä and cautiously 
peered around it to see Räma’s glorious consort seated on the ground, 
trembling at the sight of Rävaëa approaching Her. Her knees were 
drawn up to Her chest and She held them tight with Her arms. 
Rävaëa, who appeared youthful and majestic, and who shone with a 
brilliant aura, stood before the princess. She looked miserable and 
stricken, like a rose creeper torn from a tree and thrown to the ground. 
She appeared like a shattered faith, or a frustrated hope, or an 
abandoned treasure. She was covered with dirt yet charming as a pure 
white lotus stained with mud. Weeping incessantly, She tossed about on 
the bare earth, Her mind absorbed in thoughts of Räma. 
The Räkñasa king sought to seduce Her, as a fool would walk heedlessly 
toward a steep precipice. He gazed down at the forlorn Sétä, who did not 
even glance up at him. With Her palms folded She prayed to Viñëu that 
He might soon bring Räma to Her presence. 
Rävaëa said, “O most splendid jewel among women, do not be afraid of 
me. I am here only to render You service. Why do You lie here in a 
wretched condition? Rise up and enjoy with me. I shall provide You with 
pleasures only the gods know.” 
Sétä turned Her face away in contempt, Her body wracked by sobs. 
Rävaëa had tried to win Her over each day since taking Her captive, but 
his attempts sickened Her. She longed for the day when Räma would 
come and destroy the demon. Surely that time would soon come. She did 
not feel that She could take much more of Rävaëa’s torment. 
Sétä’s resistance only made Rävaëa’s desire for Her the more insistent. 
He stared at Her incomparably beautiful form. Even though She had 
been fasting and had not washed since he had kidnapped Her, She was 
still far more lovely than any of his consorts. Indeed, if it were not for

295 
Nalakuvara’s curse. . . 
The demon folded his hands in supplication. “What will you gain by 
lying here grieving? Your youth is passing swiftly and will soon be gone. 
Enjoy with me now while you can. There are none in the universe who 
can compare with me in virility and power. You are the finest of all 
women. I believe that after creating you the celebrated Brahmä must 
have retired, seeing his work to have reached perfection.” 
Rävaëa offered Her the position of his principal queen. He would 
subjugate the entire world and offer it to her father Janaka. He had 
already conquered the gods in heaven and now stood unchallenged as 
the most powerful person in the universe. What could Räma do against 
him? Sétä should stop thinking of Her puny prince, who was clad in rags 
and lived in a lonely forest. Perhaps, Rävaëa suggested, Räma had 
already died. There was no chance that She would ever see Him again. 
And even if He should somehow find His way to Lanka, He would be 
immediately destroyed by Rävaëa, standing at the head of an unlimited 
number of invincible Räkñasas.  
The demon went on, his voice rising and falling melodiously as he 
implored Sétä. “Become my wife, O most beloved one, and enjoy life. Put 
on the best of garments and gold ornaments. Shake off Your grief and 
range freely with me in delightful groves along the seashore.” 
Sétä shuddered at Rävaëa’s sinful suggestion. Without looking at him, 
and placing a symbolic blade of grass between Herself and the demon, 
She replied, “Give up your futile hope. You no more deserve Me than a 
sinful man deserves perfection. How do you expect Me to perform an act 
condemned by all pious women? How do you imagine that I will rest 
upon the arm of any other man after I have once rested upon Räma’s 
arm? Do you not realize that molesting the wives of others leads only to 
destruction? Evidently there is no one in Lanka who knows morality. Or 
perhaps you have become so degraded that you are simply unable to heed 
good advice.” 
Rävaëa snorted in anger. He clenched and unclenched his fists. There 
seemed to be no way of winning this woman. His eyes remained fixed 
upon Her as She continued without looking at him. “You should know 
Me to be as inseparable from Räma as sunlight is inseparable from the 
sun. Unite Me with Räma at once if you wish to do good for yourself and

296 
your Räkñasa race. Make friends with Räma. Otherwise, see your city, 
yourself and all the demons destroyed for good. If I am kept here, you 
will soon see well-aimed arrows joined end to end filling the sky. They 
will rain down upon Lanka like so many fire-mouthed serpents. You 
were able to steal Me only when Räma and His brother were not present. 
Indeed, O weak one, it is not possible for you to stand in the sight of 
Räma and Lakñman any more than a dog can remain under the gaze of a 
pair of lions.” 
Sétä rebuked Rävaëa further. Even if he sought shelter on the peak of 
Mount Meru or descended to Varuëa’s abode, he would not escape from 
Räma. By his wicked act of stealing Sétä he was already killed by his own 
destiny. Räma would be the instrument to fulfill that fate. With the evil 
Rävaëa remaining their leader, the Räkñasa race would be destroyed to 
their roots.  
Sétä spoke harshly. “I would burn you to ashes Myself by the power of My 
asceticism and chastity, but I do not have My lord’s order. Nor do I wish 
to waste My ascetic merits on such a wretch as yourself.” 
Rävaëa was furious. Breathing heavily he spoke slowly, his deep voice 
barely constraining his rage. “Because of Your insolent words You 
deserve to be put to death. Only my love for you prevents me from 
having You immediately killed. You have a few more months left of Your 
one-year reprieve. If by then You have not submitted to me, then my 
cooks will mince You up for my morning meal.” 
The demon then turned away from Sétä. His eyes flamed and his tongue 
darted out of his mouth. His shining diadem and his broad, powerful 
shoulders shook with his anger. His red robes swirled about him as he 
walked away and his large reddish-gold earrings swung back and forth. 
With his dark blue waist cloth he appeared like a mountain topped with 
crimson oxides and lit by lightning bolts. As he left the grove he turned 
to the Räkñasés. “Use whatever means you can to change this princess’s 
mind. By soft words, coercion and threats, force Her to submit. Dissuade 
Her from thoughts of Räma and convince Her to accept me. This will be 
in your own interests, O Räkñasés.” 
With a roar of frustration Rävaëa left the garden, his heavy footfalls 
receding into the distance. As Hanumän continued to watch, the fierce 
Räkñasés began to harass Sétä, asking in rasping and grating voices why

297 
She was reluctant to accept Rävaëa as Her lord. The Räkñasa king was 
the son of a great åñi. He had vanquished the thirty-three principal gods 
in battle. Even Indra could not stand before him. Now that very Rävaëa 
was bowing at Her feet, begging for Her favor. He was prepared to 
renounce his principal consort, the chaste and beautiful Mandodari for 
Sétä’s sake. 
Numerous Räkñasés cajoled Sétä in various ways. They told Her to stop 
pining foolishly for Räma, a mere human. Of what consequence was 
Räma when compared to Rävaëa? She obviously had no idea what was 
best for Her. 
Sétä turned away from the Räkñasés. Their advice was useless. She could 
no more abandon Räma than heat could abandon fire. She spoke with 
tear-filled eyes. “Devour Me if you will, I shall never become Rävaëa’s 
wife. As Çacé waits upon Indra, as Arundhati upon Vasiñöha and Rohini 
upon the moon-god, so do I always wait upon My lord.” 
The Räkñasés were filled with rage when Sétä rejected their counsel. 
They resorted to harsh and threatening language. Licking their 
protruding lips with their dart-like tongues, they raised their axes and 
other weapons at Sétä. Sétä stood up and walked toward the tree were 
Hanumän was hiding, with a group of Räkñasés surrounding and 
intimidating Her. Seeing Her approach, the monkey quickly climbed up 
into the branches of the tree. As he looked down from the tree he saw 
Sétä severely afflicted by Her Räkñasé guards. They spoke fiercely. 
“Submit to Rävaëa, O princess, or this very day I shall tear out Your 
heart and eat it!” 
Brandishing a huge dart one Räkñasé said, “For a long time I have wanted 
to feast on Your liver and spleen, as well as Your swollen breasts and 
indeed all Your limbs.” 
Hanumän burned with anger. He felt the impulse to leap down amid the 
Räkñasés and immediately thrash them, but he restrained himself, 
intelligently waiting for an opportunity to first speak with Sétä. If he 
revealed himself now, there would be chaos and the chance to reassure 
Sétä would be lost. 
Continuously tormented, Sétä fell to the ground weeping. She cried out 
to the Räkñasés, “A human woman is not fit to be the wife of the Räkñasa 
king. Therefore finish Me now, Räkñasés. End My misery!”

298 
Sétä embraced the tree, calling out Räma’s name. Her face was pale and 
She shook with sobs. As She tossed Her head about Her long braid of 
hair writhed like a black snake. She wondered what kind of sin She must 
have committed in Her past life that She must now endure this 
suffering. If it were not for Her longing to again see Räma, She would 
have ended Her own life. How could She endure another visit from 
Rävaëa?  
Sétä turned to the Räkñasés, who were still threatening Her as She lay 
clutching the tree. “O wicked ones, I would not touch Rävaëa even with 
My left foot. That evil one should understand it now. I would not go to 
him even under threat of being transfixed, hacked to pieces, roasted in 
fire or hurled down from mountain peaks.” 
The princess thought continuously of Räma. Why had He not come to 
rescue Her? Surely He had not abandoned Her. Perhaps He did not 
know where She was. But Jatayu must have told Him. Or maybe the bird 
died before getting the chance. If Räma knew Her to be in Lanka, then 
without doubt He would have reduced the city to ashes by now. The 
ocean would present no problem. Räma’s fiery arrows would dry it up in 
an instant. But what if Räma had perished from grief, being unable to 
find Her? Lakñman would also die, seeing His brother gone. Maybe, after 
losing Her, Räma had practiced yoga and become detached from worldy 
things such as love for His wife. But that could not be possible in one 
like Räma; He would never become detached from His duty. Protecting 
one’s wife was always the duty of pious men. 
Sétä lamented, thinking only of Her husband. She envied the perfect 
mystics who had transcended the dualities of happiness and distress. For 
them the loss of relatives did not cause any sorrow, nor did they long for 
any pleasing thing. If only She could experience their peace. As She lay 
absorbed in such thoughts, a Räkñasé named Trijata stepped forward and 
restrained her companions. She had just risen from sleep and told them 
of a dream she had experienced. 
“I saw a shining personality, who was surely Räma, mounted upon a 
celestial chariot drawn by a thousand horses and coursing through the 
air. He was united with Sétä. The couple wore white robes and white 
garlands and were ablaze with splendor. I also saw Rävaëa, robed in 
black with a red garland and sitting on a chariot drawn by asses.”

299 
Trijata described her dream in detail: Rävaëa had entered a fearful 
darkness, his body smeared with excrement. She saw all of Rävaëa’s sons 
and ministers with their heads shaved and bodies bathed with oil. She 
saw Lanka being set alight by an agile monkey and all of the Räkñasas 
disappearing into a pool of cow dung. 
The Räkñasés knew the science of interpreting dreams. It seemed from 
Trijata’s dream that a great calamity was about to befall Rävaëa. Sétä 
was heartened by Trijata. She sat up and as She did so She felt Her left 
eye throbbing and Her left arm palpitating. This was an auspicious 
omen. That omen, along with Trijata’s dream, gave Sétä hope. She felt 
that Räma must surely be near. The Räkñasés fell away from Her, some of 
them running to report to Rävaëa. 
Chapter 14 
Sétä is Found 
In the tree Hanumän considered what to do next. He wanted to comfort 
Sétä and give Her Räma’s ring, but he was not sure how to approach Her. 
She would likely think him to be Rävaëa in disguise using sorcery to 
trick her. She might cry out and alert the Räkñasas. What then? He 
could be killed or captured. How would Räma’s purpose be served if that 
happened? What other monkey could leap across the ocean and return? 
Hanumän thought carefully. He decided to remain in the tree and sing 
praises of Räma so that Sétä could hear. The Räkñasés had moved away to 
a distance and would not notice. Hanumän started to speak out loud. “In 
the city of Ayodhya there lived a great ruler named Daçaratha. That 
lordly king begot a valiant son named Räma, who possesses every good 
quality. Going to the forest in obedience to His aged and pious father, 
Prince Räma slayed in battle many violent demons.” 
Hanumän related in brief Räma’s history up until the time of Sétä’s 
abduction. He described what had happened to Räma in Her absence 
since then, leading up to his own leap across the ocean and arrival in the 
ashoka grove.

300 
Sétä was struck with wonder to hear the voice from the tree. She looked 
up and all around Her, feeling joy upon hearing Räma’s activities 
described. As She gazed into the boughs of the tree She saw among the 
leaves Hanumän’s tawny figure. The small monkey sat humbly with his 
palms folded. Immediately She became afraid. Who was this creature? 
What was he doing in the tree? Was this Rävaëa’s trick? But 
remembering the auspicious omens, Sétä became thoughtful. She prayed 
to the gods that Hanumän’s words might prove true. 
Hanumän slipped down from the tree and bowed low before Sétä with 
his joined palms raised above his head. “I assume You are Sétä, consort of 
the highly blessed Räma. I am an envoy dispatched by Räma to seek You, 
O noble lady. Along with His brother Lakñman, Räma waits in grief for 
some news of Your whereabouts.” 
Sétä felt overjoyed to hear of Räma, but She was still suspicious. What if 
this was Rävaëa? Nevertheless, upon seeing the monkey She was feeling 
a strange calm and peace of mind. She looked carefully at Hanumän and 
asked, “How can I know that you are not Rävaëa?” 
Hanumän reassured Her. He described the features of both Räma and 
Lakñman in great detail, telling Her everything he knew about the two 
princes. Hanumän then told Her about himself and how he had come to 
meet with Räma. He spoke confidently. “Now that I have found You I 
will soon return to Räma. You will see Your lord arrive here before long, 
marching at the head of an unlimited number of powerful monkeys and 
bears.” 
Hanumän showed Her the ring Räma had given him. He handed it to 
Sétä and She immediately recognized it. She was now convinced by 
Hanumän. Standing up in excitement She felt unlimited joy. Her eyes 
shed tears of happiness and Her face shone brightly. She praised 
Hanumän. “You have achieved a great feat in crossing the wide ocean 
and entering this fortified city. O noble monkey, surely you are the 
foremost of Räma’s servants.” 
Sétä wondered why Räma Himself had not come there. Why had He not 
smashed the city of Lanka and taken Her back? Was He still strong in 
mind and body? Was Lakñman well? Sétä questioned Hanumän eagerly 
and the monkey replied, “Räma does not know Your exact whereabouts, 
O godly lady, but He is well and awaiting news of You. As soon as He

301 
hears my report He will come here with His army and rid the world of 
Räkñasas. There can be no doubt whatsoever.” 
Hanumän assured Sétä that Räma was always thinking of Her. Indeed, 
His mind was distracted by grief due to Her separation. He could not eat 
properly and hardly slept. Räma sat for long periods gazing into the 
distance, sighing heavily. He would not even brush from His body gnats 
and mosquitoes, oblivious to everything as He thought of Sétä. From 
time to time He would call out Her name and shed tears. 
Sétä felt simultaneous joy and grief as She heard of Her husband and His 
own grief for Her. She sat lost in thought of Räma for some time, 
looking like the bright moon seen through a veil of clouds. The monkey’s 
words were like nectar mixed with poison. She could not tolerate 
hearing of Räma’s sorrow. Her beautiful eyelids with their long black 
lashes fluttered as She blinked away Her tears. She spoke to Hanumän, 
who sat with his palms folded and head bowed. “O valiant monkey, you 
must quickly bring Räma. Only a short time remains till the merciless 
Rävaëa will have Me killed. The demon will not heed any good advice 
and is bent on bringing about his own destruction, held as he is in the 
grip of Death.” 
Sétä told Hanumän that She had heard how Rävaëa’s brother and 
minister, Vibhishana, had repeatedly exhorted the demon king to return 
Sétä. He and other wise Räkñasas warned Rävaëa that keeping Sétä 
would result in the annihilation of the Räkñasas. But Rävaëa would not 
listen. Sétä had heard this from Vibhishana’s wife, who had befriended 
the princess. 
When he heard that Sétä’s life was threatened, Hanumän became 
alarmed. He spoke urgently. “Let me take You from this place 
immediately, O princess of Mithila. You may climb upon my back and I 
shall leap across the sea with ease. Do not be fearful. I could easily carry 
the whole of Lanka, Rävaëa and all. Therefore mount upon my back and 
I shall transport You to Räma’s presence this very day.” 
Sétä looked at Hanumän, who still appeared as a normal monkey less 
than half her size. She spoke in surprise. “Your proposal is surely quite 
monkey-like, O gallant one. How shall I even get on your back?” 
Hanumän was piqued. This was the first time his strength and power 
had been questioned. Obviously Sétä was not aware of his abilities. He

302 
needed to give Her a demonstration. Hanumän began to expand his 
body, growing up to a huge size. He looked down at Sétä and said, “I have 
the capacity to lift up this entire island, with its hills, woodlands, lakes, 
city, defensive walls and the very lord of Lanka, Rävaëa himself. Be 
done with your hesitation, O princess, and allow me to carry You to 
Räma.” 
Sétä gazed up in amazement at Hanumän, who stood before Her like a 
tawny mountain. She was reassured of his ability, but was still doubtful 
about traveling on his back. She said, “You are like the wind-god 
himself, dear monkey. When you fly with great speed it will be difficult 
for Me to hold fast to you. The force of your flight will likely render Me 
unconscious. I will then fall into the ocean, only to be devoured by fierce 
aquatics.” 
Sétä also feared that Hanumän would not be able to leave Lanka with 
Her. The Räkñasas would spot them and give chase. They were capable 
of fighting in the air with powerful weapons and Hanumän would be 
hard-pressed to retaliate as he flew with Sétä on his back.  
Sétä explained that there were still other reasons why She could not take 
up Hanumän’s offer. “I have vowed never to touch the body of any man 
other than Räma. I am already mortified due to being grasped by the 
sinful Rävaëa. I could not voluntarily touch another man. Nor could I 
allow anyone other than Räma to rescue Me, thereby diminishing 
Räma’s fame. I therefore prefer to wait for My lord, confident that He 
will soon arrive.” 
Hanumän nodded in assent to Sétä’s words. She was right. It would not 
be possible for Her to cling to him while he flew swiftly back. And he 
respected Her chastity, which was without comparison in the world. 
Resuming his normal size he said, “I shall now go back to Räma. Please 
give me some token so that He will know that I have actually met with 
You.” 
Sétä replied to him in a voice choked with tears. “You may give Him this 
token in the form of a message. Remind Him of the time when We lived 
together on the Chitrakuta mountain and how I was once attacked by a 
crow and Räma gave Me protection.” 
Sétä told Hanumän in detail about the incident. The crow in question 
was Indra’s son and he had wanted to witness Räma’s prowess. He had

303 
attacked Sétä, whereupon Räma had thrown a blade of grass at him, 
imbuing it with the power of the brahmästra. The empowered grass had 
chased the crow across the universe and finally destroyed one of his eyes. 
Räma would remember that incident and know that only Sétä could 
have recalled it. 
Hanumän asked if Sétä had any message for Räma. The princess replied, 
“You should report to Räma My wretched condition. Although I have 
the invincible Räma as My protector, I now appear like one forlorn. He 
should lose no time in rescuing Me. He is capable of advancing against 
the entire host of gods and demons united together, what to speak of 
Rävaëa.” 
Sétä took from Her cloth a brilliant celestial gem which She had used to 
decorate Her hair. Handing the yellow jewel to Hanumän She said, 
“Give this gem to Räma and say to Him, ‘Even as Viñëu rescued the 
Goddess Earth from the depths of the ocean, You should descend into 
the midst of the Räkñasas and save Me.’ O monkey, deliver this message 
to My lord.” 
Hanumän took the jewel and bowed low to Sétä. It was time to leave. But 
he wanted first to test the Räkñasas’ strength. Now that he had actually 
penetrated into Lanka he saw his opportunity. If he could incite the 
Räkñasas to fight with him, it would give him some idea of their force 
and power. And besides that, Hanumän wanted to do some damage to 
the demon forces before he left. 
Thinking in this way, Hanumän, still in a vast form, began ripping up 
the trees and bushes in the gardens. He tore down the walls and 
archways and hurled them into the ponds. Moving like a tempest and 
roaring all the while, the Vanara created havoc in the grove. He took up 
a huge iron bar and stood at the entrance to the garden, eagerly awaiting 
the arrival of Räkñasa troops. 
The inhabitants of Rävaëa’s palace were terrified to hear Hanumän’s 
roar, along with the crash of trees and the cries of frightened animals. 
The Räkñasés, who had been buried in sleep, woke with a start. They saw 
Hanumän standing at the gate of the garden like a towering hill. Some 
of them had already noticed that Sétä was speaking to a monkey and 
they questioned Her about his identity.  
“How should I know anything about this wonderful being?” She replied.

304 
“You are the ones skilled in sorcery and magic. Why then can you not 
ascertain for yourselves the nature of this creature?” 
Some of the Räkñasés ran in fear to Rävaëa. They reported to him that 
the monkey had entirely destroyed the beautiful gardens, leaving only 
the large simshapa tree under which Sétä lay.  
Rävaëa flared up. His eyes blazed and hot tears fell from them like drops 
of burning oil from a lamp. He thought for a moment. This attacker was 
probably a powerful emissary of the gods or even Viñëu. No one else 
would dare assail Lanka. Rävaëa ordered a select band of Räkñasa 
warriors, the Kiìkaräs, to capture Hanumän. Eighty thousand of them 
immediately gathered and left for the garden. The massive Räkñasas 
were endowed with extraordinary might, had large teeth and held fierce 
weapons. They rushed in a body toward the ashoka grove, keen to lay 
hold of Hanumän. 
Seeing the colossal monkey they darted at him like moths toward a 
flame. They attacked Hanumän with their sharp-edged spears, maces, 
clubs, iron pikes and scimitars, surrounding him and shouting loudly. 
Waves of arrows sped toward Hanumän, rushing through the air and 
sounding like a roaring gale. 
Hanumän assumed an even larger form. He lashed the ground with his 
tail and uttered a great cry. “Victory to Räma and Lakñman! I am 
Hanumän, the son of the wind-god, and I am here as Räma’s servant. 
Not even a thousand Rävaëas can withstand me. I shall destroy Lanka 
and then return to my master.” 
The Kiìkaräs were struck with fear upon seeing Hanumän’s size and 
hearing his booming voice, which shook the earth. They closed in on 
him in thousands. Hanumän whirled the iron bar and began striking the 
demons down. Bounding into the air and tearing through the Räkñasa 
ranks, Hanumän swiftly annihilated them. He moved like the wind and 
could hardly be seen by the Räkñasas. In a short time they were virtually 
wiped out. A few of them survived and ran back to Rävaëa.  
The demon king became even more furious. He ordered one of his great 
generals, Jambumali, to attack Hanumän. The Räkñasa bowed to Rävaëa 
and went out for battle clutching his golden bow. Jambumali mounted a 
chariot drawn by a hundred tall steeds with the heads of fiends. He 
twanged his bowstring, making a sound like thunder and, roaring with

305 
anger, raced toward the palace gardens. 
Meanwhile Hanumän had been looking around to see what further 
destruction he could cause. He saw an enormous temple atop a great hill 
where the Räkñasas worshipped their guardian deity. He quickly climbed 
the hill and scaled the side of the temple, which appeared like the sheer 
face of a mountain. As he went up the wall of the temple, the effulgent 
Hanumän resembled the rising sun. Repeatedly crying out, “Victory to 
Räma!” he began tearing down the buttresses and large stone arches all 
around the temple. In minutes he reduced the entire edifice to a pile of 
rubble. 
Hanumän leapt down from the hill and spotted Jambumali coming 
toward him. The demon was dressed in crimson robes with a garland of 
bright red flowers round his neck and a chaplet of red jewels on his 
head. Large gold earrings shone brilliantly from his blackish-blue 
pointed ears. He roared loudly and fired a hundred long shafts from his 
bow. 
Hanumän also roared when he saw the demon. He stood joyfully in front 
of the bellowing Räkñasa. Jambumali pierced the monkey all over with 
his terrible arrows. With one large crescent-headed shaft he struck 
Hanumän in the mouth, while with a number of barbed arrows he hit 
him in his arms and legs. His head stained with blood, Hanumän looked 
like a large red lotus in the sky. He was infuriated and he took up an 
immense boulder, hurling it with tremendous force at Jambumali. 
The demon laughed and instantly released ten powerful arrows which 
smashed the flying rock into fragments. Enraged, Hanumän then 
uprooted a sal tree and whirled it about. Jambumali again shot his razor-
sharp arrows and cut the tree to pieces. He continued to pierce 
Hanumän with more and more arrows. 
The monkey lost his patience and again took up the great iron rod with 
which he had slain the Kiìkaräs. With innumerable arrows sticking 
from his body he rushed toward the demon. He bounded into the air and 
came down onto Jambumali’s chariot, bringing the rod down onto his 
skull. Smashed by Hanumän, the demon’s head was pressed into his 
body, which itself was crushed into a shapeless mass. The chariot was 
shattered and the demonic donkeys ran here and there, bellowing in 
fear.

306 
Rävaëa was astounded to hear that Jambumali had been slain. He again 
ordered seven more of his generals to go out for battle. The Räkñasa 
warriors went out to meet Hanumän shouting in joy, each of them eager 
to excel the others in battle. They mounted large chariots overlaid with 
golden armor and decked with banners and flags. Rumbling like 
thunderclouds, the chariots rushed toward Hanumän. The demons were 
expert in the use of celestial weapons and they began to release all kinds 
of missiles at the great monkey.  
Hanumän leapt into the sky and wheeled about with his arms and legs 
outstretched. He dodged the arrows and missiles of the Räkñasas, who 
themselves rose into the sky to fight him. As he sported with the 
Räkñasas, who each held a golden bow, Hanumän looked like the 
powerful wind-god playing among thunderclouds with streaks of 
lightning. He swept down upon the demons one by one, striking them 
with his hands and feet. Hanumän killed all of them, and they fell to the 
ground like mountains struck down by Indra’s thunderbolt. 
Hanumän then descended to earth and stood again at the gateway to the 
gardens, eager to fight with more demons. The ground was strewn with 
the bodies of Räkñasas and smashed chariots. Elephants and horses cried 
in dissonant tones and blood flowed everywhere. In order to strike terror 
into the Räkñasas and create dissension among their ranks, Hanumän 
shouted, “Send out your best fighters, Rävaëa! They will meet the same 
fate as these here. I am Hanumän, servant of Räma. Soon millions of 
monkeys like myself will arrive here, accompanied by Räma Himself. 
What use is your fighting? Release Sétä now and restore Her to Räma!” 
Rävaëa decided that Hanumän could not possibly be a monkey. Surely 
he was a divine being created by the gods. The demon had seen some 
mighty Vanaras, but this one seemed extraordinarily powerful. Still, 
surely he could be vanquished. Rävaëa and his warriors had overcome 
the gods themselves; it should not be too difficult to overpower this 
monkey, whoever he may be. Rävaëa summoned five more exceptionally 
powerful leaders of his army. Encouraging them by praising their 
strength and skill in battle, he sent them out to capture Hanumän. He 
had to find out who this monkey was and why he had come to Lanka. 
But one after another Hanumän slew the Räkñasa generals. He struck 
down the first three with his thunderbolt-like fists. The other two then

307 
assailed Hanumän from his two sides, hurling their fierce weapons with 
great force. Hanumän, who himself looked like a mountain, tore off the 
top of the nearby hill, complete with its beasts, snakes and trees. Soaring 
upwards with that great crag, he brought it down upon the two demons 
and completely crushed them. 
Hanumän then began slaying thousands of other Räkñasas who were 
gathered there. He killed warriors by striking them with other warriors, 
elephants with other elephants, and horses with horses. The ground was 
covered with corpses. Hanumän appeared like the Time Spirit bent upon 
the destruction of all created beings. 
Rävaëa considered the situation. This being was formidable. He had 
wiped out a number of near invincible Räkñasa chiefs. Nevertheless, how 
could anyone ever defeat Rävaëa? That was impossible. Admittedly the 
goddess Lanka had previously come screaming to him, speaking of his 
imminent destruction, but Rävaëa was still confident. If necessary he 
himself would deal with the monkey, but first let him contend with 
Rävaëa’s powerful sons. That should take care of him. Rävaëa turned to 
Prince Aksha, who sat by his side. Spurred on by his father’s glance, 
Aksha rose from his seat and went out for battle. 
He mounted his golden chariot which shone like the sun. It was yoked to 
eight celestial steeds, all as swift as thought. A large red standard, 
studded with bright gems, flew from a bejeweled pole. Rows of fierce 
lances and javelins were arranged alongside numerous quivers of razor-
headed arrows. Eight long and terrible-looking swords were fastened to 
the sides of the chariot in silver scabbards emblazoned with golden 
moons and stars. Urging on his steeds Aksha rose above the ground and 
swept toward the gardens, accompanied by thousands of other demons 
on elephants, horses and chariots. 
The Räkñasa prince arrived before Hanumän in a few moments. He 
paused for a minute to assess his opponent’s strength. Aksha was 
awestruck to see the mountainous monkey standing ready for combat. 
Hanumän looked to him like the blazing fire of universal dissolution. But 
the prince was accomplished in battle and he felt no fear. He gazed at 
Hanumän with his large red eyes, which resembled those of a lion. 
Aksha drew his great bow to its full length and sent three powerful 
arrows toward the monkey. The arrows struck Hanumän’s head and he

308 
bled profusely, giving him the appearance of the newly risen sun. 
Hanumän, his eyes bulging in indignation, looked down at the Räkñasa. 
Aksha wore a breastplate which seemed to be made entirely from gems, 
it shone so brilliantly. His golden armlets flashed while he worked his 
beautiful ornate bow. As he assailed Hanumän, Aksha seemed like a 
dark cloud covered by a rainbow, pouring a shower of flaming arrows 
onto a large mountain. 
Seeing an opportunity to again display his prowess for Räma’s cause, 
Hanumän roared in joy and sprang into the air. He darted about evading 
Aksha’s arrows with the speed of the wind. Aksha’s chariot followed him 
through the air like an elephant approaching a large covered well. The 
prince continuously fired his deadly weapons at Hanumän, who wheeled 
about like a firebrand.  
Witnessing the fearful encounter between the Vanara and the Räkñasa, 
the gods were amazed. The sun grew dim, the wind ceased blowing and 
the sky echoed with loud shrieks. Even the sea convulsed and the 
Trikuta mountain shook.  
Hanumän considered that the prince was a worthy opponent, although 
only a boy. The Räkñasa was growing in strength as he fought. He stuck 
to Hanumän wherever the monkey flew and pierced him with thousands 
of razor-sharp arrows. Hanumän became more and more infuriated and 
he made up his mind to kill Aksha. Suddenly turning as he was pursued 
by the prince, Hanumän struck the eight steeds with his palms and killed 
them outright. As his chariot descended to the earth, Aksha rose up into 
the air, holding his bow and sword. He resembled an effulgent åñi who 
had quit his body through yoga and was ascending to the realm of the 
gods. 
As the prince flew through the sky Hanumän met him and took hold of 
his two legs. Spinning him around violently, the monkey swiftly 
descended from the air and dashed him to the ground. With his bones 
smashed and body bathed in blood Aksha fell dead.  
Hosts of åñis, Yakñas and Nägas who ranged the stellar sphere had 
gathered in a body in the canopy of the sky to watch the conflict. 
Observing Hanumän’s stupendous feat in killing Aksha, they applauded 
and rained down celestial flowers. 
Rävaëa was filled with grief and rage. He turned to his eldest son,

309 
Indrajit. This prince had earned his name, ‘the conqueror of Indra,’ by 
once taking captive the mighty king of the gods. He had command of all 
the mystic missiles, including even the infallible brahmästra, presided 
over by Brahmä himself. Rävaëa extolled his son at length. He ordered 
him to go out and take Hanumän captive. The Räkñasa king felt 
confident that Indrajit would succeed and he watched with affection as 
the obedient prince marched out for combat. 
Indrajit rushed out like the sea on a full moon day. He mounted a 
chariot drawn by four sabre-tooth tigers of immense size. With an arrow 
fitted to his bow he swiftly arrived before Hanumän. Upon seeing the 
banner Indrajit had seized from Indra, Hanumän roared loudly in joy, 
realizing that he faced the famous conqueror of Indra. The crash of the 
wooden tom-toms and war drums which accompanied Indrajit increased 
Hanumän’s martial ardor. He grew even further in size and again leapt 
into the sky. 
Indrajit fired his long-shafted arrows, which were covered in gold and 
had beautifully feathered ends. They screamed through the air with 
their steel points glowing bright red. Hanumän moved rapidly in all 
directions and skillfully avoided them. The Räkñasa released more and 
more deadly shafts and they traveled in long lines, like streaks of 
lightning, but the Räkñasa could not hit the swiftly moving monkey. Nor 
could Hanumän find any opportunity to take hold of Indrajit. The gods 
and åñis were struck with wonder as they watched the two accomplished 
warriors wheeling about in the sky. 
The Räkñasa realized that Hanumän was formidable. But if he was a 
created being then he would surely succumb to the might of the creator’s 
weapon, the brahmästra. Indrajit fitted to his bow the special arrow he 
reserved for the brahmästra. He chanted the mantras sacred to Brahmä 
and released the missile. Hanumän, instantly bound by the divine force 
of the irresistible weapon, fell to the earth with his limbs stunned. He 
understood that the brahmästra had overpowered him and considered 
the situation.  
Hanumän had been given a boon by Brahmä that the brahmästra would 
only be effective upon him for a short while. He knew he would soon be 
released. But this was an opportunity for him to be taken before Rävaëa 
himself. That would be useful. He could deliver a stern ultimatum to the

310 
Räkñasa on Räma’s behalf and then make his escape. 
Having reduced his body to its normal size, Hanumän was surrounded by 
a large number of fierce Räkñasas who quickly bound him with large 
ropes. Hitting and kicking Hanumän, they began dragging him toward 
Rävaëa’s palace on Indrajit’s order. Hanumän feigned fear and, even as 
the effect of the brahmästra wore off, allowed himself to be taken to 
Rävaëa. Within his mind the monkey thought only of Räma and how he 
could best serve Him now. 
The demons dragged Hanumän into Rävaëa’s great assembly hall and 
threw him before the Räkñasa king. Rävaëa’s fierce-looking ministers 
reviled Hanumän. Some said, “Let him be thrashed, roasted alive and 
devoured.” But Rävaëa was inquisitive. Who was this being? Why had 
he caused so much havoc in Lanka? The demon turned to his chief 
minister and ordered him to interrogate Hanumän. The monkey 
immediately said, “I am a messenger arrived from Sugréva, king of the 
Vanaras. Both he and I are the servants of Räma, the Lord of this 
world.” 
Hanumän looked up at Rävaëa. He was awestruck by the demon’s 
opulence. Rävaëa sat upon a vast crystal throne studded with gems and 
raised on a platform of gold. On his head he wore a brilliant diadem set 
with priceless jewels and encircled by strings of pearls. His limbs were 
decorated with numerous gold ornaments inlaid with diamonds. He wore 
valuable silk robes and was adorned with crimson sandal-paste, painted 
with peculiar designs. His ruddy eyes were at once terrible and yet as 
attractive as large lotus petals. With his twenty powerful arms he looked 
like a mountain infested by five-hooded serpents. On both sides he was 
being fanned by elegantly adorned young women. Next to him sat his 
four principal advisors, who leaned across to him offering advice and 
reassurance. 
Hanumän gazed intently upon Rävaëa, admiring his power and 
opulence. Surely the demon could have been the leader of the gods and 
the protector of the universe were he not given to violent and sinful 
acts. If this demon were enraged, he could doubtlessly turn the entire 
world into one large ocean.  
Prahasta, Rävaëa’s chief minister, was doubtful about Hanumän’s 
identity and he questioned him. “Take heart, O monkey. We will soon

311 
release you. But first tell us who you really are. Are you an envoy of 
Viñëu, thirsty as He is for conquest over the demons? Perhaps you are 
sent by Indra or one of the other gods. Speak the truth! We do not hold 
you to be a monkey, for your power is very great indeed.” 
Hanumän responded that he was indeed a monkey. He again declared 
himself to be Sugréva’s messenger. “We are Räma’s servants. He cannot 
be conquered by any being in all the worlds. Take heed of the advice I 
shall now offer you for your own good, O Rävaëa.” 
Hanumän told Rävaëa the history of Räma and his exile to the forest, 
leading right up to the assembling of the Vanara hordes at Kishkinda. 
All these monkeys, Hanumän warned, were as swift and powerful as 
Hanumän himself. No one could resist them in battle. Seeking to create 
fear and dissension among the Räkñasas, Hanumän spoke boldly. “You 
should immediately release Sétä before it is too late. Otherwise you will 
soon see an ocean of monkeys and bears descend upon Lanka. Räma and 
Lakñman will stand at their heads, loosing arrows which are as powerful 
as Indra’s thunderbolt. Not even all the gods united together could keep 
the princess of Mithila from Räma. If you value your life, restore Her to 
Räma today.” 
Hanumän then described Räma’s prowess. Räma could dissolve the 
universe with His arrows and immediately create it anew. Not even 
Brahmä or Çiva could not stand before Räma in battle. Lanka and its 
Räkñasas would not present even the smallest obstacle to Him. Rävaëa 
had placed the noose of death around his neck when he stole Sétä. His 
only hope now was to go before Räma and beg for forgiveness and mercy.  
Rävaëa was overcome with wrath. Opening his eyes wide he exclaimed, 
“Kill this insolent monkey!” 
Hearing this command, Rävaëa’s brother and counselor Vibhishana 
immediately objected. “It is never acceptable to kill a messenger. No 
virtuous ruler would even consider such an action. If necessary the 
monkey can be punished in some other way.” 
Rävaëa angrily replied that Hanumän had acted sinfully. He had 
destroyed the ashoka grove and killed many Räkñasas. But Hanumän 
replied that he had acted only in self-defense. He was only a monkey. 
His monkey nature had made him playfully tear down the gardens, and 
he had then been attacked by many fierce warriors. What could he do

312 
but fight back? 
When Hanumän stopped speaking, Vibhishana continued to argue 
against his execution. Rävaëa’s eyes blazed with fury. He always found 
his brother’s advice hard to accept. But Vibhishana was wise; that much 
Rävaëa could accept. The demon king decided to inflict another 
punishment upon Hanumän. “Monkeys are fond of their tails,” Rävaëa 
said with a smile. “Set his tail alight. Then parade him around the streets 
of Lanka. After that, if he survives, he can return home in a wretched 
and mutilated state.” 
The Räkñasas quickly carried out Rävaëa’s command. They tied oil-
soaked cloths around Hanumän’s tail and set them alight. Hanumän 
furiously expanded his body and began lashing the demons around him. 
Cursing, they dragged him from the hall and out into the streets of 
Lanka. His tail ablaze, the giant monkey marched behind his captors, 
carefully surveying the city. After all, this was an opportunity for 
further reconnaissance so he could advise Räma how the city could best 
be attacked. 
Some of the Räkñasés reported to Sétä that Hanumän was being paraded 
through the city with his tail alight. Upon hearing this news Sétä felt 
aggrieved. She prayed mentally to the fire-god, Agni, “If I possess any 
merit from service to My husband and if I am truly devoted to Räma, 
then please prove cool to Hanumän.” 
At once Hanumän felt the fire on his tail to be cold. He wondered how 
that could be possible. Surely it was due to Räma’s power, or perhaps it 
was due to Sétä’s mercy. Räma’s god-like spouse is dear to all beings, 
Hanumän thought. The fire-god would certainly try to please those 
devoted to Her service. 
As Hanumän went along Lanka’s streets he was derided and abused by 
the demons. The monkey decided to make his escape. He was tied 
around his torso with thick ropes that bound his arms to his body. 
Hanumän suddenly reduced his size and slipped free of those ropes. With 
a shout of “Victory to Räma!” he sprang into the air. He bounded across 
the rooftops and made his way toward the city’s northern gate. As he 
leapt he set fire to the mansions of the Räkñasas with his flaming tail. 
Assisted by his father Väyu and by Agni himself, Hanumän soon had a 
large part of Lanka blazing.

313 
Hanumän again assumed his colossal size and roared like the 
thundercloud that appears at the time of universal dissolution. Many 
buildings in Lanka cracked and fell, blazing, to the ground. Räkñasas ran 
and flew in all directions, shouting in terror. Seeing Hanumän standing 
like a mountain they considered that Agni himself had come to destroy 
Lanka. Räkñasas fell from the high windows of their mansions, their 
blazing bodies resembling meteors. Molten gold and silver flowed in 
rivulets carrying sparkling gems of every description. It seemed as if the 
whole of the Trikuta mountain was ablaze. Huge scarlet and orange 
flames leapt up and dense palls of black smoke hung like clouds around 
the mountain. 
Some of the powerful Räkñasas attacked Hanumän. He took up a massive 
club and smashed them, killing thousands. “Here is the mighty and 
vengeful Indra!” some cried. “Surely this is Yamaräja meting out his 
awful punishments!” said others. Still others considered that Çiva had 
come there blazing with fury. Indeed, it might be any powerful deity, for 
the sinful Rävaëa had angered them all at different times. Perhaps it was 
even the infallible and unassailable Viñëu, Lord of the entire creation. 
Hanumän stood on the northern rampart and looked around at the 
blazing city. Scenes of chaos and turmoil met his eyes on all sides. He felt 
satisfied with his work and decided that it was time to return to the 
mainland. In the sky above him the gods and åñis had assembled and 
were extolling him with choice poems. 
But a sudden apprehension seized Hanumän. What about Sétä? Surely 
the princess had been burned alive in this immense conflagration. How 
had he been so impetuous? Hanumän cursed himself for falling a victim 
to anger. Under the impulse of anger a person could kill his elders or 
rebuke those worthy of worship. He had let himself come fully under the 
sway of his fury with no thought of the terrible consequences. What 
would happen now if Sétä were killed? The monkey felt gripped by 
despondency. 
Even as Hanumän thought this, however, he heard from the sky the 
Cäraëas saying, “Hanumän has achieved a great and marvelous feat. 
This city of Lanka, thickly crowded with demons, has been burnt on all 
sides. It now stands as if shrieking and yet the gentle Sétä has not been 
harmed in the least.”

314 
Reassured by their words, Hanumän decided then to depart. He leapt 
across to the Arista mountain on the northern shore of Lanka. As he 
ascended the mountain, which reached up to the clouds, large rocks 
broke under his feet and scattered down the mountainside. Deer and 
lions started and fled in fear. Large trees were crushed beneath 
Hanumän’s tread, making a loud cracking sound. On the summit of 
Arista, Hanumän crouched down, ready to leap across the ocean once 
more. 
Shouting Räma’s name, Hanumän leapt into the air. Again the pressure 
of his leap pressed the mountain down into the earth. All its trees shook 
and shed their blossoms. Vidhyadharas, Kinnaras and Gandharvas, who 
were sporting on the mountain slopes, rose into the air as the mountain 
vibrated violently. Thousands of lions living in the mountain caves 
roared together with a terrific noise.  
Hanumän rose high into the sky and soared away from Lanka, his 
mission accomplished. 
Part Three 
War 
Chapter 1 
The Army Sets Off 
Hanumän sailed across the firmament feeling overjoyed at his success. 
He would soon see Sugréva and Räma and give them the good news that 
Sétä had been found. Leaving Lanka in a state of confusion, he moved 
with the speed of the wind. No Räkñasas gave chase, as they were all 
engaged in trying to save their afflicted city.  
Out of fear of Rävaëa, the fire-god had not burned his palace. The 
Räkñasa king fumed as he gazed out at his blazing city. He should have 
killed the monkey when he had the chance. Without doubt Räma and 
His troops would soon arrive in Lanka, and there would be a great battle. 
Rävaëa thought of his boon from Brahmä. The demon had no immunity

315 
from humans. Would this human king Räma be the cause of his death? 
Was He Viñëu incarnate? He would need to be, mused Rävaëa. Let the 
fight go ahead. We will soon see Räma’s power. Rävaëa would not cower 
before anyone. Death would be preferable. Indeed, death at Viñëu’s 
hands was no shame. Some even said that such a death awarded one the 
highest regions of bliss. But under no conditions would he surrender 
Sétä. Räma would have to take Her by force or not at all. The demon 
stood lost in reverie. 
Hanumän sped through the sky like an arrow loosed from a mighty bow. 
Within an hour, he again saw Mount Mahendra looming large in the 
distance. The monkey roared again and again, filling the sky with the 
thunder of his voice. Aìgada and the others heard his roar and stood on 
the seashore gazing up at the sky, relieved to realize that Hanumän’s roar 
indicated success. Overpowered by happiness, they leapt and sprang 
about on the beach, shouting with joy. 
Within a few minutes they saw Hanumän bursting through the clouds, 
appearing like Garuòa in full flight. The Vanaras stood with joined 
palms in respect and appreciation of their compatriot as he descended 
upon the Mahendra mountain, which shook with the force of his 
landing. Hanumän quickly descended from the mountain and, again 
assuming his normal size, ran toward his friends. The monkeys 
surrounded him, raising cries of joy. They offered Hanumän roots and 
fruits and laughingly embraced him with tearful eyes.  
Taking Aìgada by the hand, Hanumän sat down in a wooded grove near 
the beach to tell him everything that had happened. “I have seen the 
godly Sétä. She sits pining for Her lord, surrounded by fierce Räkñasés 
and constantly harassed by Rävaëa. We should lose no time in rescuing 
the princess.” 
Hearing of Hanumän’s success the monkeys sent up great shouts. Some 
roared like lions and others bellowed like bulls. Some raised ululations 
while dancing around and waving their long curly tails. In the midst of 
the foremost monkeys, Aìgada said to Hanumän, “Your feat is without 
compare. You have saved our lives and rendered a great service to Räma, 
who will soon be freed of His grief. What marvelous determination and 
valor you have displayed, dear Hanumän!” 
Aìgada and Hanumän sat encircled by powerful Vanaras, even as Indra

316 
and Sürya are surrounded by the other gods. As Aìgada questioned him, 
Hanumän described in detail all the events that had occurred since he 
left. The monkeys were delighted to hear how he had killed so many 
powerful Räkñasas and wrought havoc in Lanka, but they were horrified 
to learn of Rävaëa’s terrible threat to Sétä. Aìgada decided that 
immediate action was required. “How can we report to Räma that Sétä 
lies in such a sorry state? We must recover Her from Lanka. Here are 
monkeys as powerful as the gods. We shall all of us proceed swiftly to 
Lanka. Let us destroy that city, kill the evil Rävaëa and rescue Sétä. 
Then we can return to Sugréva and Räma.” 
Jambavan did not agree with Aìgada. “Your suggestion is not wise, O 
mighty monkey. We were not enjoined to kill Rävaëa or bring back Sétä; 
we have been asked only to locate Her and report to Räma of Her 
whereabouts. That prince has vowed to rescue Her Himself. Even if we 
should somehow succeed without Räma, we would falsify His vow.” 
The monkeys accepted Jambavan’s advice. The old king of the bears was 
always wise and he considered everything carefully. He was right. It was 
better to report back to Kishkindha. Then they could go to Lanka united 
with all the other monkeys, headed by Räma and Lakñman. There would 
be plenty of opportunities for fighting at that time. 
The monkeys got up and immediately set out toward Kishkindha. With 
Hanumän at their head they bounded back as fast as they could. Within 
a few days they reached the Madhuvan forest, which lay not far from 
Kishkindha. The forest was extensive and filled with trees loaded with 
fruits and honeycombs. The monkeys took Aìgada’s permission to drink 
the honey, which was actually meant for Sugréva, and they consumed it 
in large quantities. They became intoxicated and danced merrily here 
and there. Some of them sang loudly while others laughed hysterically. 
Some leaned unsteadily upon one another and still others lay flat on the 
ground. They rolled about and slapped their sides. Rolling the beeswax 
into balls they pelted one another in sport. They ripped down boughs 
from the trees and whirled them around in mock fights. Leaping from 
tree to tree they raised a great tumult in the forest.  
The Madhuvan forest was guarded by a Vanara general named 
Dadhimukha. When he saw that thousands of monkeys were tearing 
down the trees and taking the honey he became infuriated. He

317 
dispatched a number of his guards to stop them. Accosted by the guards, 
the monkeys in Aìgada’s party laughed and fought with them. They 
took hold of the guards by their legs and dragged them about. Others 
they tossed into the air and slapped around with their palms.  
When even Dadhimukha himself was beaten by Aìgada, he decided to 
go and inform Sugréva of the situation. Dadhimukha told the monkey 
king how Aìgada and Hanumän, along with thousands of other 
monkeys, were wrecking the king’s personal orchard and stealing his 
honey. However, upon hearing this report, the intelligent Sugréva 
became joyful. He turned and spoke to Lakñman, who was by his side. 
“There can be no doubt that Aìgada’s party has returned successful. O 
noble Lakñman, my guess is that Hanumän has found Sétä. These 
monkeys would not make so bold with my grove and its honey had they 
failed in their mission.” 
Lakñman rejoiced and ran to tell Räma the news. Sugréva told 
Dadhimukha that he should tolerate the misbehavior of the search party 
and send the monkeys into Kishkindha.  
Dadhimukha bowed to Sugréva and left at once. Realizing that Hanumän 
had accomplished a great service to the king he felt gladdened. As he 
raced back to the Madhuvan with Sugréva’s message he forgot all about 
the beating he had received. Back in the orchard he saw all the 
monkeys, who by now had become sober, standing about urinating on 
the trees. He sought out Aìgada and bowed before him. “Please forgive 
me, O prince. I should not have tried to restrain you. Sugréva very much 
desires to see you and Hanumän. Please go there with all speed.” 
Aìgada spoke kindly to Dadhimukha. Then he raised his arm and 
shouted to the other monkeys, “All right. Let us now go to Kishkindha! 
Sugréva and Räma are expecting us!” 
Sugréva awaited their arrival eagerly. He was sure that they had 
succeeded. It had been almost three months since their departure. There 
was no possibility that Aìgada would have returned if he had failed. The 
monkey king reassured Räma, who was experiencing deep anxiety over 
Sétä. Räma looked up with tear-stained eyes at Sugréva. This was their 
last chance. All the other parties had returned without success. What if 
Aìgada’s group had also failed? Räma sat by Sugréva, anxiously waiting 
Aìgada’s news.

318 
Suddenly they heard cries in the distance and saw a cloud of dust rising 
upwards as Aìgada and his party rushed toward Kishkindha. Sugréva 
stretched and curled his tail in joy. He saw Aìgada and Hanumän at the 
head of the party, bounding swiftly toward him. They appeared like 
thundering clouds driven along by the wind. Within a few minutes they 
had arrived and were prostrating themselves before Sugréva and Räma. 
Hanumän sat before Räma with folded palms. “My lord, Sétä has been 
found,” he said. 
Tears sprang to Räma’s eyes. He jumped up and said eagerly, “Tell Me 
everything about that godly lady, O gallant one. Is She well? Where is 
She? Where indeed is that wicked wretch Rävaëa?” 
With Aìgada’s permission, Hanumän related everything to Räma and 
Sugréva, describing in detail how he had jumped across the ocean and 
wrought havoc in Lanka. He told them how Sétä was pining for Räma 
and would not even look at Rävaëa. He then gave Sétä’s message to 
Räma, along with Her ornament. 
Räma took Sétä’s yellow jewel from Hanumän. He pressed it to His 
bosom and wept softly. Comforted by Lakñman He said, “Even as a cow 
sheds milk upon seeing its calf, so My heart melts upon seeing this jewel. 
It originally belonged to Indra and was given to Sétä by King Janaka. By 
seeing this brilliant gem I have directly gained sight of My noble father-
in-law as well as My beloved wife Sétä.” 
Räma asked Hanumän to repeat Sétä’s speech again and again. He was 
pained to learn of Her sorry plight and felt Her words to be His only 
consolation. The monkey narrated to Räma his entire conversation with 
Sétä. When he stopped speaking Räma sat silently for some time 
absorbed in thoughts of Sétä. At last He said to Hanumän, “You have 
accomplished a great deed, dear Hanumän. None but Garuòa or the 
wind-god himself could have achieved this feat. Who could leap across 
the expansive ocean? Who, having once entered Lanka as an enemy, 
could ever hope to emerge alive? You are a first-class servant, O monkey. 
You have achieved all that was asked of you and more.” 
Praising Hanumän in various ways, Räma lamented that He could not 
repay the monkey for the service he had rendered. All He could offer 
him was His embrace. “O Hanumän, that is all I can call My own at this 
time,” Räma said as He took hold of Hanumän and tightly hugged him.

319 
Räma then began to consider how to recover Sétä. How could He and 
millions of monkeys cross the ocean? He again felt despondent and asked 
Sugréva if he had any ideas. The monkey replied, “In my opinion, a 
bridge should be constructed across the ocean. There is no need to 
lament. We now know Sétä’s whereabouts, and we have amassed an army 
that is more than capable of annihilating the demons. I am confident, 
for I perceive many good omens and my mind feels delighted.” 
After hearing Sugréva speak, Räma became determined. He said to the 
monkeys, “I am surely able to cross this sea, either by the mystic power I 
have acquired through asceticism, by throwing a bridge over it, or by 
drying it up with My fiery arrows. O Hanumän, tell us of Lanka’s 
fortifications and defenses, for we shall soon arrive there for battle.” 
Hanumän described everything he had seen in Lanka. The city was atop 
a great mountain thickly covered with forests. At the edge of the city 
was a wide moat infested with alligators. All around Lanka were vast 
ramparts with steel-barred drawbridges and gates. Hordes of Räkñasas 
prowled about the ramparts, holding spiked clubs which could kill a 
hundred warriors with a single blow. Great catapults were lined along 
the defensive walls, as well as machines which could fire blazing iron 
darts to a distance of ten miles. Rävaëa’s forces were all but unlimited in 
number. They were highly trained and could use every kind of weapon, 
and they remained constantly alert to any danger. They had already had 
enough time to repair the damage caused by Hanumän and would now 
be especially vigilant, expecting Räma’s attack.  
When Hanumän finished speaking, Räma said fearlessly, “Without delay 
I shall destroy this great city of Lanka. Let us immediately prepare to 
depart. It is the auspicious midday hour. Favorable constellations augur 
our success. Having abducted Sétä, the despicable Rävaëa shall not 
escape with his life.” 
Sugréva warmly applauded Räma, who then began issuing orders. He 
asked Sugréva’s commander of troops, Néla, to lead an advance party out 
of Kishkindha. They should prepare the way for the whole army, 
ensuring that no hostile troops lay in ambush. Only the most powerful 
monkeys should go, as a difficult task lay ahead. Räma personally named 
the best monkey warriors: Gaja, Gavaya, Gandhamädana, Rishabha, 
Dwivida, Mainda and others. Then he said, “Mounting Hanumän’s back,

320 
I myself shall go, even as Indra rides upon his elephant Airävata. I shall 
march in the center of the army cheering the troops as they rush like a 
flood. Lakñman should mount Aìgada’s back, as Kuvera would ride upon 
the elephant Sarvabhauma, who guards the eastern quarter of the 
universe.” 
Sugréva bowed to Räma and then gave detailed instructions to his 
monkeys. Gradually, the many millions of powerful monkeys moved off 
in a southerly direction. Springing and bounding in joy they proceeded 
swiftly like masses of clouds driven by a gale. They roared and shouted 
their determination, “We will slaughter Rävaëa and the Räkñasas. Not 
one shall survive!” 
The monkeys sportingly lifted and tossed each other around. They leapt 
up trees and hills and jumped upon one another’s backs. As they pressed 
forward they roared like the tumultuous ocean. At the rear of the 
monkeys came Jambavan and his contingent of bears. In the midst of 
them all were Räma and Lakñman, seated upon the backs of Hanumän 
and Aìgada. They looked like the sun and moon conjoined with Jupiter 
and Venus and surrounded by innumerable stars.  
Lakñman spoke to His elder brother. “The omens are all good, Räma. A 
gentle breeze follows us and the sun shines brightly. The beasts and birds 
run and fly along with us. This army of monkeys and bears are roaring in 
joy and they are ablaze with splendor. In the night skies I have observed 
numerous auspicious portents. Undoubtedly Your success is imminent, 
dear brother.” 
Räma smiled as He rocked about on the back of Hanumän, who was 
racing ahead with swift steps. The vast party raised an enormous dust 
cloud which screened the sky. They were like a continuous line of clouds 
covering the heavens. When they crossed rivers, the currents flowed 
backwards for many miles. Bounding through lakes, they caused them to 
overflow and flood the surrounding land. They broke down trees and 
smashed rocks, haughtily vaunting their prowess to one another. 
Traveling by day and by night they quickly approached the southern 
shore of the sea. 
When they reached the ocean Räma spoke to Sugréva. “Here lies the 
vast sea, O valiant monkey. This lord of the rivers cannot be crossed 
easily. Some device is required. Let us camp here and deliberate upon

321 
our next course of action.” 
When the army came down onto the beach it stretched for miles like a 
second ocean. It created a noise that drowned out the roar of the sea as 
the monkeys discussed how to reach Lanka. None was capable of 
emulating Hanumän’s incredible leap. The Vanaras and bears stared out 
at the tossing waves, wondering what Räma and Sugréva would decide to 
do next. 
Chapter 2 
Panic in Lanka 
In Lanka, Rävaëa had assembled his ministers for a full council meeting. 
Seeing the terrible carnage and destruction wrought by Hanumän, the 
demon spoke to his advisors. “This city, which we previously thought 
unassailable, has been penetrated and wrecked by a mere monkey. My 
gardens are destroyed, our temple has been outraged and some of the 
topmost Räkñasas have been slain, including my own son Prince Aksha. 
Indeed, that wretched monkey has single-handedly turned the city 
upside down.” 
Rävaëa looked around at his advisors. He asked them to carefully 
deliberate and then decide on their next course of action. The demon 
king was apprehensive. He was sure that Räma and His army would 
somehow cross the ocean before long. And Hanumän’s demonstration of 
strength and power had been astonishing. If the rest of the monkeys 
were like him…  
Rävaëa continued, “I am depending upon your advice, O Räkñasas. It is 
said that he is a wise person who, before an undertaking, seeks the 
counsel of learned persons versed in the scripture. However, he who 
simply acts without due consideration and advice will quickly come to 
ruin.” 
The demon king’s generals were all powerful, but they lacked 
intelligence and political wisdom. Without understanding the full extent 
and power of the Vanara forces they spoke of them derisively. The

322 
Räkñasas boasted of their own prowess, dismissing Räma and His army as 
being of no consequence. They reminded Rävaëa how he had defeated 
the gods, Gandharvas, Yakñas, Nägas, Daityas, Dänavas and other foes in 
battle. Rävaëa had even repulsed Death himself. What fear could he 
have of an army of humans and animals? 
One of the mightiest Räkñasas, Prahasta, stood up and, with his palms 
folded toward Rävaëa, spoke in a voice that boomed like thunder. “We 
were caught unawares by Hanumän, who sneaked into Lanka. Had I 
been prepared for him, then that monkey would not have left this city 
alive. Indeed, I can sweep the entire globe clean of monkeys in no time 
at all. Simply command me, O lord.” 
Another powerful Räkñasa named Virupaksha stood up and spoke 
furiously, holding aloft his frightful iron bludgeon which was stained 
with flesh and blood. “How can we tolerate this monkey’s affront? Order 
me and I shall leave this very hour! I will smash Räma and Lakñman with 
my iron club and crush the entire monkey army. Even if they flee into 
the dread deep or take refuge in the heavens, they shall not escape my 
wrath.” 
One Räkñasa suggested that they employ trickery, disguising themselves 
as humans and infiltrating Räma’s army. They could pretend to be a 
contingent dispatched by Räma’s brother Bharata. Once they entered 
his army, the rest of the Räkñasas could attack from the air. The Vanara 
army would then be torn to be pieces by a two-pronged assault both from 
within and without. 
One after another, each of the leading Räkñasas declared that he alone 
could defeat Räma and His troops. Rävaëa should remain peacefully in 
Lanka. The demon forces would swiftly cross the ocean and annihilate 
the monkeys before they could even approach the city. Standing 
together, the Räkñasa generals raised a great tumult in Rävaëa’s 
assembly hall. They grasped their bows, arrows, spears, pikes, javelins 
and iron maces and asked Rävaëa for his order to depart for battle. 
Vibhishana, Rävaëa’s younger brother, then stood up. As the clamor of 
the other demons died down he spoke to Rävaëa. “The wise declare that 
force should only be used after other methods of achieving one’s aim 
have failed. Furthermore, force is said to be likely to succeed only when 
the enemy is weaker, devoid of virtue or condemned by their own

323 
adverse fate. Räma is ever alert and possesses boundless might. He is 
virtue incarnate and is assisted by every divine power. No one who 
knows what is best would counsel an attack upon Räma.” 
Vibhishana was not like the other Räkñasas. He did not share their 
inclination for wanton living and violent behavior. Although he was 
Rävaëa’s blood brother, Vibhishana was given to meditation and the 
practice of virtue. He also realized Räma’s divine nature. He spoke 
gravely, intent on his brother’s welfare. “Have you forgotten how Räma 
disposed of Khara and his troops? Think carefully about Hanumän’s feat 
in leaping across the ocean and wrecking Lanka. Do not underestimate 
the power of Räma and His servants.” 
Vibhishana advised Rävaëa to give Sétä back to Räma. If he did not do 
so, then before long he would witness the total destruction of Lanka. All 
the heroic Räkñasas would perish like moths entering a fire. Rävaëa 
should pursue the path of righteousness if he wanted to see his city and 
his followers survive. 
Rävaëa listened to his brother without comment. He did not like 
Vibhishana’s advice, but it made him somewhat circumspect. The demon 
king then dismissed his assembly saying he would decide the next day 
what should be done. 
The following day at dawn, Vibhishana again approached Rävaëa. As he 
passed through the long, wide passageways of Rävaëa’s palace he heard 
the sound of Vedic hymns being chanted by the Yatudhanas, blessing 
the Räkñasa king that he might attain victory. Vibhishana knew that 
Rävaëa was not going to achieve victory against Räma. He had to avert 
the total devastation of his people, which he now saw as imminent.  
Vibhishana entered Rävaëa’s chambers and greeted his brother with 
gentle and soothing words. Rävaëa glanced over at an ornate golden seat 
and Vibhishana sat down looking intently upon his brother. Vibhishana 
had studied all the codes of religion. He knew what was right in every 
circumstance and he now tendered beneficial advice to Rävaëa. “Ever 
since Sétä was abducted, there have been numerous bad omens in Lanka. 
The sacrificial fire emits sparks and is enveloped by smoke. The cows’ 
milk has dried up. Horses neigh dolefully even though well-fed and 
tended. Crows swarm about, uttering harsh cries. Jackals howl ominously 
day and night.”

324 
Vibhishana described many other types of evil portents and again asked 
Rävaëa to return Sétä to Räma. “This action alone will save you, all the 
other Räkñasas, and this city from destruction,” Vibhishana said. “Even 
if you find me in some way self-motivated you should not ignore my 
advice, for doing so will have terrible consequences.” 
Rävaëa sat shaking his head. He grunted contemptuously and replied to 
his brother. “How can Räma stand before me in battle? Under no 
circumstances shall I return Sétä. Today in council I shall issue orders for 
battle.” 
Vibhishana shook his head sorrowfully. It was hopeless. Rävaëa seemed 
bent upon his own destruction.  
Rävaëa dismissed Vibhishana and sat brooding for a while. He had to 
have Sétä. For the last ten months he had tried everything to win Her 
over and was not going to give up now. If he could only kill Räma, then 
surely She would be won. But this Räma was no ordinary man; that 
much was obvious. And if the monkeys were all like Hanumän, then he 
had a real battle on his hands. No matter. There was no question of an 
ignominious surrender. A fight to the last was the only thing acceptable. 
If Räma were a mere mortal man, then He would certainly succumb to 
the might of the Räkñasas. And if He were Viñëu Himself? Well, defeat 
at the hands of a powerful foe was never shameful.  
Rävaëa would not be cowed by any enemy. He would fight. The demon 
rose up and swept toward his assembly hall followed by bards who 
uttered poems in his praise. Coming from his inner chambers he 
mounted a golden chariot and sped down the wide road that led to the 
hall. He was surrounded on all sides by Räkñasas attired in diversely 
styled robes and adorned with every kind of jewel. These powerful 
Räkñasas, capable of contending single-handedly with tens of thousands 
of warriors, roared loudly. They held upraised weapons of every sort in 
their hands. 
As Rävaëa and his generals approached the hall, trumpets blared and 
conch shells blasted. Innumerable kettledrums were beaten as the demon 
king went through the great doorway into his hall. Rävaëa strode across 
the golden floor of the hall toward his crystal throne, which was spread 
with the skins of the priyaka deer. After taking his seat he ordered that 
a full council of war be assembled.

325 
Immediately swift messengers flew off to every part of the city, calling 
for all the Räkñasa leaders. Hearing Rävaëa’s order, the mighty Räkñasas 
rushed toward the assembly hall from all directions. Some mounted great 
chariots, some rode elephants, and others ran on foot. They quickly 
entered the assembly hall as lions might enter a rocky mountain cave. 
After prostrating themselves before Rävaëa, they took their seats, each 
according to his rank. As they sat gazing on their ruler’s face, they 
appeared like the Vasus surrounding Indra. 
Vibhishana took his seat next to Rävaëa on a throne of gold. When 
Rävaëa saw that everyone was present and sitting silently he turned to 
Prahasta and spoke. “You should issue orders to ensure that Lanka’s 
defenses are fortified. All four kinds of troops should be made ready, for 
a great fight is at hand.”  
Prahasta immediately rose and gave orders to his key Räkñasas. Within a 
short time he returned to Rävaëa and said, “It is done.” 
Rävaëa then addressed the entire assembly. “All of you know well your 
duty in all circumstances. My undertakings executed through all of you 
have never proved futile. I wish to enjoy the royal fortune forever, 
ruling over Lanka with justice and compassion. However, we now stand 
threatened by Räma and His army for the sake of Sétä, whom I abducted. 
I cannot part with that lovely lady, smitten as I am by the shafts of love. 
Although She has not yet submitted to my advances, She has promised 
me that after one year has passed She will be mine. Therefore I must by 
all means repulse Räma’s attack. O Räkñasas, tell me if this meets with 
your approval or not.” 
Rävaëa lied about Sétä. She had never indicated that She would accept 
him at any time. He gazed around the assembly with his ten heads, 
looking for his subjects’ agreement. Except perhaps for Vibhishana, he 
did not expect that any would argue with him. But suddenly his powerful 
brother Kumbhakarna stood up in a rage.  
“O Räkñasa, you now seek our counsel, but what advice did you ask when 
you stole Sétä from Räma?” he thundered. “Actions taken without due 
consideration of their righteousness and without recourse to proper 
counsel lead only to grief. On an impulse alone you abducted Sétä from 
Räma, and now you face a severe consequence. Fortunately, however, 
you have me as your well-wisher. I shall make good your foolish action by

326 
standing against Räma and Lakñman on the battlefield. Give up your 
fear and rest at ease. The two human brothers will not return with life 
once they face me.” 
Kumbhakarna was as powerful as Rävaëa, but he had once been tricked 
by the gods into asking a boon from Brahmä that he might enjoy six 
months of sleep at a time. Brahmä had thus said he would remain awake 
for only one day every six months. The day of the council happened to 
be his one day of wakefulness. The following day he would again fall into 
a deep slumber. He was nevertheless devoted to his brother and was 
prepared to do whatever he could to help him. Kumbhakarna was wise 
and he knew Räma was a formidable foe. He wanted to fight Him and 
either attain a glorious victory or, as was more likely, die gloriously at 
Räma’s hands. But first he would need to be awakened. 
Although smarting from his brother’s admonishment, Rävaëa thanked 
Kumbhakarna for his support. Then Mahaparsva, a leader of some of 
Rävaëa’s troops, stood and asked him a question. “My lord, having 
secured the beautiful Sétä, why do you not simply enjoy Her by force? 
Who can prevent you or do anything about it?” 
Rävaëa then told them of the long-past incident with Rambha. “This is 
a secret I have never revealed,” he said. “Nalakuvara’s curse was 
reinforced by the words of Brahmä himself. Indeed, the powerful creator, 
upon whom my own strength rests, said that if I ever again violate a 
woman, my life will end immediately.”  
Rävaëa looked around the assembly. The Räkñasas were dedicated to 
him and ready to fight with any enemy on his behalf. They sat awaiting 
his command. The demon king boasted to them of his power. “Surely 
Räma has not seen me in battle, as furious as the raging ocean and as 
swift as the wind. Otherwise, He would not be so foolish as to march on 
Lanka. He has not seen arrows like flaming serpents with forked tongues 
loosed in millions from my bow. Räma wants to face Death himself 
standing enraged on the battlefield. I shall consume Räma in no time. I 
will disperse His army as a the sun disperses a morning mist.” 
Rävaëa railed on for some time. When he at last became silent, 
Vibhishana stood up to speak. He knew it was more or less hopeless—
Rävaëa was already set on battle—but he had to make one last attempt 
to make his brother see sense. His voice echoed around the silent hall as

327 
everyone listened to his words. “By whom has the immense and highly 
venomous serpent, known as Sétä, been tied around your neck? That 
serpent has for its sharp fangs Sétä’s sweet smiles. Her bosom is its coils, 
Her five fingers are its five hoods and Her thoughts of Räma are its 
deadly poison. O Rävaëa, do not destroy your race. Before we see 
monkeys like great mountains bounding toward Lanka and arrows like 
thunderbolts falling on the heads of our warriors, return Sétä to Räma.” 
Vibhishana tried at length to convince Rävaëa of his folly. Although he 
was rebuked by various Räkñasas he insisted that the only way to save 
Lanka was to return Sétä. He made it clear that it was his duty as a 
counselor to tender advice conducive to the interests of his master. He 
would not neglect that duty out of weakness or fear, nor out of a desire 
to say something pleasing. Even if advice were distasteful, it should still 
be given by a counselor who properly understood his duty. And a wise 
leader was he who was able to hear both palatable and unpalatable 
advice, giving equal consideration to both. 
Indrajit became impatient and agitated upon hearing Vibhishana speak. 
He retorted. “How do you call yourself a Räkñasa, O weak uncle? Surely 
you are devoid of courage, virility, prowess, heroism and spirit. These 
two men can be slain by any Räkñasa, even the most insignificant among 
us. Why then do you tremble in fear?” 
Indrajit bragged about his own strength. He had overcome hosts of gods 
headed by Indra riding upon the celestial elephant Airävata. He vowed 
that he would kill Räma and Lakñman personally. Vibhishana rebuked 
him with strong words. “Being a mere boy, your intelligence is not 
mature. You cannot see what is right or wrong, dear child. Although 
called a son, you are actually your father’s enemy. You are evil-minded 
and deserve death, for your counsel will lead only to the death of all 
those who listen to you. You are indiscriminate, dull-witted, wicked and 
ignorant. You do not understand Räma’s power. There are none among 
the gods, Daityas, Dänavas or Räkñasas who can withstand the flaming 
arrows Räma will loose in combat.” 
Rävaëa had heard enough. He would not accept Vibhishana’s advice. 
All he wanted now was to get on with the fight that lay ahead. He spoke 
furiously. “It is better to live with an enraged serpent than a person who, 
although pretending to be a friend, is actually in league with the enemy.

328 
It is a fact that kinsfolk usually despise their chief even though he may 
be carrying out all his duties. The greatest danger lies in one’s own 
relatives, O disgrace of our race, for they may turn on one at any time. 
Although a brother, you are unworthy of my affection. Indeed, one 
bestowing love upon the unworthy obtains only grief.” 
Rävaëa vented his anger, insulting Vibhishana in various ways. He told 
him that had he not been his brother he would surely have killed him for 
his words. 
Vibhishana realized that there was nothing he could do to help the 
proud demon king. Along with his four ministers, who were his close 
followers and friends, he rose up into the air. Stationed in space, with 
mace in hand, he spoke to Rävaëa. “You who have addressed me with 
harsh words, O king, are deluded. Say what you will, for your 
intelligence is lost. Those speaking pleasant words can easily be found, O 
Rävaëa, but one who speaks unpalatable truth is rare. One fallen under 
Death’s Sway does not heed the words of wisdom offered by a well-
wisher. I have tried my best, wishing to save you from certain 
destruction. Now be happy in my absence. I can no longer tolerate your 
abusive speech, even though you are my elder. Farewell. I shall now 
depart.” 
Vibhishana soared away from the assembly hall, accompanied by his four 
friends. Rävaëa made no attempt to stop him and was glad to see him go. 
Now there were none who would oppose his desires. He issued orders to 
prepare for battle. 
Chapter 3 
Räma Confronts the Ocean 
Vibhishana had decided to join Räma. He crossed the ocean and arrived 
at Räma’s camp in less than an hour. The intelligent Räkñasa stayed in 
the air and asked to see the leader of the monkeys. Sugréva quickly 
appeared. Seeing the five huge Räkñasas in the sky wearing armor and 
adorned with celestial jewels, he was apprehensive. He thought carefully.

329 
Had the Räkñasas come to attack the monkeys? Perhaps this was some 
kind of cunning trick, of which Räkñasas were so fond. Sugréva looked 
closely at Vibhishana. The Räkñasa looked like a mountain or a cloud 
and vied with Indra in splendor. All five Räkñasas were holding various 
weapons.  
Sugréva spoke to Hanumän. “Surely these Räkñasas have some malicious 
intentions at heart. Let us take up rocks and trees. Leaping into the air 
we shall quickly finish them before they can execute their plan.” 
As Sugréva spoke, Vibhishana addressed him from the sky. “There is an 
evil Räkñasa by the name of Rävaëa. I am his brother Vibhishana. He 
has carried away Räma’s consort by using trickery and deceit. Although I 
repeatedly advised him to return the princess, the demon would not 
listen. I have thus come here to seek Räma’s shelter.” 
Vibhishana asked the monkeys to inform Räma of his presence. Sugréva 
was still highly suspicious. He ran up to Räma and said, “One of the 
enemy has suddenly made his appearance here. No doubt he seeks an 
opportunity to kill us when we are unaware. Perhaps he is a spy. There 
may be other invisible Räkñasas around. No trust should ever be reposed 
in these demons. Please tell us how we should deal with this one.”  
Sugréva told Räma Vibhishana’s name and who he was, as well as what 
he said. The monkey king was sure that Vibhishana had evil intentions 
and had been sent there by Rävaëa himself. He suggested that the 
Räkñasa and his followers be killed immediately. Räma listened carefully. 
He looked around at the other monkey chiefs who sat with him. “You 
have heard Sugréva’s suggestion. What do the rest of you think?” 
Each of them gave their opinion. They all felt that Vibhishana was to be 
treated with the utmost caution and suspicion, that he should be 
interrogated and tested before they placed any trust in him. 
Räma then turned to Hanumän and asked his opinion. The monkey had 
studied all the scriptures, and bowing to Räma he replied, “Although 
You are well able to ascertain for Yourself this Räkñasa’s intentions, You 
nevertheless seek our opinion out of humility and kindness. I shall 
therefore speak my feelings in this regard. In my view we should accept 
Vibhishana as our own. I do not think he has any devious purpose.” 
Hanumän said that he had not detected any deceit in the speech or 
expression of Vibhishana. If a person has ill motives, then it is always

330 
revealed in their expression. Hanumän felt that Vibhishana had wisely 
decided that Räma’s cause was superior to Rävaëa’s. It appeared that the 
Räkñasa was moral and desired to assist Räma.  
Having given his opinion, which differed from that of his companions, 
Hanumän asked Räma for His view. Räma thanked all of them for their 
suggestions and then said, “I cannot refuse to receive a person who has 
sought My shelter. Whatever his intentions I must accept a supplicant. 
This is never condemned in the eyes of good people.” 
Sugréva was alarmed by Räma’s statement. He was still convinced that 
Vibhishana was inimical. The monkey king tried again to convince 
Räma. “What does it matter whether his intentions are good or bad?” 
Sugréva argued. “After all, he is a Räkñasa and will always revert to his 
own nature. Furthermore, if he can abandon even his own brother, then 
how can we ever trust him as our friend?” 
Sugréva wanted Vibhishana to be taken captive and perhaps even killed. 
The Räkñasa was Rävaëa’s brother. His allegiance to Räma would never 
exceed his deeper attachment to his own people. Sugréva looked 
anxiously at Räma, who smiled and replied gently, “Your concerns are 
well-founded, O noble Vanara, but I have given it careful thought. Even 
if this demon is malevolent, what harm can he do? I can annihilate the 
entire horde of Räkñasas with My fingertip. We should not have any 
fear. And we should always abide by the instructions of the Vedas.” 
Räma explained that even an enemy must be received with hospitality 
according to scriptural rules. If a person comes seeking shelter, then one 
must offer him protection even at the cost of one’s own life. No 
consideration should be made of his intentions, good or bad. If a 
supplicant is turned away and perishes as a result, then he takes all the 
pious merits of the man who turned him away. Great sin is incurred by 
such neglect. Räma concluded, “If a person comes to Me saying, ‘I am 
Yours’ only once, then I shall give him courage and protection from all 
danger forever after. This is My solemn vow made here before you all. 
Even if Rävaëa himself came to Me, I would not refuse him shelter. 
Bring Vibhishana here, for I have already granted him safety.” 
Everyone present was moved deeply by Räma’s speech. With tears 
flowing from his eyes Sugréva said, “It is no wonder that You should 
speak in this way, O Räma. You are the best knower of what is right and

331 
are always devoted to virtue. My doubts are gone. Let Vibhishana enjoy 
our friendship on an equal level with all of us.” 
Sugréva gave Vibhishana Räma’s message. Feeling reassured, the Räkñasa 
descended to the earth along with his devoted followers. He went before 
Räma and lay flat on the ground with his bejeweled hands touching 
Räma’s feet. Getting up onto his knees, he addressed Räma respectfully. 
“I am Vibhishana, the younger half-brother of Rävaëa. Insulted by him, 
I have come here, abandoning my family, friends and home. O Räma, 
You are the only shelter of all beings. My very life now depends upon 
You.” 
Räma glanced affectionately at Vibhishana. He spoke soothingly to the 
Räkñasa, welcoming him. Räma then asked him about Rävaëa’s strengths 
and weaknesses. “Please tell me in truth all that you know about Rävaëa 
and Lanka.” 
Vibhishana told Räma about Rävaëa’s boon. He described the power of 
Rävaëa’s chief warriors—Kumbhakarna, Indrajit, Prahasta, Mahodara 
and others. All of them were capable of facing the mightiest fighters 
even among the gods. Accompanied by them, Rävaëa had given battle to 
the four guardians of the universe, all of whom he routed. 
Räma replied to Vibhishana, “I have indeed heard of all these exploits of 
Rävaëa which you have truthfully related. Hear me now! After killing 
in battle the ten-headed Rävaëa along with all his followers, I shall 
crown you king of Lanka. There need be no doubt whatsoever. I swear 
by My three brothers that I shall not return to Ayodhya without slaying 
Rävaëa with his sons, kinsfolk and people.” 
Vibhishana again bowed to Räma and promised to render Him every 
assistance in the upcoming battle. Räma ordered Lakñman to go at once 
and fetch some seawater. With that water Räma immediately 
consecrated Vibhishana as the ruler of Lanka. Witnessing this display of 
grace all the monkeys leapt about joyfully, roaring and shouting, while 
Vibhishana sat with his head bowed. 
Hanumän then approached Vibhishana and asked how the army could 
possibly cross the ocean. After thinking for some while, Vibhishana 
suggested that Räma personally ask the ocean-god to reveal some means 
of crossing. The ocean had been excavated by a great king in Räma’s line 
and thus the deity would no doubt wish to render Him some service in

332 
return. Räma was pleased with Vibhishana’s advice and He spread a seat 
of kusha grass on the seashore. He sat there and began to pray to the god 
to reveal himself.  
As Räma sat on the beach Rävaëa’s spy flew over the Vanara army. He 
determined its size and power and returned with all speed to Rävaëa. 
Falling before the demon king the spy submitted, “Like another sea, a 
deep and immeasurable flood of monkeys and bears is moving toward 
Lanka. They are spread out for one hundred miles in all directions. At 
their head are the two powerful princes, Räma and Lakñman. Even now 
they are camped on the seashore, determining some means of crossing 
over it.” 
Rävaëa became perturbed. He ordered a demon named Suka to carry a 
message to Sugréva. “Tell the monkey that he has nothing to gain by 
assaulting Lanka,” he ordered. “I have never done him any harm. What 
does it matter to him if I have carried off Sétä?” 
Rävaëa told Suka to warn Sugréva off. It would not be possible for 
monkeys and bears to defeat Räkñasas. Not even the gods could 
overpower Lanka; what then could a few mere mortal creatures do? They 
had best return peacefully to their own country. 
The powerful Suka turned himself into a large bird and flew swiftly 
across the sea. He swooped over the monkey army and found Sugréva. 
From the air the Räkñasa delivered Rävaëa’s message, but even as he was 
speaking the monkeys suddenly sprang up and dragged him down. They 
began to beat him violently. Suka cried out to Räma for mercy. “Only an 
envoy who has spoken his own view rather than his master’s message 
deserves death. O Räma, I have faithfully related Rävaëa’s message and 
should therefore not be slain.” 
Räma ordered the monkeys to let Suka go. The demon again rose into 
the air and asked for Sugréva’s reply to Rävaëa. The monkey king said to 
the demon, “Rävaëa should be informed that I am neither his friend nor 
his well-wisher. Indeed, he has formed an enmity with Räma and is thus 
my sworn enemy as well. For stealing Sétä from Räma the demon 
deserves death at my hands, and that he shall receive in due course.” 
Sugréva sent a message that Rävaëa would not escape even if he sought 
shelter in the furthermost part of the universe. He would certainly be 
killed along with his entire demon force. The Räkñasa was no match for

333 
Räma and his army. Rävaëa obviously lacked prowess because he stole 
Sétä when Räma was absent. He now faced a terrible calamity in the 
shape of Sugréva and his army. 
After Suka had left, Räma sat with a concentrated mind at the edge of 
the sea. He meditated on the sea-god Samudra and waited patiently for 
him to appear. Three days and nights passed as Räma sat motionless on 
the beach, but still the ocean deity did not come. Räma became enraged 
and He spoke to Lakñman. “Just see the vanity of this god. Although I 
have sat here humbly beseeching his audience, he has not appeared. 
Alas, forbearance, gentleness and politeness of speech are construed as 
weaknesses by the wicked. The world regards with respect only those 
who are arrogant, harsh and given to meting out strong punishments. O 
Lakñman, neither fame, nor victory, nor even popularity can be won by 
conciliation. I shall therefore stand with My bow and flaming arrows. I 
shall dry up the ocean this very day. The monkeys may go on foot to 
Lanka. Watch now as I exhibit My prowess.” 
Räma was furious with Samudra. Feeling insulted, He stood firmly on 
the beach, forcibly stringing His great bow. His eyes were red and He 
blazed like the fire of universal destruction. He instantaneously released 
hundreds of fleet arrows toward the sea. The ocean began to roar and 
rise up in massive billows. Clouds of steam covered its surface as the 
flaming arrows entered the water. Long, writhing sea serpents and great 
dark whales were thrown about. Waves resembling the Mandara 
mountain were seen to rise up one after another. Even far beneath the 
ocean the Dänavas and Nägas felt disturbed and cried out in distress.  
Lakñman rushed toward Räma and held onto His bow. “There is no need 
for this display, dear brother!” He exclaimed. “Men of Your caliber never 
give way to anger. Your purpose will surely be achieved without such 
violence.” 
In the sky invisible åñis called out, “O Räma. Hold! Be at peace!” 
But Räma’s anger did not abate. He placed upon His bow a large golden 
arrow and began thinking of the mantras to invoke the brahmästra. 
Stretching His bow with vehemence He gazed furiously at the raging sea. 
Suddenly the heavens were enveloped by darkness and fierce winds 
blew. Large bolts of lightning were seen and the earth itself shook. The 
ocean surged back a distance of ten miles and rose up to a tremendous

334 
height. Räma stood immovable with his arrow trained on the waters. 
Then suddenly before everyone’s sight, Samudra appeared. Rising up 
from the ocean, he seemed like the bright sun at dawn. He shone like a 
glossy black gem and was adorned with brilliant gold ornaments. Clad in 
red robes with a garland of red flowers, he had eyes like large lotuses. A 
wreath of celestial flowers crowned his head. On his chest was a 
prominent jewel which shed a white luster all around. Surrounded by 
many river goddesses he came before Räma and placed before Him a 
large heap of shining jewels taken from the ocean depths. He spoke in a 
sonorous voice. 
“Every element has its natural state, O Räma. My nature is to be 
fathomless and unaffordable. I did not wish to deviate from my 
constitutional position, neither from infatuation nor from fear. 
Nevertheless, I shall tell You the means by which I may be crossed by 
Your army. The monkey named Nala is a son of Viçvakarmä, the 
heavenly architect. He can construct a bridge over me which I will 
sustain.” 
Samudra assured Räma that He would be able to cross him without fear. 
The deity would ensure that the fierce creatures inhabiting his depths 
would not be aggressive. Räma still stood with His arrow at the ready on 
His bow. However, He was now pleased with the sea-god and He said, 
“This unfailing shaft must be released. Tell Me, O abode of Varuëa, 
where I should send this arrow?” 
Samudra asked Räma to fire the arrow upon a part of his waters to the 
north. There were numerous sinful demons inhabiting that region and 
Samudra did not like his waters being polluted by this touch. Räma 
assented and shot His fiery arrow to the north, drying up that whole 
section of the ocean. Samudra then disappeared from view. 
Nala was enlivened by the task that faced him. He informed Räma that 
he had been granted a boon by Viçvakarmä, the gods’ engineer, who 
decreed that Nala’s abilities would equal his own. Nala was confident 
that he could build the bridge. He ordered the monkeys to fetch the 
necessary materials. The monkeys leapt about joyfully, applying 
themselves to the work with great energy.  
Soon there were thousands of trees and massive heaps of rocks piled on 
the beach. Nala had them thrown in the sea and they sent up huge

335 
splashes of water. Using lengths of creepers to measure and make 
straight lines Nala gradually constructed his bridge over the sea. The 
ocean allowed even great rocks to float on his waters. Binding together 
tree trunks, rocks and reeds, the monkeys built the bridge toward Lanka. 
On the first day they covered over one hundred miles. Becoming even 
more enthusiastic, they built one hundred and fifty miles on the second 
day and nearly two hundred on the third. In this way the bridge was 
completed in only five days and reached right across the ocean to the 
shores of Lanka. On the southern shore of Lanka stood Vibhishana and 
his ministers, maces in hand, ready to repulse any Räkñasas who tried to 
attack the bridge. 
The gods and Gandharvas, along with the celestial åñis, all stood in 
amazement as they gazed upon the bridge. It was eighty miles wide and 
eight hundred miles long. The monkeys and bears swarmed onto it 
shouting and roaring in joy. Like a great flood they swept toward Lanka. 
In their forefront were Räma and Lakñman mounted upon the backs of 
Hanumän and Aìgada. They soon reached Lanka and ordered the army 
to encamp on the shore. 
Räma sat with Lakñman and Sugréva. He told the monkey king to have 
his troops ready for battle at any time. He spoke of evil portents he had 
witnessed. “Winds full of dust are blowing. The earth is quaking and 
trees are falling. Dark clouds are thundering and giving forth drops of 
blood. On all sides there are ferocious beasts uttering fierce screams as 
they face the sun.”  
Räma described many omens and said that they foretold the destruction 
of both armies. “Eminent heroes among the Vanaras, bears and Räkñasas 
will soon be killed,” Räma said gravely. 
Sugréva had the army arrayed in battle formation. They spread out and 
surrounded the city of the Räkñasas from the eastern to the western side. 
As they approached Lanka they heard a deafening clamor of war drums 
from within. The monkeys rejoiced at hearing that hair-raising sound 
and they roared loudly, drowning out the drums. Hearing the terrifying 
roars, the demons clasped their weapons more tightly. 
Räma looked upon Lanka and felt a pang of separation from Sétä. Here 
She was at last. The vile Rävaëa also lay within this city tormenting the 
anguished princess. Räma was anxious to face the demon. He spoke to

336 
Lakñman. “Here is the splendid city of Lanka, built long ago by 
Viçvakarmä. It looks like the sky filled with white clouds.” 
Räma had the army deployed in a human-shaped formation with its arms 
reaching around the city. The most powerful monkeys were stationed at 
the various key points. Räma Himself, along with His brother, stood at 
the head of the formation. The monkeys took up gigantic trees and 
rocks, saying to one another, “Let us dash this city to pieces!” 
Chapter 4 
Rävaëa’s Evil Trickery 
In Lanka, Rävaëa received reports from his spies that the monkeys were 
amassed outside the city. The terrified Suka told him that Räma’s army 
was inestimable in size and power. He recommended that Rävaëa 
immediately return Sétä to Räma. Suka’s suggestion infuriated Rävaëa. 
“I would not give back Sétä even if the entire host of gods now stood 
outside Lanka!” he bellowed. “Oh, when shall my arrows dart toward 
Räma like bees toward flowers in spring? I shall eclipse His army even as 
the rising sun obscures the stars.” 
Rävaëa bragged of his power at length. He had no intention of making 
peace with Räma. The demon arrogantly asserted that his power was 
without compare. It would be a one-sided fight.  
The demon king was nevertheless impressed by the fact that the army 
had crossed the ocean by building a great bridge. He needed to more 
carefully assess their power and he ordered Suka and another Räkñasa, 
Säraëa, to enter the enemy ranks. “Disguise yourselves well and 
ascertain the exact size of this army. Find out who are the generals and 
who are Räma’s counselors. Tell me who is their commander-in-chief.” 
Suka and Säraëa disguised themselves as monkeys and penetrated deep 
into Räma’s army, but they could not find the end of his troops. The 
monkey forces occupied woods, mountains, rivers and flatland for as far 
as could be seen. It stretched back across the bridge all the way to the 
opposite shore, still moving toward Lanka. The sound of Räma’s army

337 
was tumultuous, and it struck fear into the hearts of the Räkñasas. 
As the two spies wandered amid Räma’s soldiers, Vibhishana detected 
them. He had them captured and brought before Räma. The monkeys 
kicked and pummeled them as they were dragged toward Räma, and the 
Räkñasas were terrified and afraid for their lives. They joined their 
palms and implored Räma, “Dear sir, we are two spies sent by Rävaëa to 
find out everything about your army. Please spare us.” 
Räma laughed heartily and replied, “You need have no fear for your 
lives, O night-rangers. If you have seen the entire army, then return to 
Rävaëa at once. If not, then I shall have Vibhishana show you whatever 
you wish to see. Then you may deliver the following message to your 
king.” 
Räma wanted Rävaëa to be fully informed of the immensity of the forces 
that now surrounded his city. Perhaps the foolish demon would see 
sense. Räma asked the spies to tell Rävaëa to display all his strength. 
The next day he would see his city with its defensive walls and arches 
broken down by Räma’s arrows. At daybreak, Räma said, He would let 
loose His terrible anger on the Räkñasas. 
The two spies were released and they sped back into the city. They went 
trembling before Rävaëa and spoke. “It seems to us that Räma and 
Lakñman alone could uproot Lanka with its walls, palaces and the entire 
host of Räkñasas. The glory and power of these brothers is limitless. They 
are united with an army of Vanaras who appear frightful and who are 
bellowing joyfully at the prospect of war. O lord, abandon your policy of 
antagonism while there is still time. Return Sétä to Räma.” 
Rävaëa roared angrily. Again his weak-hearted followers were 
suggesting something to which he could never agree. Again he said that 
Lanka was impenetrable even by the denizens of heaven, never mind a 
few monkeys. The spies were obviously afraid because they had been 
beaten by the monkeys, but Rävaëa would never give way to fear under 
any circumstances. Followed by Suka and Säraëa he went up to the top 
of his palace, wanting to see for himself the monkey army. 
Standing atop his snow-white palace, which was as high as dozens of tall 
palm trees, Rävaëa gazed around. Near the walls of the city he saw an 
ocean of dark-colored monkeys and bears. He focused his gaze upon the 
head of the army and asked Säraëa the names of the chief monkeys.

338 
Säraëa replied, “That colossal monkey who stands facing Lanka and 
roaring like a furious bull is Sugréva, their king. The one by his side who 
looks and thunders like a dark storm cloud is Néla, his commander. Near 
him the massive monkey who is pacing about and repeatedly yawning in 
fury is Aìgada, the crown prince. And there is Hanumän, who single-
handedly laid waste to Lanka. You have already met him.” 
Säraëa went on to describe all of the powerful monkey generals, 
pointing them out one by one. The awestruck Räkñasa praised the power 
of Räma’s army, which he felt was unassailable.  
Rävaëa looked carefully at the foremost monkeys. They were all 
standing firm with their faces toward the city. Brandishing thick trees 
and rocks resembling mountain peaks, they shouted and roared, eager 
for the battle to commence. Behind them stretched the vast army 
covering every visible part of the island of Lanka. Rävaëa saw Räma 
with Lakñman, shining together like the sun and the moon. Near them 
Vibhishana stood, holding his mace and surrounded by his four 
ministers. 
The demon king, agitated at heart and indignant, spoke harshly and 
angrily to his two spies, who stood with their heads bent low. “How have 
you dared to glorify in my presence the enemy forces? No wisdom or 
good sense exists in either of you. Indeed, the load of ignorance is borne 
by you both alone. By sheer good luck I have been able to retain the 
sovereignty of Lanka with stupid ministers like yourselves. I should have 
you both put to death at once. My anger is hardly abated even when I 
think of all your past services. Get out of here! I do not want to see your 
faces again.” 
Rävaëa ordered that some other spies be quickly brought. He told them 
to go among Räma’s army and try to ascertain their exact battle plan. 
They should discover everything about Räma: when He slept, when He 
ate, what were His habits. Equipped with this knowledge, Rävaëa felt 
confident he could repulse his enemy. 
The spies, headed by a demon named Sardula, quickly left in obedience 
to Rävaëa’s command. Reaching the top of the Suvala mountain they 
gazed around at the army of monkeys. The Räkñasas were beside 
themselves with fear as they scanned Räma’s vast forces. As they moved 
toward the army they were again discovered by Vibhishana, who was

339 
constantly on the lookout for Rävaëa’s emissaries. The monkeys beat the 
demons severely and dragged them before Räma, but the compassionate 
prince again ordered their release. 
The spies returned hastily to Lanka. Panting and stupefied with terror 
they fell before Rävaëa. The demon king said to Sardula, “You appear 
somewhat off-color, O mighty Räkñasa. I trust you did not fall into the 
hands of enraged enemies.” 
Sardula replied in a faint voice. “O lord, it is simply not possible to spy 
upon this army. They are guarded on all sides by monkeys like 
mountains and are headed by the invincible Räma. There is no 
possibility of even asking them a single question. I had hardly penetrated 
the army before I was arrested and brought before Räma. The monkeys 
paraded me about, having me march back and forth in various unusual 
gaits. They attacked me with knees, fists, palms and teeth, throwing me 
before Räma in a wretched state.” 
Sardula described to Rävaëa the enormous bridge over the sea and how 
it was filled with monkeys and bears still pouring into Lanka. Like the 
other spies before him the Räkñasa recommended that Rävaëa hand 
back Sétä; but the demon king remained resolute. He would not give up 
Sétä even if threatened by all the worlds joined together.  
Rävaëa dismissed the spies and went into his rooms thinking of Sétä. 
Perhaps there was now an opportunity to win Her over. If he could 
somehow convince Her that Räma was dead, She might succumb. It was 
worth a try. And in any event, perhaps, just perhaps, he may end up 
losing Her to Räma. Now might be his last chance to gain Her favor. 
The demon decided to play a trick upon Sétä. He summoned a Räkñasa 
named Vidyujiva, an expert magician, and ordered him to create a head 
that looked exactly like Räma’s head, and a bow resembling Räma’s own.  
Saying, “So be it,” Vidyujiva soon produced the head and bow, and 
showed them to Rävaëa. The demon king was pleased and he handed 
the magician a priceless necklace of gems. Rävaëa then told Vidyujiva to 
accompany him to the ashoka grove to see Sétä. 
He found Sétä lying beneath a tree, sighing repeatedly, still guarded by 
numerous Räkñasés. With Vidyujiva close behind him Rävaëa went 
before Her and began to speak. “Your husband, on whose account You 
have rebuked me, now lies killed. O blessed lady, Your roots are torn out

340 
and Your vanity is crushed. Of what use to You now is Your dead spouse? 
Become mine today. I shall be a better protector to you than any other. 
Let me tell You how Räma and His army were slain.” 
Rävaëa fabricated a whole story about how the army of monkeys was 
annihilated by the Räkñasas. He told Sétä they had been wiped out 
during the night as they slept, exhausted from their journey across the 
sea. All of the principal monkeys, including even Hanumän, were now 
dead. Räma’s head had been severed by the commander of the Räkñasas. 
Rävaëa had Vidyujiva show Her the trick head. The magician placed the 
head on the ground in front of Sétä. He handed the bow he had created 
to Rävaëa and then promptly vanished from the spot. 
Throwing down the bow next to the head, Rävaëa said, “Look now upon 
Your husband. There is His famed bow, fetched here by Prahasta after 
he had disposed of that mortal being during the night.” 
Sétä looked at the head. It resembled Räma closely with the same large 
eyes and the same splendid jewel in His hair. The princess burst into a 
wail and fell to the ground. She cried out, censuring Kaikeyi. “O cruel 
woman, be now satisfied with your work! See what you have done to the 
noble house of Raghu. How can I continue to live? Everything is 
finished. The death of a husband before his wife is declared to be a 
catastrophe.” 
Sétä lamented at length. How had this happened? The royal astrologers 
had predicted that Räma would live a long life and rule over the earth. 
“The Time Spirit is irresistible to all beings,” cried Sétä. “O Räma! Surely 
You are now reunited with Your father. But what of Me? Do you not 
recall the solemn vow You made at Our wedding? You declared You 
would always protect Me and take Me to the next world with You. How 
have You deserted Me now?” 
The princess was torn apart. She thought of Kaushalya and Sumitra. 
They would both die immediately upon hearing the terrible news. 
Considering that She was the cause of Räma’s death, Sétä condemned 
Herself. She said to Rävaëa, “Kill Me at once, O demon. Lay My dead 
body on top of Räma and unite a husband with his wife.” 
While Sétä was wailing in this way a messenger came to Rävaëa. He 
called the demon aside and told him that he was needed urgently in the 
council chamber. Prahasta had arrived and was awaiting orders to

341 
commence the battle. 
Rävaëa turned away from Sétä. There was no time to lose. Räma’s 
formidable forces had to be checked at once. The demon immediately 
left the ashoka grove and walked swiftly toward his chambers. As soon as 
he left, a Räkñasé named Sarama, the wife of Vibhishana, came toward 
Sétä. Taking Her away from the other Räkñasé guards, she reassured the 
distraught princess. “I heard what Rävaëa said to you, but You should 
not believe him. He is a great trickster and a liar. O gentle princess, be 
fully restored to confidence. Räma is not dead. Even now the demon 
king is making plans to defend the city from the monkey forces, headed 
by Your unconquerable husband and His brother.” 
Sarama spoke with affection to Sétä. The Räkñasé was as pious as her 
husband and she had often comforted the grieving princess. She assured 
Sétä that Räma’s so-called head was an illusion conjured up by Rävaëa 
and his henchman. 
As Sarama and Sétä spoke they heard the crash of war drums as well as 
the clamor of troops and the blare of countless trumpets. It was obvious 
that a battle was about to commence.  
Sarama had heard from her husband all about Räma. She said to Sétä, 
“This mighty fight will result in the complete destruction of the demons. 
Rävaëa will undoubtedly be slain by Räma. No other outcome is 
possible. Dear Sétä, I am certain You will soon be reunited with Your 
husband.” 
After gladdening Sétä, Sarama asked if there was any service she could 
do for the princess. She offered to carry a message to Räma. “If You wish, 
I can go invisibly through the skies and reassure Räma of Your safety,” 
she suggested. But Sétä instead asked to be informed of Rävaëa’s plans. 
She wanted to know if Rävaëa had any intention of releasing Her or of 
even killing Her before Räma came. If so, then perhaps a message should 
be taken to Räma. 
Sarama went unobserved into Rävaëa’s chambers and listened to the 
discussions. After some hours she returned again to Sétä and informed 
Her what was happening. “Rävaëa has been exhorted by his own dear 
mother to return You to Räma,” Sarama said. “Along with one of his 
elderly and affectionate counselors, she tried at length to make him see 
sense. Other wise ministers have also put forward a case for Your return.

342 
They warned Rävaëa that battle with Räma and the monkeys will have 
a disastrous result for the Räkñasas. But Rävaëa will no more let You go 
than a miser would leave his hold on treasure. He is not prepared to 
release You until he has laid down his life in combat, O godly one.” 
Sétä thanked Sarama for her kindness and friendship. Feeling reassured 
that Her husband would soon arrive to rescue Her, She sat beneath the 
simshapa tree, absorbing Herself in thoughts of Räma. 
* * * 
In his council chamber Rävaëa gazed around at his ministers. They all 
sat mutely looking at one another. Räma’s feat in crossing the ocean 
with an unlimited number of bears and monkeys was astonishing. And 
that was on top of the incredible display by a single monkey in Lanka. 
Surely battle with Räma would be foolhardy. Seeing the timidity of his 
advisors, Rävaëa spoke in a voice which rang around the silent chamber. 
“I have heard everything about Räma and His prowess. I feel that we will 
be able to overcome Him in battle. I know the Räkñasas to be unfailing 
and resolute. You should entertain no fears.” 
An elderly counselor named Malayavan, Rävaëa’s maternal grandfather, 
replied, “O king, there are different ways to deal with a hostile enemy. 
Battle is only one and it is only recommended in situations where the 
enemy is clearly weaker or where every other means of diplomacy has 
failed. You have not explored any other avenues with Räma. Let us first 
try to make an alliance. Give Sétä back to Räma. The outcome of battle 
is always unsure; there must be a loser. On the other hand, O intelligent 
Räkñasa, negotiations can produce a favorable result for both parties.” 
Malayavan spoke strongly. Rävaëa had abandoned virtue. He would now 
be swallowed up by evil. Räma however was devoted to virtue and His 
cause was just. The gods and åñis whom Rävaëa had assaulted were all 
supporting Räma. Furthermore, Rävaëa had no immunity from humans 
and animals. Nor was Räma an ordinary human. He was surely Viñëu 
Himself. Therefore peace should be secured by any means. 
Having delivered his sagacious advice, Malayavan fell silent, eyeing the 
ruler of Lanka and awaiting his response. Rävaëa knitted his brows. He 
breathed heavily in anger. Clenching, his fists he replied furiously, “How 
have you uttered such harsh and ill-considered words? Surely you have

343 
come under the sway of the enemy. On what basis do you hold as 
powerful the wretched Räma, a mere human who has been abandoned 
by His father and has as His support only a band of monkeys? See Him 
struck down by me in a short while! Having somehow crossed the sea 
and reached Lanka, He will nevertheless not return with His life. There 
is no doubt whatsoever.” 
Malayavan made no reply. It seemed that Rävaëa was bent on his own 
ruin. After uttering benedictions wishing him victory, the old minister 
left for his own residence. 
Rävaëa set about making all arrangements for Lanka’s defense. He 
posted powerful generals at each of the city’s four gates, all of them 
equipped with a force of hundreds of thousands of fierce Räkñasas. 
Rävaëa himself would visit each gate in turn. Satisfied that everything 
was secure, the demon then retired to his own chambers. 
Chapter 5 
The War Begins 
Outside Lanka, Räma held counsel with His chiefs. They discussed how 
to assail the city. Vibhishana reported that his four ministers had 
entered the city in the form of birds. They had carefully surveyed 
everything. Vibhishana described the defensive arrangements. “At the 
eastern gate stands Prahasta, the commander-in-chief. At the southern 
gate is Mahaparshwa and Mahodara, two almost invincible Räkñasas. 
Stationed at the western gate is Rävaëa’s cunning and fearful son 
Indrajit, who is highly dangerous in battle. At the northern gate is 
Rävaëa himself.” 
Vibhishana told Räma how many Räkñasas they faced. They numbered 
tens of millions, all of them equipped with fierce weapons of every 
description. It was not going to be an easy fight. 
Räma smiled. He issued orders detailing different monkeys to attack 
each gate. Sugréva, Jambavan and Vibhishana should remain at the 
center of the army. Néla would assault the eastern side, Aìgada the

344 
south, Hanumän the west, and Räma Himself would attack the northern 
gate. He wanted to waste no time in confronting Rävaëa directly. Räma 
ordered that the monkeys should fight in their natural forms only. This 
would be their distinguishing mark. Räma expected that the demons 
would try trickery and assume different forms. The monkeys would have 
the best chance of recognizing each other if they remained in their own 
forms. 
Evening was approaching. The battle would commence the next day. 
Räma decided to ascend the Suvela mountain and spend the night there. 
As He climbed the mountain He spoke with Lakñman. “We shall be able 
to survey Lanka from this vantage point. I long now for the battle to 
begin. My anger toward Rävaëa is growing at every moment. The whole 
Räkñasa race will perish on account of their mean-minded and stubborn 
king.” 
Räma reached the top of Mount Suvela along with hundreds of the 
foremost monkey warriors. They gazed at Lanka, which glowed red in 
the light of the setting sun. Along its defensive wall, which appeared like 
a sheer cliff face, there seemed to be another dark wall in the shape of a 
compact row of Räkñasas. No gap could be seen anywhere in the lines of 
heavily armed demons. The monkeys roared in anticipation. As they 
stared at their enemy, the sun set and a full moon rose. Räma and the 
monkeys alertly watched for any signs of a treacherous night assault by 
the Räkñasas. 
After sunrise the following day the monkeys closely surveyed Lanka 
again. Atop the Trikuta mountain the city appeared charming with its 
towering white gates and gold and silver fortifications. Mansions and 
palaces and tall, golden-domed temples crowded the city. The monkeys 
saw various devices lined up along the outer wall ready for the battle. As 
the Räkñasas readied themselves for battle the thunder of drums and the 
blowing of conches and trumpets was tumultuous.  
As Räma and the monkeys looked across at Lanka they saw in the 
distance Rävaëa himself. The demon appeared at the top of the city 
gate, clad in red robes and adorned with shining scarlet gems. He was 
being fanned on all sides and a large white parasol was held over his 
head.  
Seeing him there, Sugréva became impetuous. He immediately sprang

345 
from the mountaintop and with one mighty bound landed near the 
demon king. He rushed up to him and said, “I am a friend and servant of 
Räma, ruler of this world. Display your power, O Räkñasa, for I shall not 
spare you today.” 
With that, Sugréva leapt upon Rävaëa and dashed his shining diadem to 
the ground. The Räkñasa shook him off and stood for the fight. He spoke 
harshly. “Today I will break your beautiful neck, O monkey.” 
Rävaëa caught hold of Sugréva and threw him forcefully to the ground, 
but the monkey bounced up like a ball. He closed on Rävaëa and grasped 
him tightly. As they pummeled, kneed and scratched one another they 
appeared like two tall trees intertwined together and shaken by a gale. 
Their limbs were bathed in blood and perspiration as they locked 
together, grunting furiously. Both were endowed with extraordinary 
might and they fought with tremendous power. They fell to the ground 
and rolled over, dropping from the flat roof of the gate to the ground 
below, still violently belaboring each other. As both were experts at 
wrestling, they employed various maneuvers with great skill. They 
appeared like a lion and a tiger engaged in a furious fight to the death. 
Breaking apart, they moved around in a circle, each rebuking the other 
with harsh words.  
They stood in diverse postures and moved about in many ways-now 
rushing, now wheeling, now leaping high and now crouching. As they 
struck and dodged one another with blinding speed they appeared 
graceful, but neither could overpower the other. Becoming tired of the 
bout, Rävaëa decided to exhibit his supernatural power. Sugréva realized 
this and immediately sprang high, landing again on the roof of the gate. 
Taking another great bound he soared across to the Suvela mountain. 
Rävaëa was left standing angrily on the ground. Seeing that he had 
returned to the side of Räma and Lakñman, the demon decided not to 
pursue the monkey. The battle with the prince would come soon 
enough. 
Räma embraced Sugréva and examined the wounds Rävaëa had inflicted 
upon him. Feeling a little annoyed with the monkey, Räma admonished 
him out of love. “Kings should not act in such rash ways, O mighty one. 
If anything had happened to you, then what would have become of Me? 
If you had been slain, then I surely would not have survived. Please do

346 
not be so impetuous again.” 
Sugréva bowed to Räma and replied, “Seeing that disgusting demon who 
has borne away Your wife, I lost control of myself. I had to give him a 
beating. I am sorry.” 
Räma praised Sugréva’s courage and strength and then turned to 
Lakñman. “O valiant brother, the time for battle has arrived. We should 
array our forces in preparation. Many terrible omens are visible, boding 
massive destruction and death. The earth will soon be covered with 
rocks, darts, arrows and swords, hurled by monkeys and Räkñasas. Soon a 
thick morass of flesh and blood will spread on all sides. Surrounded by 
monkeys and bears, We should immediately march on Lanka.” 
Räma rapidly descended the mountain, followed by His brother. Upon 
reaching the foot of the mountain He reviewed the army. Then, with 
Sugréva’s assistance, He marshalled the troops ready for the battle. At an 
auspicious moment He ordered them to advance. The army moved off 
sending up a roar which made the earth shake and the walls of Lanka 
vibrate. The different Vanara commanders soon reached their 
respective positions at the gates of Lanka. Räma Himself stood at the 
northern gate. Sugréva remained at a distance from the city. Along with 
Lakñman and Vibhishana he detailed divisions of troops to support each 
of the commanders. 
Seizing hold of fully grown trees and massive boulders, the monkeys 
rushed forward. Their long tails raised in anger and their terrible teeth 
bared. Their eyes were bloodshot and their faces contorted with fury. As 
they bounded high in the air, they seemed like a swarm of locusts. The 
growls and roars of the fierce bears led by Jambavan sounded like the 
rush of a mighty ocean. 
The army quickly surrounded the city of Lanka, making it difficult even 
for the wind to approach. Looking out from the walls, the Räkñasas were 
filled with wonder upon seeing the flood of monkeys and bears. They 
ran about in all directions, making ready to defend their city. 
Räma summoned Aìgada and asked him to carry a message to Rävaëa. 
This was the demon’s last chance. If he returned Sétä now, then a battle 
could be averted. Räma said to Aìgada, “You should approach the ten-
headed monster on My behalf. Tell him that his cup of sins has now 
overflowed. Fierce retribution will shortly ensue for all his acts of

347 
violence against the åñis, gods, Gandharvas, Apsaräs, Yakñas and others-
what to speak of his depraved act of stealing Sétä from Me. His arrogance 
born of Brahmä’s boon will shortly be smashed by Me. Soon he will see 
his city rent asunder and the Räkñasas lying lifeless upon the ground. 
Standing firm in battle, I will soon force him to throw down his body.” 
Räma offered Rävaëa the opportunity to surrender. He could return Sétä 
now and the army would leave peacefully. Otherwise, the world would 
soon be rid of Räkñasas, barring those who sought Räma’s shelter. 
Aìgada leapt high and crossed over the walls of Lanka. Confounding 
the demons by his speed and movement, he swiftly arrived before 
Rävaëa. He stood a short distance from the Räkñasa and announced 
himself to be Räma’s messenger. He then delivered the message exactly 
as he had heard it from Räma.  
Rävaëa was seized by fury. He commanded his ministers to capture and 
kill Aìgada. Four huge demons immediately took hold of Aìgada by his 
arms. The monkey, who blazed like a fire, allowed the Räkñasas to hold 
him. Taking all four of them still clinging to his arms, he leapt up onto a 
high ledge. He then dashed the demons together and they fell senseless 
to the ground. The monkey let out a great shout proclaiming his name 
and roaring, “Victory to Räma!” With a great leap he returned to Räma, 
smashing down the wall from which he jumped. Rävaëa’s reply to Räma 
was clear enough. 
Witnessing this display of power, Rävaëa became morose. He foresaw his 
own destruction. The demon sat sighing amid his ministers, but still he 
gave no thought to the possibility of surrender. 
Räma affectionately received Aìgada back. Hearing then of Rävaëa’s 
cruel response, He resolved to fight and immediately gave the order to 
charge. Mounted upon the back of a monkey, Räma led the attack 
Himself. The entire earth around Lanka was rendered brown by the 
mass of monkeys and bears. They filled the moats and completely 
covered the defensive walls as they rapidly scaled them. The air was 
filled with cries of “Victory to Räma and Sugréva!” Many mighty 
monkeys rose quickly to the tops of the walls, screaming ferociously. 
They poured onto the ramparts and tore into the Räkñasas with their 
teeth and nails. 
Rävaëa ordered his troops to rush against the enemy. A great clamor was

348 
raised. Thousands of drums were beaten with golden sticks, creating a 
terrible din. Räkñasas of hideous features blew conches and trumpets and 
rallied Rävaëa’s vast forces to the fight. With their dark limbs adorned 
with brilliant jewels the Räkñasas seemed like so many clouds lit by 
lightning. They joyfully rushed forth like the waves of an ocean swollen 
with the rains of universal destruction. The trumpeting of elephants, the 
neighing of horses, the clatter of chariots and the shouts of demons 
made the earth and sky resound.  
The Räkñasas struck the monkeys with their flaming maces, javelins, 
pikes and axes. The monkeys grasped hold of the demons with their 
powerful arms and hauled them down from the walls. They aimed 
terrible blows at the Räkñasas with their fists and feet. The demons 
replied with darts and arrows. As they fought, they shouted out their 
respective names. All around Lanka there were monkeys, bears and 
Räkñasas locked in fierce combat. The earth quickly became covered 
with a mire of flesh and blood. 
Great heroes among the Räkñasas mounted brilliant chariots and came 
out of the city. With their dazzling coats of mail they shone like fire. 
Others sallied forth on the backs of gigantic elephants, while others 
charged out on great steeds. They were supported by tens of thousands of 
Räkñasas on foot, their frightening faces twisted in fury. Shouting, 
“Victory to the king,” the Räkñasas issued out for battle like a black river 
gushing out of the city gates. Some of them took to the air and swooped 
down upon Räma’s army wheeling huge scimitars. Others fought on foot, 
raising their frightful weapons and screaming in anger. The Vanaras met 
them, surging toward them with shouts of joy. The two armies appeared 
like heaven and earth colliding in the sky. 
Great duels took place between the heroes on both sides. Aìgada fought 
with Indrajit even as Çiva had contended with the demon Andhaka. 
Hanumän fought a furious battle with the huge Räkñasa Sharabha, while 
Vibhishana battled with a violent Räkñasa called Suparshwa. Sugréva 
closed with Praghasha and Lakñman with Durmukha. Four of the most 
powerful Räkñasas charged Räma, who stood on the battlefield, shining 
like a smokeless fire. 
A fierce and confused fight raged. All of the combatants sought a quick 
victory and they fought with tremendous force. A stream of blood

349 
flowed across the ground floating dead bodies that looked like logs with 
hair resembling weeds. Heads, arms, legs and trunks rolled about. The 
clamor of the fight was deafening. It struck terror in the hearts of all 
those who were not heroes in battle. 
Sharabha hurled at Hanumän a blazing lance which pierced the monkey 
in the breast. Not tolerating the attack, Hanumän sprang onto the 
demon’s chariot and with his bare hands smashed it along with the 
Räkñasa himself. Sugréva took up a massive sal tree and brought it down 
upon Praghasha’s chariot, killing the Räkñasa outright. A fierce and 
notorious demon named Pratapana rushed yelling toward Nala and 
lacerated him with hundreds of sharp arrows. With one of those arrows 
Nala bounded onto the demon’s chariot and gouged out his eyes. With a 
hail of arrows Lakñman overwhelmed Durmukha, and with one swift 
shaft He pierced the demon in the heart. Räma quickly lopped off the 
heads of the four Räkñasas who surrounded Him. 
The powerful Mainda, a commander among the monkeys, leapt into the 
sky and fought the Räkñasas who flew overhead. Catching hold of the 
powerful demon named Vajramusti he smashed him to the ground along 
with his chariot and four great steeds. Nikhumbha, the son of 
Kumbhakarna, shot a hundred swift arrows at Néla. The monkey took up 
a chariot wheel and rushed toward the Räkñasa who stood laughing in 
his chariot. Nikhumbha loosed another hundred fierce shafts at the 
advancing Néla. Not minding the arrows, Néla whirled the iron wheel 
and jumped onto the Räkñasa’s chariot. Even as Viñëu severs the heads 
of demons with His Chakra, Néla cut off the head of Nikhumbha, as well 
as that of his charioteer. 
Vidyunmali, a leader among the Räkñasas, attacked Sushena with his 
gold-encrusted arrows. Roaring again and again he pierced the monkey 
with hundreds of sharp arrows. In a rage Sushena took up a mountainous 
boulder and hurled it at the demon. Vidyunmali hastily leapt from his 
chariot as the boulder descended and smashed it to pieces. The demon 
stood on the ground, mace in hand. Sushena seized a huge rock and 
darted toward the Räkñasa, who swung his fierce mace at the monkey 
and caught him on the breast. Unmoved by the blow Sushena brought 
the rock down upon the demon’s head with the force of a thunderbolt. 
Vidyunmali fell lifeless to the ground like a tree smashed in a storm.

350 
Many valiant Räkñasas were crushed in this way by mighty heroes among 
the monkeys and bears. The battlefield was strewn with spears and 
maces, as well as javelins, lances and arrows. Smashed chariots lay amid 
the carcasses of horses and elephants. The headless trunks of Räkñasas 
and monkeys bounded here and there, spurting blood and finally falling 
to the ground. Vultures and jackals moved about the field, feasting on 
flesh and blood. 
As night fell, the Räkñasas felt their strength and enthusiasm increase. 
The fight continued into the night with the combatants hardly able to 
recognize one another. Voices were heard to call out, “Are you a monkey 
or a Räkñasa?” Shouts of “Stand and fight!” and “Why do you flee?” 
mixed with the cries of wounded and dying soldiers. The monkeys could 
see the golden armor of the Räkñasas glinting in the moonlight, and they 
sprang upon them, tearing them with their sharp teeth and pounding 
them with their fists. Powerful monkeys dragged down the elephants and 
horses mounted by demons. Monkey heroes picked up Räkñasas, crushed 
them in their embrace and then dropped them lifeless to the ground to 
be devoured by jackals. 
Räma and Lakñman stood together like two brilliant gods. They killed 
numerous Räkñasas with swift arrows, including those who ranged 
invisible through the sky. Not even the heroes among the Räkñasas could 
approach the two princes as They fought in the midst of the battle. 
A terrible sound arose as the Räkñasas beat countless kettledrums and 
large wooden tom-toms and blew thousands of conches and trumpets. 
This sound, mixed with roars of pain and the clash of weapons, created a 
horrifying uproar. It was difficult to move across the ground due to the 
countless corpses lying there. Monkeys and Räkñasas lay on the 
battlefield with lances and arrows protruding from their lifeless bodies. 
That first night of battle was like the night of universal dissolution. 
Millions of warriors were slain. Ghosts and nocturnal fiends ranged 
about the battlefield, reveling in the scenes of carnage and death. 
The Räkñasas rallied, and headed by six of their mighty chiefs riding in a 
line, they rushed in a body toward Räma and Lakñman. Räma released 
thousands of flaming arrows which lit up the ground like flares. Almost 
instantaneously He struck down the six foremost Räkñasas with six 
straight-flying arrows. With other golden-feathered arrows He tore to

351 
pieces hundreds of other Räkñasas who came near Him. Lakñman stood 
behind Him and fended off the treacherous demons who attacked Räma 
from His rear. The demons that approached the princes perished like 
moths entering a fire. 
Aìgada fought a furious battle with Indrajit. With a rock that looked 
like a mountain peak he smashed the demon’s chariot. Indrajit rose into 
the air and became invisible. Fatigued from the fight he retreated. 
Seeing Aìgada besting Indrajit, the gods and åñis praised him. Räma and 
Lakñman also praised the valor of the monkey prince. They called out, 
“Well done! Bravo!”  
Hearing his enemy praised, Indrajit fell into a terrible rage. Remaining 
invisible, the demon loosed sharp arrows which shone like lightning. 
They seemed to appear out of nowhere and sped toward Räma and 
Lakñman, piercing them all over. The Räkñasa used his supernatural 
power to send arrows like venomous snakes which caught and bound 
Räma and Lakñman. The two princes fell to the ground enmeshed in a 
tight network of writhing serpents with glowing ethereal bodies. 
Räma immediately ordered ten monkeys to search out Indrajit. 
Hanumän, Aìgada and eight other Vanara general bounded into the air 
and darted about, whirling trees and maces, but they could not locate 
the demon who continuously fired at them his swift iron arrows 
bedecked with buzzard feathers. Laughing all the while and keeping out 
of sight, Indrajit shot hundreds of arrows into the bodies of Räma and 
Lakñman. No part of Their bodies remained visible. Blood flowed 
profusely from Their wounds and They appeared like trees giving forth 
red blossoms in spring. Indrajit shouted to Them, “Even the ruler of the 
gods, Indra, could not discern me as I fight invisibly. What then of You 
two humans? I shall now dispatch You to the abode of Yamaräja with my 
sharp arrows.” 
The demon continued firing his arrows at the two bound brothers who 
felt distressed and afflicted. They lay upon the ground with Their bows 
fallen from Their hands. Arrows with the heads of axes, others with 
razor heads and others with heads shaped like calves’ teeth whistled 
toward Them from the sky. Seeing Them lying there bathed in blood, 
the monkeys screeched in agony and fear. They surrounded the fallen 
princes and shed tears, giving way to despondency.

352 
Indrajit considered his enemy defeated. He joyfully left the battlefield 
and went toward Lanka to give the happy news to his father. 
The monkeys felt hopeless. They stood beating their breasts and crying 
in anguish. As they gazed around at the sky, fearing further attacks from 
the invisible Indrajit, they saw Vibhishana coming toward them. Some 
of the monkeys mistook the Räkñasa for Indrajit and they fled here and 
there, but Vibhishana reassured them. Looking around with his occult 
vision he could discern that Indrajit had left. He told the monkeys not 
to worry and knelt down by Räma’s side.  
Vibhishana spoke to Sugréva with pain in his voice. “These two brothers 
who always depend on virtue have been struck down by Indrajit’s 
treachery. The wicked demon cannot face Them in a fair fight. 
Therefore he resorts to sorcery and cowardice.” 
Vibhishana told the monkeys that Räma and Lakñman had been bound 
by a mystical weapon which Indrajit had received as a boon from 
Brahmä. Even the gods would not be able to release Them. This made 
the monkeys even more anguished. Sugréva lamented loudly. “All Räma’s 
hopes have been dashed today. Our efforts are in vain and everything is 
lost. What shall we do now?” 
Vibhishana took hold of Sugréva’s arm and reassured him. “Take heart, 
O monkey king. Conflicts are always of this nature. Victory is never 
certain. Heroes do not lament when faced with setbacks. Rather, they 
exert themselves with even more energy. My feeling is that these two 
princes will recover. Somehow They will shake off these bonds, I am 
sure. Be strong, for the fear of death should never haunt those devoted 
to truth and piety.” 
Vibhishana dipped his hand in cool water and wiped Sugréva’s eyes. He 
told him to look closely at Räma and Lakñman. They were still breathing 
and Their bodies were lustrous. It was clear They were only in a 
temporary faint. Vibhishana felt sure They would soon return to 
consciousness and find a way out of Their predicament. He left with 
Jambavan to reassure and rally the rest of the army, as the news of 
Räma’s fall had spread quickly. Sugréva, along with Hanumän and the 
other leading monkeys, stood by Räma’s side waiting for Him to awaken.

353 
Chapter 6 
Garuòa to the Rescue 
Indrajit entered Lanka surrounded by the chief Räkñasas, all of them 
bellowing in joy. The Räkñasa prince went quickly to his father’s palace 
and told him the news. “Your two mortal enemies lie killed on the 
battlefield, struck down by my sharp arrows. Dispel your fear, O king. 
Victory is now ours.” 
Rävaëa sprang to his feet and embraced his son. He was elated and 
immediately called for the Räkñasés guarding Sétä. He instructed them to 
take the princess in the Pushpaka chariot and show her Räma and 
Lakñman. He felt sure that Sétä would now accept him as Her husband. 
The Räkñasés left at once and brought Sétä. They placed Her on the 
chariot along with Trijata, who was friendly with the princess. Ordered 
by Rävaëa, the chariot rose high above Lanka and went over the 
battlefield. Sétä then saw Räma and Lakñman lying in a pool of blood 
and covered all over with arrows. She was stricken with agony. 
Suspecting Their death, She held on to Trijata and cried vehemently, 
“How has this happened? Learned astrologers foretold that I would never 
be widowed. They predicted that I would be the wife of a pious ruler of 
the world and would have powerful sons by Him. Today they have all 
been proven false.” 
Sétä was completely bewildered. Her body shook as She grieved, 
comforted by Trijata. She thought of Kaushalya and Sumitra. How 
would those godly ladies live after hearing that their sons had been 
killed? Indeed, the whole of Ayodhya would be plunged into despair. 
Surely destiny was unfathomable and all-powerful. If Räma and 
Lakñman could be struck down in battle, then even Death itself could be 
killed. 
Trijata carefully surveyed the scene below. She spoke gently to Sétä. 
“From the appearance of the monkeys I deduce that Your husband still 
lives. An army whose leader is slain is cast about like a rudderless boat 
on a high sea. These monkeys are standing firm in their battle array.

354 
Clearly they expect Räma to recover. I also see that Räma and Lakñman 
are still possessed of bodily luster. They are surely still living. Do not 
lament, O princess.” 
Sétä embraced Trijata saying, “May your words prove true.” She felt a 
little reassured and prayed that the princes would soon be restored to 
strength. The chariot returned to Lanka carrying the mournful princess 
back to the ashoka grove. 
* * * 
The monkeys surrounding Räma softly called out His name, trying to 
awaken Him. Slowly Räma opened His eyes and looked around. He saw 
Lakñman lying unconscious by His side, His face streaked with blood. 
Räma spoke in a voice choked with sobs. “What purpose of mine will be 
served by recovering Sétä when My gallant brother lies slain in battle. I 
might find another wife like Sétä, but I could never find a companion 
like Lakñman anywhere in this world. This prince followed Me to the 
forest, sharing with Me every happiness and distress. I shall now follow 
Him to Yamaräja’s abode.” 
Räma condemned Himself. It was His fault that Lakñman had been 
killed. What was the use of His vain boasting that Rävaëa would be slain 
and Vibhishana installed as the ruler of Lanka? Now everything was 
finished. Räma told Sugréva to return to Kishkindha. He thanked him 
and all the other monkeys and bears for their service. Now they could go 
home. 
The monkeys stood with tears falling from their eyes. Sugréva burned 
with fury. He looked toward Lanka. The Räkñasas would pay for this 
outrage. He would personally annihilate every last one of them, 
including Rävaëa and Indrajit. Then he would recover Sétä and bring 
Her back to Räma. Clenching his fists he said to Aìgada, “Take Räma 
and Lakñman back to Kishkindha. Expert physicians may heal Them 
with celestial herbs. For my part I shall remain here until the business is 
finished. No Räkñasa will survive today.” 
As Sugréva spoke, there suddenly arose a fierce wind. Dark clouds 
appeared with flashes of lightning. The ground shook and trees toppled 
over. A sound like the steady beat of some gigantic drum was heard. The 
monkeys gazed around and saw in the sky Garuòa, Viñëu’s great eagle

355 
carrier. The powerful bird glided down, landing near Räma. As he 
descended the serpent bonds of the brothers immediately fell away. The 
ethereal snakes that had wrapped themselves around the princes quickly 
disappeared into the sky.  
Garuòa, who appeared in a half-human form with two arms, bowed 
before Räma with folded palms. He knelt by the brothers and gently 
wiped Their faces. At once Their wounds were healed and Their bodies 
became brilliant. Lakñman opened His eyes and sat up. All of the 
monkeys cheered loudly and leapt about with screeches of joy. Garuòa 
raised the two brothers. Räma embraced him with affection, saying, “It is 
fortunate indeed that you have appeared here, O gallant bird. We have 
been saved from a great calamity at the hands of Indrajit. Pray tell us, 
who are you, glowing with celestial brilliance and adorned with heavenly 
jewels and garlands?” 
Garuòa told Räma his name. “Surely you know me, O Räma, as I am 
always Your servant. Consider me Your own breath moving outside of 
Your body. I heard that Indrajit had employed the Näga sons of Kadru. 
He converted those powerful serpents into arrows by means of sorcery. I 
came here quickly with a desire to dispatch my venomous prey, but they 
fled away simply upon seeing me. Grant me leave to pursue them.” 
Räma again embraced Garuòa and gave him permission to leave. The 
bird assured Räma that the Räkñasas would soon be overcome. Indrajit 
would not again be able to employ the serpent weapon. Then, after going 
respectfully around the two princes, he rose into the skies, shining like 
the sun and filling the whole region with the wind raised by his wings. 
Räma and Lakñman stood ready for battle. The monkeys and bears 
roared in joy, uprooting huge trees and brandishing them. They swarmed 
toward the gates of Lanka, shouting for the Räkñasas to come out and 
fight. Beating clay drums and blowing their conches, the army raised a 
massive tumult, which terrified the Räkñasas, who gazed from the city 
walls in amazement. 
* * * 
Rävaëa sat in his palace. He had spent the night celebrating, having 
sent messengers all around Lanka to declare that Räma and Lakñman 
were dead. As dawn approached, he was thinking of Sétä. Now She

356 
would surely be his. He straightened his disheveled clothes and prepared 
to go to the princess. Suddenly from outside the city he heard the 
crashing of drums and the shouts of Räma’s army. “What is this?” he 
exclaimed in surprise. He got up with a start and shouted for his 
ministers. How could the monkeys rally with their leader slain? 
Something was wrong. 
The demon ordered his ministers to find out what was happening. Spies 
left at once and went to the top of the city walls. From there they saw 
Räma, Lakñman and Sugréva at the head of the army, besieging the city. 
The spies reported to Rävaëa. “The two human brothers are standing 
like a pair of lordly elephants that have broken their fetters. All around 
Them stand the monkeys and bears roaring for battle.” 
Rävaëa turned pale. This was a disaster. Surely the Räkñasas were in 
danger now. Räma had escaped from a weapon which had even 
overpowered Indra. It seemed that some invincible power protected this 
human. 
The Räkñasa king turned to his commander-in-chief Dhumraksha and 
ordered him to march at once to fight with Räma. “Take with you the 
mightiest of the Räkñasas,” Rävaëa commanded. “Use any means 
whatsoever. Räma must be defeated!” 
Dhumraksha left Rävaëa’s palace roaring exultantly and longing for 
battle. He was surrounded by demons with fierce features who clutched 
spiked maces, razor-sharp spears and heavy iron cudgels. Clad in golden 
mail and mounted upon chariots drawn by fiends, they rushed out of the 
city gates. They were followed by waves of other Räkñasas, some riding 
massive black steeds and others on elephants as large as hills. Laughing 
loudly, they went out the western gate where Hanumän was stationed. 
As the Räkñasas advanced, they saw numerous terrible omens. Ferocious 
birds of prey circled screaming over the demons. They descended upon 
Dhumraksha’s standard and fought together, sending a shower of 
feathers onto the demon. A headless trunk, wet with blood, rose from 
the ground and ran across the path of the charging Räkñasas. The earth 
shook and blood fell from the heavens. Darkness enveloped the four 
quarters and the wind blew strongly into the demons’ faces. 
Not deterred, Dhumraksha raced on at the head of his troops. He 
shouted out challenges in a voice resembling the braying of a donkey.

357 
The monkeys roared back and charged. The two armies appeared like 
two oceans surging toward one another and then meeting with a 
tumultuous crash. Demons and monkeys fell by the hundreds of 
thousands, pierced and smashed by weapons and trees.  
Some monkeys were transfixed by lances and spears. Others were cut to 
pieces by waves of arrows. Some were hacked down with swords, and still 
others were trampled by elephants. In response the monkeys crushed the 
Räkñasas with great boulders. They reduced some of the demons to pulp 
by bringing tree trunks down onto them. They leapt upon the chariots 
and tore at the Räkñasas with their nails and teeth. Monkeys lifted 
demons and dashed them to the ground. Enraged, the Räkñasas fought 
back throwing punches and kicks that felt like the striking of 
thunderbolts. 
Dhumraksha was possessed by a madness for battle. He wrought havoc 
among the Vanara troops. He could hardly be seen as he rushed about 
whirling his various weapons. Arrows loosed from his bow seemed to fly 
in all directions at once. Monkeys fell on all sides, vomiting blood. 
Heads, arms and legs flew about. The monkey army was dispersed and 
put to flight by the enraged Dhumraksha, who thundered like autumnal 
clouds. 
Seeing his troops routed by the Räkñasa, Hanumän became furious. His 
eyes turned red and he took hold of an enormous boulder. With a roar 
he hurled the rock at Dhumraksha’s chariot, but Dhumraksha nimbly 
leapt clear. The chariot, along with its horses and driver, was reduced to 
a mangled heap. Hanumän then took up a sal tree and whirled it around, 
attacking Dhumraksha’s guards. Within moments he pounded hundreds 
of demons to death. The monkey then grasped a mountain peak and 
raced toward Dhumraksha, who stood with his mace uplifted. As 
Hanumän approached him the Räkñasa brought down his mace, which 
was bedecked with numerous shining points, upon Hanumän’s head. It 
sounded like an explosion, but the monkey was not shaken. Hanumän 
smashed his mountain peak on Dhumraksha’s skull. With his head 
crushed and all his limbs shattered, Dhumraksha fell dead to the ground. 
The other demons ran back toward the city howling in fear. Rävaëa 
heard of Dhumraksha’s death and he hissed like an enraged serpent. He 
spoke at once to Vajradamstra, another of the great Räkñasa champions.

358 
“Sally forth, O hero! Make short work of our enemies.”  
Replying “So be it,” Vajradamstra circumambulated Rävaëa and left his 
palace. 
Vajradamstra was artistically adorned with gem-encrusted armlets and a 
shining diadem. He put on a golden coat of mail that blazed like fire. 
Taking up his bow he mounted his brilliant chariot, which was dressed 
with hundreds of pennants and decorated with carvings of refined gold. 
He came out of the southern gate followed by countless troops holding 
scimitars, strangely-shaped iron clubs, polished maces, bows, javelins, 
spears, razor-edged discuses, swords and double-headed axes. They raised 
a great uproar as they rushed toward the monkey army. 
Again many evil omens were seen. Dazzling meteors fell and hideous 
jackals belched tongues of fire. The demon troops stumbled and fell on 
level ground. Vajradamstra paid no heed to the grim portents foretelling 
his defeat. He thundered out his war cry, rallying the Räkñasas to the 
fight. 
The monkeys met them with furious impetuosity. Demons and monkeys 
collided like mountains clashing together. Warriors fell with their heads 
and limbs severed. Others dropped down, being sliced in half from head 
to toe. Some were crushed and some beaten to a pulp. The fighters found 
their feet sinking in a mire of flesh and blood-soaked earth. From a 
distance the battle produced a sound that resembled a musical 
performance, with the clash of weapons for its drums, the twang of 
bowstrings its véëäs and the roar of warriors its loud singing. 
Vajradamstra created havoc on the battlefield. From his chariot he 
released tens of thousands of steel arrows with razor-sharp heads. He 
moved with the speed of the wind, seeming like Death himself come for 
the destruction of all beings. The formidable Räkñasa employed mystical 
weapons of every kind and mowed down the monkey troops like wheat 
in a field. 
Seeing the destruction, Aìgada became maddened. With his two 
serpent-like arms he clasped a great tree and whirled it around with 
blinding speed. The monkey prince danced with the tree on the 
battlefield and crushed innumerable Räkñasas. He moved through the 
demon troops like a lion through a flock of deer. The Räkñasas fell back 
in terror as Aìgada wheeled. Chariots, elephants, horses and Räkñasas

359 
fell on all sides, smashed by the infuriated Vanara. 
The earth became decorated with golden poles fallen from chariots, as 
well as with bejeweled armlets, necklaces and diadems of every sort. A 
stream of blood flowed on the battlefield carrying the heads and limbs of 
Räkñasas slain by Aìgada, who could not be checked. 
Vajradamstra saw his troops being routed and, roaring in fury, he rushed 
toward Aìgada and shouted out a challenge. He released arrows that 
flew with unerring accuracy and pierced eight or nine monkeys at a 
time. In his wake the demon left heaps of slain monkey warriors, who lay 
with their teeth clenched and eyes still staring in anger. 
Aìgada stood firm to receive the fast-approaching Räkñasa. 
Vajradamstra shot a thousand arrows at Aìgada and sent up a great 
shout. The monkey was pierced all over, but he was not shaken. He 
hurled his tree at the demon and it whirled through the air with a sound 
like a rushing gale. Without effort, Vajradamstra tore the tree to pieces 
with his arrows even as it flew toward him. Aìgada leapt up a nearby 
hill and tore off a crag. Spinning around several times he threw it with 
tremendous force at the Räkñasa. Vajradamstra immediately jumped 
down from his chariot with his iron mace in his hand. 
The rock descended upon the Räkñasa’s chariot and shattered it into 
small pieces, crushing the driver and horses. Even as the crag fell 
Aìgada had taken up another and hurled it at the Räkñasa himself. It hit 
him full on the head and he fell to the earth, vomiting blood. He lay 
there unconscious for some minutes with his mace clasped to his bosom. 
Coming again to his senses, he got up and flew at Aìgada, hitting him in 
the chest with his mace. The monkey remained steady and the demon 
began striking him with his fists. Aìgada returned his blows and the two 
fought a fierce hand-to-hand battle for some time, both spitting blood 
and breathing heavily. 
Aìgada uprooted another tree and he stood adorned by its flowers and 
fruit. The demon seized hold of a shield made of bull hide and a great 
shining sword decorated with golden bells. The two combatants circled 
one another, each looking for an opportunity to strike the other. They 
closed and separated again and again, raining down fierce blows. Both 
became exhausted and sank to their knees. 
Suddenly Aìgada, who was thinking of Räma, sprang to his feet. He

360 
took up a fierce-looking sword and swung it at Vajradamstra’s neck, 
lopping off his head. The Räkñasa dropped to the earth, spurting forth a 
jet of dark-red blood. 
With their leader slain the other Räkñasas fled in fear, pursued by the 
monkeys. Hanging their heads in shame they swiftly re-entered Lanka. 
The monkeys surrounded the overjoyed Aìgada and praised his 
wonderful feat in killing Vajradamstra. 
Chapter 7 
Rävaëa Enters the Fray 
Rävaëa saw his bedraggled troops returning defeated. His eyes were 
crimson with rage and he breathed heavily. He ordered the next of his 
powerful commanders, Durdharsha, to march out for battle. The demon 
had faced the gods and Dänavas in battle and he feared nothing. 
Mounting his jewel-encrusted chariot, which had eight iron wheels that 
stood as tall as two men, he raced out of the city. His voice resounded 
like thunderclaps as he rallied the Räkñasa forces who followed him in 
the hundreds of thousands. Like the other Räkñasa chiefs before him he 
observed numerous ill omens, but he too ignored the portents and 
rushed toward the monkeys. 
Another terrible carnage ensued. Rains of sharp arrows and weapons 
from the Räkñasas were met with volleys of rocks and trees from the 
monkeys. The combatants fell upon one another in a frenzy, each 
seeking to violently kill his adversary. No mercy was shown in the 
furious fight. A great dust cloud rose above the battlefield which 
screened the sky and enveloped the fighters. They could hardly perceive 
one another, and monkeys struck monkeys, while demons cut down 
other demons. Soon hundreds of thousands of Vanaras and Räkñasas lay 
stretched out on the ground, prey for vultures and jackals. 
Durdharsha exhibited a wild rage. Standing on his chariot he loosed 
venomous shafts that tore the monkeys apart, breaking and routing the 
ranks of Räma’s army. Seeing this, Hanumän advanced toward him.

361 
Durdharsha immediately showered him with innumerable sharp arrows, 
but Hanumän received the shafts like a mountain receiving rainfall. 
Laughing heartily, Hanumän ran at the Räkñasa, causing the earth to 
shake. With one hand he took up a great boulder and raised it above his 
head. 
As Hanumän stood with the uplifted rock, Durdharsha shot crescent-
headed arrows that smashed it to pieces. Hanumän laughed again and 
uprooted an ashwakarna tree as big as a mountain. He whirled it around 
and ran at the demon who was stationed some distance from him. As 
Hanumän bounded with the tree spinning, he struck down dozens of 
Räkñasas mounted upon elephants and chariots. Durdharsha saw him 
approach like a furious tempest, and full of trepidation, began to work 
his massive bow more furiously. The demon shot hundreds of fierce-
looking arrows into Hanumän’s body. As the valiant monkey bled, he 
appeared like a mountain overgrown with trees full of red blossoms. 
Determining to kill Durdharsha, Hanumän shouted, “Victory to Räma!” 
and rushed at the Räkñasa with the tree raised aloft. The demon hardly 
had time to place another arrow upon his bow before Hanumän reached 
him. The furious monkey brought the tree down onto the Räkñasa’s head 
with his full force. Durdharsha fell from his chariot dead. The other 
Räkñasas wailed in despair. They dropped their weapons and fled in all 
directions, falling over each other in their panic. 
The monkeys cheered Hanumän and taunted the defeated demons. 
Räma and Lakñman then personally honored the victorious monkey. In 
the sky the gods assembled and chanted auspicious hymns in Hanumän’s 
praise. Hanumän enjoyed the glory even as Viñëu had upon killing the 
demons in days gone by. 
In Lanka, Rävaëa was becoming more and more exasperated. He looked 
at Prahasta, the mightiest of his Räkñasa commanders. “I do not see 
many who are capable of saving Lanka at this critical juncture, O 
courageous one. Apart from you, Indrajit, Kumbhakarna and myself, 
there are none who can undertake such a burden. Räma and His troops 
are indeed formidable, but the fickle-minded monkeys will be put to 
flight when they hear your roar on the battlefield. O Prahasta, not even 
the mightiest gods could stand before you.” 
Although resolute to fight to the end the demon king was beginning to

362 
feel misgivings. There was something exceptional about these monkeys 
and bears. Some divine force was empowering them. Rävaëa thought of 
Räma. No doubt the final battle would be between himself and that 
human prince. The demon reflected upon his boon. Only a human could 
kill him. Would it be Räma? He recoiled from the thought. This was not 
the time for fear. The battle must continue. 
Rävaëa urged Prahasta to march out with another enormous contingent. 
He told the Räkñasa chief to be firm. Even though victory was never 
certain, it was always preferable for a warrior to die in battle than in any 
other way. Rävaëa asked Prahasta if there was anything he needed. The 
demon replied, “I need only your blessings, my lord. Having ever been 
honored by you with gifts and kind words, how can I not render service 
to you when the time has come? Neither wife, sons, wealth nor even life 
itself is dearer to me than your service. Today the vultures will feast 
heartily on the flesh of monkeys.” 
Prahasta walked around Rävaëa with folded palms and then left for the 
battle. He assembled a horde of Räkñasas, all eager to fight. In less than 
an hour a force of over five hundred thousand Räkñasas was ready. They 
adorned themselves with garlands sanctified by sacred mantras, put on 
armor and grasped their weapons. They thronged around Prahasta, 
waiting to depart. 
The demon commander had the iron portcullis at the northern gate 
lifted and the army swarmed out with a great cry. Prahasta rode at their 
head in his terrific war chariot furnished with every kind of weapon and 
driven by a hundred steeds. A large standard of brilliant cat’s-eye stones 
bearing the emblem of a serpent stood in the middle of his bejeweled 
chariot. Prahasta shone like the sun as he charged laughing toward the 
enemy. 
Dozens of vultures rose up and began circling anticlockwise around 
Prahasta. A large meteor dropped from the heavens. Clouds rumbled 
with a sound resembling the braying of a donkey, and showers of blood 
fell. 
Prahasta ignored the omens and pressed ahead with full speed. He met 
the advancing monkeys and penetrated deeply into their ranks. They 
immediately surrounded the Räkñasa and assailed him with rocks and 
trees. The demon simply shrugged off the missiles without being

363 
disturbed. He sent volleys of arrows at the monkeys and roared like a 
thundercloud. His vast Räkñasa force fell upon the monkey troops with 
shouts of joy. 
Monkeys and demons were again destroyed in large numbers. Some 
monkeys were run through with pikes and lances, some cut down with 
razor-sharp discuses and some hacked to pieces with axes. Still others 
were clubbed to death with iron mallets, while others were crushed with 
huge maces. The monkeys smashed thousands of Räkñasas with 
mountainous crags and trees. They struck down the Räkñasas with their 
bare hands and pounded them to death. A tumultuous clamor arose as 
heroic fighters roared in exultation or screamed in pain. 
Prahasta himself caused terrible havoc among the monkeys. He knew 
the secrets of all kinds of mystic weapons and sent arrows in such 
numbers that they resembled dark clouds. All around his chariot waves 
of monkeys fell to the ground, pierced in their vital parts. The battlefield 
resembled a swirling river with heaps of slain warriors as its banks, 
lances and spears its trees and torrents of blood for its vast sheet of 
water. That river rushed toward the sea of death, sweeping away all in its 
path. 
Seeing Prahasta annihilating his troops, the Vanara commander-in-
chief Néla rushed toward the demon. Prahasta saw Néla approach and he 
drew his bow to full length, releasing deadly shafts that pierced the 
monkey. Not minding his wounds, Néla took up a tree and struck the 
Räkñasa as he stood upon his chariot. Prahasta roared in fury and sent 
hundreds of arrows at Néla. The monkey could not check the shafts and 
he received them with closed eyes. Néla fell to his knees and braced 
himself against the arrows’ impact, with his mind absorbed in thought of 
Räma. Rallying himself, the Vanara chief took up a sal tree. He brought 
it down with tremendous force onto Prahasta’s chariot, smashing it to 
pieces and killing the horses. 
Prahasta clutched hold of a fearsome iron mallet and leapt down from 
his shattered chariot. He ran at Néla and a fierce fight ensued at close 
quarters. Prahasta struck Néla on the forehead with his terrible weapon. 
Blood flowed in waves from the monkey’s head. He hurled a boulder 
onto Prahasta’s chest but, unmoved by that rock, the Räkñasa again 
lifted his massive iron mallet and rushed at Néla. Even as the Räkñasa

364 
closed on him, Néla took up a mountain peak and smashed it onto his 
head. The demon’s head split apart and he fell to the ground, deprived of 
his splendor and his life. 
The Räkñasas were thrown into complete confusion. With their 
commander-in-chief slain, they did not know which way to turn. The 
jubilant monkeys overran them and put them to flight. Downcast and 
defeated, the Räkñasas re-entered their city. 
Räma and Lakñman warmly applauded Néla and then the monkeys 
rested, awaiting the next wave of Räkñasas. 
* * * 
Rävaëa was shocked to hear news of Prahasta’s death; his mind 
tormented with grief and anger. In an anguished voice he said to his 
ministers, “Our enemy should be held in the highest regard. They have 
killed Prahasta, who was capable of exterminating Indra’s army. It seems 
it is time for me to make my appearance at the battle. With a steady 
stream of blazing arrows I shall consume the army of monkeys. Today I 
will throw down Räma and Lakñman.” 
Rävaëa looked around at his ministers. They cheered his decision and 
felt encouraged. Now the monkeys would surely be crushed. 
Without losing time, Rävaëa sent for his chariot. Honored with 
auspicious hymns and conch blasts, and to the accompaniment of 
beating kettledrums, Rävaëa mounted his splendid vehicle. He went out 
of Lanka surrounded by innumerable dark Räkñasas, who resembled big 
mountains. The demon appeared like Çiva in the midst of his ghostly 
followers. He saw ahead of him the immense monkey army springing up 
with trees and rocks in readiness to receive them. 
As the vast Räkñasa army poured from the city, Räma turned to 
Vibhishana and asked him the names of the principal fighters. 
Vibhishana named them all and then pointed to Rävaëa. “That one who 
looks like the Himalaya mountain, who is surrounded by terrific demons 
with the heads of tigers, elephants, camels and deer, who shines like the 
sun and is adorned with a blazing diadem, he is the sovereign lord of all 
the Räkñasas, Rävaëa.” 
Räma gazed at Rävaëa and exclaimed, “There at last is the evil one I 
seek. I can hardly perceive his actual form, bathed as it is in a brilliant

365 
effulgence. Even the gods are not possessed of such brilliance. This 
demon is accompanied by warriors who seem entirely unapproachable. 
Indeed, he looks like Death himself surrounded by fiery and hideous 
fiends. By good fortune this wicked demon has come within My sight. 
Today I shall freely vent My anger that was born from Sétä’s abduction.” 
Räma took from His quiver a long arrow with a barbed steel head and 
placed it on his bow. With Lakñman by His side He faced the rapidly 
advancing Räkñasa hordes. 
Rävaëa raced at the head of his army. He carved his way through the 
monkeys like a killer whale dividing the ocean waters. Sugréva took hold 
of a great mountain crag and ran toward Rävaëa, holding it aloft. As the 
monkey king approached the demon, he hurled the mountain-top, which 
was covered in numerous trees, straight at his chariot. Rävaëa laughed 
as the mountain sailed through the air. He tore it apart with a hail of 
golden arrows that resembled streaks of fire.  
The Räkñasa then took out an arrow resembling a huge serpent and 
released it for Sugréva’s destruction. The arrow sped like Indra’s 
thunderbolt and emitted a stream of sparks. It struck Sugréva on the 
chest and the monkey groaned in pain and fell senseless to the ground. 
As Sugréva fell the Räkñasas shouted exultantly. Other powerful Vanara 
generals immediately took up crags and rushed at Rävaëa. They rained 
down their rocks and trees, but the demon smashed all of them to pieces 
with his swift arrows. He pierced all of the monkeys with numbers of 
golden shafts bedecked with jewels. The monkeys fell down, shrieking 
and crying out to Räma for protection. 
Räma heard their cries and He advanced toward the demon, but 
Lakñman stood before Him and asked that Räma permit Him to fight 
with Rävaëa first. Räma looked at His younger brother, who was eager 
for battle. He assented to His request, but warned Him to be on guard. 
Rävaëa was no ordinary foe. 
Lakñman folded His palms and bowed to Räma who tightly embraced 
Him. The young prince then moved off and surveyed Rävaëa fighting 
the monkeys. As He watched He saw Hanumän approach the ten-
headed Räkñasa. The fearless monkey shouted at Rävaëa, “You are proud 
of your boon, O demon. No fear exists in you of gods, demons, Yakñas or 
Gandharvas. But beware. There is danger to you from monkeys. My fist

366 
will now expel from your body your very life-breath. Try your best to 
fight with me for your death is now close.” 
Hanumän raised his fist and moved toward Rävaëa who shouted back at 
him, “Strike me at once without fear, O monkey. Earn for yourself 
lasting fame. Having seen the limits of your power, I shall immediately 
destroy you!” 
Hanumän laughed and reminded Rävaëa of the fight in the ashoka 
grove, and of Aksha and the other powerful Räkñasas he had slain. As he 
spoke he rushed straight at the demon. Rävaëa threw a great blow which 
hit Hanumän on the chest and sent him reeling. But Hanumän regained 
his balance and whirling round he struck the demon with his 
outstretched palm. 
Rävaëa shook like a mountain in an earthquake. In the heavens the åñis 
and Siddhas, who were observing the battle, shouted with joy. Rävaëa 
recovered his senses and called out to Hanumän. “Well done, monkey! 
Your strength and valor are worthy of my praise.” 
Hanumän replied that his strength was lamentable as Rävaëa still lived. 
Rävaëa rushed at Hanumän and dealt him another tremendous blow, 
which sent the monkey spinning away. The demon then speedily drove 
his chariot toward Néla, who was standing nearby. Rävaëa shot 
thousands of arrows at the monkey chief. Hanumän shouted after him to 
come back and fight, but the demon paid no heed. He continued to 
engage with Néla, who took up a mountaintop and hurled it at the 
Räkñasa. With seven crescent-headed arrows Rävaëa cut the rock to 
pieces. Néla threw great trees at the Räkñasa, one after another. Sal, 
aswakarna and mango trees in full blossom flew with speed toward 
Rävaëa. The demon loosed sharp arrows that ripped all the trees to 
shreds. He then covered Néla with a hail of sharp-pointed shafts. 
Néla sprang clear of Rävaëa’s arrows and, reducing himself to a very 
small size, he leapt onto the top of Rävaëa’s standard. The monkey 
sprang from the standard to the end of Rävaëa’s bow, then onto his 
diadem and back again to the standard. Rävaëa blazed with fury upon 
seeing Néla’s insolence. He set an arrow on his bow and charged it with 
the power of the Ägneyastra, the dangerous fire weapon. Being struck 
with that missile Néla fell unconscious to the ground. The monkey was 
burned all over, but by the grace of his father the fire-god, he was not

367 
slain. 
Rävaëa then looked around and saw Lakñman. He directed his 
charioteer to go quickly toward the prince. Lakñman saw him approach 
and called out to him, “Here I am to do battle with you, O king of the 
Räkñasas. Leave aside the monkeys and fight with Me.” 
Rävaëa shouted back, “It is fortunate indeed that You have fallen within 
my sight. Today You shall meet Your end at my hands. Fight with all 
Your strength, O Raghava!” Rävaëa addressed Him derisively as a 
descendent of the powerful King Raghu.  
“What is the use of your bragging?” Lakñman answered. “Those who are 
actually strong do not engage in such talk. O sinful one, I know your 
valor and power. Stand firmly now and fight, for the hour of your demise 
draws near.” 
Rävaëa immediately shot seven beautifully plumed arrows at Lakñman. 
The prince instantly responded with seven of His own arrows, which 
struck down Rävaëa’s shafts from the air. Again and again Rävaëa 
released deadly arrows, but Lakñman cut them all down. The demon was 
astonished at Lakñman’s speed and skill. He became incensed and fired 
more and more arrows in swift succession. Lakñman responded with 
equal numbers. From His fully drawn bow, He shot at Rävaëa arrows 
that shone like fire and flew with the velocity of lightning. 
Suddenly seeing an opportunity, Rävaëa released a celestial arrow that 
penetrated Lakñman’s defenses and struck Him on the forehead. 
Lakñman reeled and His grip on His bow loosened. Crouching down for 
only a moment He recovered His senses and stood up, instantly releasing 
an arrow which cut Rävaëa’s bow in two. The prince then shot three 
sharp-pointed arrows which hit the demon on the chest and made him 
swoon. 
When he regained his senses, Rävaëa took up from his chariot a huge 
javelin he had taken from the gods. He hurled it with great force at 
Lakñman, and it sped through the air emitting fire and sparks. 
Lakñman struck the javelin with His arrows, but it coursed on and Hit 
him full in the chest. Stunned by the javelin Lakñman fell down in a 
faint. As He lay there burning in agony, Rävaëa quickly ran up to Him 
and attempted to take Him captive. The demon violently caught hold of 
Lakñman with his twenty arms and tried to lift Him, but despite exerting

368 
himself with all his power, Rävaëa was unable to even raise the prince’s 
arms. He fell back in amazement and quickly leapt back onto his chariot. 
Hanumän, who had been observing the battle between Rävaëa and 
Lakñman, took the opportunity to jump onto Rävaëa’s chariot. Whirling 
his two fists he struck the demon on the chest, making a sound like a 
great thunderclap which filled the four quarters. Rävaëa fell to his 
knees, blood flowing from his mouths, eyes and ears. He lost 
consciousness and sank motionless to the floor of his chariot. The gods 
and åñis, witnessing Hanumän’s incredible feat, shouted in joy. 
Feeling anxiety for Lakñman, Hanumän left aside his dazed foe. He 
quickly leapt down and gathered up Lakñman in his arms. The monkey 
easily lifted the prince although Rävaëa, the lifter of Mount Kailäsa, had 
not been able to budge him. Hanumän carried the unconscious Lakñman 
into Räma’s presence. 
Räma ran His hand over His brother’s face. Slowly Lakñman came back 
to consciousness and Räma said to Him, “The demon tried to take You 
captive, but that sinful being could not lift You, protected as You are by 
virtue. I cannot brook this attack upon You, dear brother. I shall 
immediately go and destroy this demon.” 
Hearing this Hanumän folded his palms and asked Räma, “Please mount 
upon my back and allow me to carry You to Rävaëa. Fight the demon 
from my back even as Viñëu fights upon Garuòa.” 
Räma at once climbed onto Hanumän’s shoulders and the monkey 
swiftly went to Rävaëa. Twanging His bowstring and making a sharp 
sound that reverberated like thunder, Räma called out to the demon, 
“Stand, O best of the Räkñasas. You will not escape today. Soon you will 
follow the path trodden by your fourteen thousand followers in 
Janasthana.” 
Rävaëa was seized with anger. He let go hundreds of flaming arrows, 
which struck Hanumän all over his body. Keeping a tight hold on Räma, 
the monkey bore the arrows without flinching. His energy and vigor 
only grew as Rävaëa assailed him. 
Räma was infuriated by Rävaëa’s attack on Hanumän. He drew His bow 
to a circle and fired shafts which tore Rävaëa’s chariot to pieces. Its 
standard, wheels, horses, canopy, shields and driver all fell to the ground. 
Räma then struck Rävaëa himself on the chest with arrows that flew

369 
with blinding speed. The demon, who had withstood Indra’s 
thunderbolt, was rocked by Räma’s arrows and he dropped his bow. He 
swooned and lay gasping. Räma took up a crescent-headed shaft and tore 
off Rävaëa’s diadem, of which he was so proud. Räma did not consider 
the Räkñasa to be a king in any way. With another arrow He broke apart 
the demon’s bow. He then spoke to the half-conscious Rävaëa. 
“You are clearly exhausted from the battle. As you are unable to 
properly defend yourself, it is not right that I kill you this time. 
Therefore, O valiant one, return to Lanka. Once you have rested, come 
out again and you shall witness My strength in battle.” 
Rävaëa scrambled to his feet. With his chariot shattered, his diadem 
ripped off and his bow destroyed, the Räkñasa was a sorry sight. He 
turned and flew toward Lanka with his vanity crushed. The other 
Räkñasas followed him and the battle ceased for the time being. Räma 
and Lakñman comforted the wounded monkeys and they all rested, 
awaiting the return of Rävaëa and his troops. 
Chapter 8 
The Colossal Demon 
Rävaëa returned to Lanka feeling highly disturbed. Overcome by Räma 
like an elephant defeated by a lion, he felt humiliated. Remembering the 
force of Räma’s irresistible arrows, he wondered what action to take. He 
summoned his counselors, who then entered the council chamber and 
surrounded Rävaëa as he sat upon his throne. The demon looked around 
and spoke to them, still shaking from his fight with Räma. 
“It seems that all my asceticism has proved useless, for I have been 
utterly vanquished by a mere mortal. I am now recalling Brahmä’s boon, 
which excluded protection from humans. I think this Räma is the one 
referred to by King Anaranya, long ago slain by me. Again the curse of 
Vedavati comes to mind. Surely that lady has been born as Sétä. The 
predictions of those endowed with divine sight always come to pass. 
Considering all this, O mighty Räkñasas, strive in every way to protect

370 
me. A great danger has now arrived at my door.” 
Rävaëa then thought of Kumbhakarna. It was time to rouse him. When 
his fearsome brother marched out, the monkeys would flee in all 
directions. In battle his body grew to immense proportions. With each 
step he took he could crush an entire division of warriors. He would 
make short work of Räma’s army. But how to wake him? Brahmä’s boon 
to him was more like a curse. He remained buried in the deepest sleep 
for six months, impervious to everything. It had only been ten days since 
he had last gone to sleep. 
Rävaëa issued orders for the Räkñasas to go in their thousands to 
Kumbhakarna’s chamber. They should raise a terrific din and try to 
wake him. The Räkñasas left at once and went quickly to Kumbhakarna’s 
abode which was in a subterranean cavern. Pushing back the enormous 
gates, the Räkñasas entered his cavern. They were deafened by the sound 
of his snoring and almost blown over by the blast of his breath. The 
Räkñasas then saw Kumbhakarna’s stupendous body lying in slumber 
within the vast cave, which was lit by innumerable celestial gems. They 
piled up great mounds of meat and other foods by his side. Heaps of 
antelopes, buffaloes and boars were placed next to him, along with 
massive pails of blood. They anointed him with heavenly perfumes and 
daubed him with the finest sandal-paste. Costly incense was lit and 
crowds of Yatudhanas began to extol Kumbhakarna with poetic phrases. 
Other Räkñasas thundered like clouds and blew their great conchshells 
with full force. Clapping their arms, beating drums and roaring like 
lions, the demons raised a tremendous uproar. As the noise issued from 
the cave, beasts fled in all directions and birds fell down stunned. 
But Kumbhakarna did not stir. The Räkñasas then took hold of maces, 
mallets, boulders and flat swords. They beat the limbs of the colossal 
Räkñasa. Hundreds of demons mounted Kumbhakarna’s chest and 
pounded him with their fists, but were thrown off by the wind of his 
breath. Ten thousand Räkñasas surrounded him and all at once began to 
roar and strike his body with their hard fists. Still he would not awaken. 
Unable to rouse Kumbhakarna, the Räkñasas became more and more 
furious. They made an even louder noise, hitting huge drums with all 
their strength and blowing their conches taken from the bottom of the 
ocean. Some of them tore out his hair while others bit his ears.

371 
Hundreds of pails of water were thrown on Kumbhakarna’s face. 
The Räkñasas then had a thousand elephants run up and down 
Kumbhakarna’s monstrous body while at the same time striking him 
with fully grown sal trees. At last he began to stir. Feeling a light touch 
on his body Kumbhakarna opened his eyes and stretched his limbs. The 
Räkñasas and elephants were thrown to the ground and scattered as he 
sat up and yawned. His mouth appeared like another great cavern and 
his luminous eyes resembled two blazing planets. 
Kumbhakarna reached out and scooped up the food that lay around him. 
He consumed all of it and quaffed down many pails of blood and wine. 
When he was sated, the other demons came and respectfully bowed 
before him. Looking at them with eyes still heavy from sleep, 
Kumbhakarna questioned them. 
“Why have I been roused from my slumber? I hope everything is well 
with Rävaëa and with Lanka. Or perhaps some great peril has arrived. If 
so, then I shall proceed from here at once to remove the cause of your 
fear without delay. Tell me, O Räkñasas, what should I do?” 
A minister of Rävaëa named Yupaksha replied. “A formidable danger 
has beset us all of a sudden. Monkeys like great mountains have laid 
siege to the city. Each of them resembles the single monkey who killed 
Prince Aksha and set fire to Lanka. At their head is Räma, sorely 
grieved and angered by Sétä’s abduction. Even our lord Rävaëa was 
overpowered by Him in an encounter and then released.” 
Kumbhakarna was not surprised. He had already warned his brother 
about Räma. It seemed that the time for the inevitable battle had 
arrived. Räma’s power would now be tested to the full. Kumbhakarna 
spoke in a voice that boomed around the cavern. “This very day I shall 
wipe out the entire army of monkeys. The Räkñasas may gorge 
themselves with their flesh. I myself shall drink the blood of Räma and 
Lakñman.” 
Kumbhakarna sprang to his feet and washed his face. He called for more 
drink and quickly swallowed two thousand pails of strong wine. Slightly 
inebriated and anticipating the excitement of battle, the Räkñasa left his 
cave and marched toward Rävaëa’s palace, shaking the earth with his 
every step. He was surrounded by Räkñasas who ran with joined palms 
and continuously sang his praises.

372 
From outside the city, the monkeys saw Kumbhakarna rising above the 
city walls like a mountain peak. They cried in fear and fell stunned to 
the earth. Some fled in all directions, seized by panic. Seeing 
Kumbhakarna, who was adorned with a blazing diadem, moving within 
the city, the monkeys were struck with terror. They rushed to Räma’s 
tent, calling for Him to come out quickly. 
Räma came out holding His bow. He saw the huge Räkñasa, glowing with 
a brilliant effulgence. Räma’s eyes opened wide with astonishment. He 
asked Vibhishana, “Who is this fellow resembling in every way a shining 
mountain? Simply upon seeing him, the monkeys have been put to 
flight. I have never seen such a creature before.” 
Vibhishana told Räma everything about Kumbhakarna. Describing the 
power of Rävaëa’s immense brother, he said, “This demon has defeated 
Indra and all the gods in battle. He has crushed and devoured tens of 
thousands of mighty Daityas and Dänavas. Indeed, this one has 
consumed innumerable living beings. It was for this reason that Brahmä 
contrived to have him sent into continuous slumber. The gods feared 
that he would render all the worlds bereft of creatures, all of them eaten 
by him. Obviously Rävaëa, fearful of You, has roused him for the battle.” 
Vibhishana suggested that Räma inform the monkeys that 
Kumbhakarna was only a mechanical device. Otherwise they would 
never be able to muster up the courage to face him in battle.  
Räma smiled. There was no need for that; He would Himself deal with 
this massive mountain of a Räkñasa. He ordered Néla to quickly array the 
troops for battle. They should be reassured that Räma would Himself 
face the colossus. Taking hold of mountain peaks, trees and various 
weapons, the monkeys deployed themselves around Lanka, awaiting 
Kumbhakarna’s appearance. Räma Himself stood with Lakñman, both of 
Them holding Their bows and facing the city. 
In Lanka, Kumbhakarna, who could change his form and size at will, had 
reached Rävaëa’s palace. He found his elder brother seated in the 
Pushpaka chariot appearing perturbed and anxious. Bowing low at his 
feet, Kumbhakarna inquired what service he could render.  
Rävaëa was joyous upon seeing his brother and he directed him to sit 
down on a splendid heavenly seat. He then told him what had 
transpired. “O mighty one, just see how the woods and groves of Lanka

373 
have been converted into a sea of monkeys. Already they have slain 
many of the foremost fighters among the Räkñasas. I have been unable to 
overcome them by any means. Therefore I have sought you as my only 
shelter. I can think of no other way to defeat this simian army. Beloved 
brother, you have routed the gods and Dänavas many times. Be my 
savior today and crush Räma and His followers without delay.” 
Kumbhakarna became angry. “Were you not warned?” he retorted. “You 
are now reaping the fruits of your rash and sinful act of stealing Sétä. 
Had you heeded the advice of your well-wishers and acted in accord with 
political wisdom, you would never have found yourself in such a mess.” 
Hearing Rävaëa reprimanded by Kumbhakarna, the minister Mahodara 
came to his defense. “Rävaëa acted properly in stealing Sétä,” he argued. 
“The duty of all beings is to secure their happiness by any means. Even 
virtue is only a means to ensure one’s happiness. Therefore Rävaëa’s 
theft of Sétä, meant as it was for his pleasure, was rightly done.” 
Rävaëa also did not like his brother’s speech and he answered angrily. 
“What use is this lecturing now? We face the greatest danger we have 
ever known. This is the time for action, not words. Whether I have 
acted wisely or not is of little consequence now. Let us do what must be 
done.” 
Kumbhakarna smiled. “Be at ease, dear brother,” he said soothingly. “I 
spoke only out of my love for you. It is always the duty of a well-wisher 
to tender proper advice. I shall now fight. You should cast away your 
fears. Soon you will see the monkey army stretched out on the 
battlefield. Räma’s head will be brought before you. Sugréva and the 
other monkey chiefs will be thrown about like so many pieces of dust.” 
Kumbhakarna vaunted his prowess at length, growing more and more 
enraged. He did not care if Brahmä, Indra and Yamaräja appeared on 
the battlefield. There would be no shelter for Räma and His army.  
Mahodara spoke again. “O Kumbhakarna, you are powerful and brave, 
but you should give up any thought of defeating Räma. That human has 
already killed fourteen thousand powerful Räkñasas single-handedly. He 
is now decimating our army. I do not think further battle with Him is at 
all wise.” 
Mahodara was afraid. He suggested that Rävaëa use trickery to win over 
Sétä. The demon king should convince Her that Räma was dead, and

374 
then She would submit to him. This would deprive Räma of all energy. 
Both Rävaëa and Kumbhakarna told Mahodara to be quiet. That plan 
had already failed. There was no avoiding the battle now, short of 
returning Sétä—and that was out of the question.  
Kumbhakarna boomed, “I shall now march out to make good the 
disastrous policy you have initiated, O king. You are surrounded by 
useless ministers like Mahodara. They simply acquiesce out of fear and 
lead you into more and more danger, which they are then powerless to 
prevent. It is fortunate for you that I am here as your protector.” 
Rävaëa laughed heartily to see his brother’s resolve. Surely he would 
now be saved. No one could face Kumbhakarna and live. This would be a 
glorious day for the Räkñasas. Rävaëa sprang up and placed a beautiful 
gold necklace around his brother’s neck. He also adorned him with 
numerous other gem-studded ornaments and had many fragrant garlands 
put on him. 
Kumbhakarna donned an impenetrable golden coat of mail and a huge 
dark blue girdle. As he marched out for battle, he shone like the western 
mountains receiving the setting sun. He went first to Rävaëa’s weapon 
room and took up a great pike, which was embellished with gold and 
which emitted flames even as it lay there. It shone like Indra’s 
thunderbolt and was no less powerful. The pike was wreathed with 
garlands of crimson flowers and smeared with the finest sandal-paste. 
Clutching his fierce weapon, the demon stormed toward the city gates. 
Thousands of drums were beaten and conches blew. Kumbhakarna 
assumed a form six hundred bow-lengths high and more than a hundred 
in breadth. He strode toward the battlefield surrounded by gigantic 
Räkñasas driving chariots and mounted upon elephants. Others followed 
him on camels, donkeys, lions, serpents, antelopes and birds. The 
Räkñasas, who all had terrifying forms and faces, raised their maces, 
swords, lances, bludgeons and bows, sending up a terrific roar.  
As the Räkñasas moved off, there were many grim omens. Massive gray 
clouds full of thunder and lightning covered the sun. The earth shook. 
Birds wheeled from right to left and a large vulture perched on 
Kumbhakarna’s pike. The Räkñasa’s left eye and arm throbbed. A 
flaming meteor fell from the sky and descended to the ground with a 
terrible crash. Jackals howled and a strong wind blew into their faces.

375 
Kumbhakarna paid no heed to the omens. He stepped over Lanka’s 
defensive wall and laughed out loud. The Räkñasa gazed around at the 
army of monkeys, which appeared like a mass of clouds. Seeing the 
stupendous Räkñasa’s sudden appearance, the monkeys dispersed in all 
directions, even as clouds are scattered by a gale. Kumbhakarna roared 
repeatedly, filling the four quarters with an unbearable thundering 
which agitated the ocean and made the mountains quake. Numerous 
monkeys fell unconscious simply from hearing the sound. Others fled 
screeching in terror. 
As the monkeys stampeded, Aìgada called out to them, “Have you 
forgotten your prowess, your valor and your lineage? Why are you 
fleeing like ordinary monkeys? This gigantic nightmare of a Räkñasa will 
not be able to stand for long against us, protected as we are by Räma and 
Lakñman. Stand and fight, O Vanaras!” 
The monkeys regained confidence upon hearing Aìgada’s words. 
Turning back and taking hold of trees and rocks, they stood firm as 
Kumbhakarna rushed toward them. They smashed the Räkñasa with 
mountain peaks and fully-grown trees, but these had no effect 
whatsoever, falling shattered to the ground. Kumbhakarna reached 
down and scooped up hundreds of monkeys. He dashed them furiously to 
the earth. The Räkñasa began destroying the ranks of the Vanara troops 
like a fire consuming dry wood. Innumerable huge monkeys soon lay 
senseless on the ground, covered with blood.  
The monkeys again hastily retreated. They bounded away without 
looking back or sideways. Some rushed back over the ocean bridge. 
Others were seen sailing through the air, having been struck or tossed by 
the Räkñasa. With their faces turned pale, the monkeys scrambled up 
mountains or dived into the sea. Bears climbed trees and hid in caves. 
The whole army ran about in fear, not knowing which way to turn. 
Aìgada tried again and again to rally the monkeys. He called out to 
them, “Come back! Where will you hide from this monster? He must be 
faced. What will you say to your wives after you have fled in fear from 
the battlefield? Have you forgotten your boasting words, ‘We shall 
annihilate the Räkñasas’? How have you become such cowards? No 
regions of bliss are ever attained by cowards. Indeed, they are always 
condemned by good men.”

376 
Although Aìgada tried in many ways to convince his troops to fight, 
they would not listen. They continued fleeing, some of them replying to 
the prince as they ran, “This Räkñasa cannot be faced in battle. This is 
no time to exhibit bravery, for life is dear. We are going.” 
Although their troops fled in all directions, Aìgada and Sugréva 
remained firm, along with Hanumän and some of the other powerful 
commanders of the monkey troops. The Vanara leaders then somehow 
managed to check the monkeys and reminded them of Räma’s 
invincibility. With heartening arguments they convinced the monkeys 
to once more advance against Kumbhakarna. With Aìgada at their head 
the Vanara forces turned again to face the mighty Räkñasa. 
Thousands of monkeys rushed in a body at Kumbhakarna, but he swept 
them aside with his pike. He ran about crushing and devouring the 
monkeys even as Garuòa would devour serpents. With great difficulty 
the monkeys remained standing in the forefront of battle. Waves of 
other Räkñasas rushed forward in support of Kumbhakarna, roaring in 
joy. The battle raged furiously with Kumbhakarna wreaking havoc 
among the monkey army. 
The powerful Dwivida hurled an immense boulder at Kumbhakarna. 
The Räkñasa evaded the rock and it fell among the other Räkñasas, 
crushing chariots, horses and elephants, along with hundreds of demons. 
The Räkñasa warriors fought back, severing the heads of the yelling 
monkeys with their deadly arrows. 
Hanumän leapt into the air and rained down rocks and trees upon 
Kumbhakarna’s head. The Räkñasa fended off the missiles with his pike. 
Hanumän, who had grown to huge proportions, came down on the 
ground and stood firmly in front of Kumbhakarna. He smashed him on 
the breast with a mountain peak and the Räkñasa reeled back in pain. 
Quickly recovering, the Räkñasa struck Hanumän a terrible blow with 
his pike. The monkey was rendered almost senseless and he fell back, 
vomiting blood. 
Seeing Hanumän thrown down, the Räkñasa forces cheered loudly and 
the monkeys fled in fear. Néla quickly came forward and rallied the 
troops. He took up a great boulder and flung it violently at 
Kumbhakarna. The Räkñasa saw it coming and smashed it to pieces with 
his fist, sending up a shower of flames and sparks.

377 
Five huge monkey chiefs then attacked Kumbhakarna from all sides. 
They struck him with crags, trees, the palms of their hands and their 
feet. They climbed up his legs and tore at him with their nails and teeth. 
Then hundreds of other monkeys rushed at the Räkñasa and leapt upon 
him. Kumbhakarna plucked the monkeys from his body and thrust them 
into his huge open mouth. Monkeys were seen to issue out of his nostrils 
and his ears as the demon repeatedly thrust them into his mouth. 
Kumbhakarna looked like Death incarnate appearing for the destruction 
of all living beings. One by one the powerful monkey leaders assailed 
him and were repulsed. Sugréva took up a great mountain-top and boldly 
challenged the Räkñasa. “See now my prowess, O Räkñasa. Leave aside 
the other monkeys and face me. With this mountain peak I shall dash 
you to the ground.” 
The Räkñasa laughed. “I know you, monkey. You are a grandson of 
Brahmä and the son of the mighty Riksaraja. Thus you stand there 
roaring. Show me then the limits of your strength.” 
Sugréva immediately hurled the vast crag upon the demon’s chest. It 
smashed to pieces and fell to the earth, but the Räkñasa was hardly 
moved. In a rage he threw his flaming pike at Sugréva but Hanumän 
intercepted it as it flew. The monkey placed the pike across his knees 
and broke it in two, making the Vanara troops roar with joy.  
Kumbhakarna became maddened. He stormed across to the Malaya 
mountain and tore from it a massive peak. Spinning around, the Räkñasa 
hurled it at Sugréva. The monkey king was caught by the whirling crag 
and he fell unconscious. The Räkñasas shouted in triumph, thinking 
Sugréva to be slain. Kumbhakarna quickly ran over and took up the 
fallen monkey. Pressing him under his arm, the demon made his way 
back to the city. If Sugréva were killed or captured, then the entire 
monkey army would be finished. 
As the Räkñasa stepped over the city wall, he was greeted by cheering 
citizens. They showered flowers and scented water on him. Sugréva felt 
the cool water on his face and he regained consciousness. He saw himself 
being carried toward Rävaëa’s palace. Bending his body violently, 
Sugréva spun round and ripped off the demon’s ear with his nails. He 
then bit off the end of his nose and clawed his side. Kumbhakarna 
roared in pain and threw the monkey down.

378 
Sugréva bounced up like a ball. He sprang onto a rooftop and quickly 
bounded over the city wall and back to the monkeys. Kumbhakarna 
stood with blood running down his face. He screamed in anger and 
turned back toward the battle holding a terrible-looking mace. Rushing 
into the monkey forces, he continued annihilating them by the 
thousands. 
Lakñman then appeared before the Räkñasa. He immediately shot two 
dozen flaming arrows into Kumbhakarna’s arms. The prince 
continuously released arrows which covered Kumbhakarna on all sides 
like a golden cloud. Brushing aside the shafts the Räkñasa laughed and 
spoke to Lakñman. “You have shown me your prowess, O prince. I am 
impressed with Your valor. Even Indra or Yamaräja would not dare to 
face me in an encounter. But I wish to fight only with Räma. Where is 
Your brother? By slaying Him I shall put an end to this conflict. My 
army will then finish the rest of the monkeys.” 
Räma heard the Räkñasa’s haughty challenge. He called out, “Stand 
ready for battle!” and shot from a distance a number of arrows that 
pierced the huge demon all over. Kumbhakarna at once rushed toward 
Him, clutching his mighty mace. Räma sent volleys of arrows, which 
shattered the Räkñasa’s mace even as he raised it for Räma’s destruction. 
Shafts bedecked with golden feathers thudded into the demon’s body by 
the thousands. Blood poured from his wounds like streams from a 
mountain. 
Kumbhakarna ran about in fury, crushing monkeys and demons alike. 
He seized hold of a tremendous rock and flung it at Räma. The prince 
released sharp-pointed arrows which smashed the crag as it flew toward 
Him. The pieces of the rock killed two hundred Räkñasas as the shards 
fell to earth. 
Thousands of monkeys rushed at Kumbhakarna and leapt upon him, 
trying to drag him down, but the Räkñasa shook them off like so many 
insects. He dashed about intoxicated with battle and slaying both friend 
and foe. Räma determined that the time to kill him had arrived. Firmly 
grasping His bow he called out, “Take heart and fight, O lord of the 
Räkñasas. Know Me to be the destroyer of the Räkñasa race. You will 
now be slain by Me.” 
Kumbhakarna whirled around and faced Räma, but suddenly Vibhishana

379 
came between them with mace in hand. Seeing him there, 
Kumbhakarna said, “Yes, my brother. Come forward and strike at once. 
Abandon all filial affection and remain devoted to the duty of a warrior. 
O Vibhishana, you alone are the redeemer of our race. Among the 
Räkñasas you are the best knower of virtue. Indeed, I will not slay you 
today, for you deserve protection at my hands. Stand aside! I cannot 
check my nature and am given to wantonly killing all creatures.” 
Vibhishana replied, “With the interests of my race in mind I always 
tendered advice to Rävaëa, but neglected by him I sought Räma’s 
shelter. Hence I stand before you in battle today.” 
Tears sprang to Vibhishana’s eyes as he spoke. Räma consoled him and 
told him to stand aside; the time for Kumbhakarna’s destruction had 
come. Seeing Räma standing firmly before him, Kumbhakarna laughed 
hideously and said, “I am neither Viradha nor Kabhandha. Nor am I 
Khara, Dushana, Vali or Maricha. I am Kumbhakarna, arrived here as 
Your death. Do not hold me in contempt. Show me the full limit of Your 
power and I shall then devour You, O Räma.” 
Räma at once released arrows which flew with the speed of lightning 
and struck the Räkñasa’s body. Those arrows, which had formerly pierced 
seven sal trees and the very earth itself, did not even shake the demon. 
The Räkñasa took up a massive club and whirled it about, knocking 
down Räma’s arrows as they flew. Laughing again and again, 
Kumbhakarna stood with his great club uplifted. 
Räma released an arrow imbued with the force of Väyu. It roared 
through the air and severed the Räkñasa’s arm. That arm, still clutching 
the club, fell to earth and killed a thousand monkeys and Räkñasas. 
Kumbhakarna shrieked with pain, making the sky vibrate and the 
mountains break open. He looked like a mountain whose summit had 
been cut off with a gigantic sword. With his remaining arm he tore up a 
large palmyra tree and rushed toward Räma. With each step the earth 
vibrated and trees toppled over in distant forests. 
Räma released another mystic missile, which cut off the Räkñasa’s other 
arm. It fell with an enormous crash, sending Räkñasas and monkeys 
scattering in all directions. With blood spurting from the stumps of his 
arms the Räkñasa continued to rush at Räma. He bellowed furiously and 
the monkeys covered their ears, unable to tolerate the noise. Räma shot

380 
a pair of crescent-headed arrows imbued with the force of Indra’s 
thunderbolt and they severed the Räkñasa’s feet. 
Not deterred, Kumbhakarna still somehow moved swiftly toward the 
prince. His mouth was wide open and he emitted savage, deafening cries 
which shook the earth. In an instant Räma filled his mouth with arrows 
and the demon was silenced. Räma then took up an arrow which was 
encrusted with gems and which shone brilliantly. Empowering it with 
the force of the brahmästra, He released it for Kumbhakarna’s 
destruction. 
As it flew with terrible speed, the arrow illuminated all directions like a 
blazing comet descending to earth. It tore off the Räkñasa’s head, which 
looked like a peak of the Himalaya mountains. Adorned with a pair of 
blazing gold earrings, his head shone as it was carried through the air by 
the force of Brahmä’s weapon. It seemed like the rising moon moving 
through the heavens. It fell upon the defensive wall of Lanka and 
demolished the great northern gate. The head then rolled along the 
royal highway. By the power of Brahmä’s mystic missile the Räkñasa’s 
body was lifted and thrown into the ocean, creating a tidal wave which 
swept the coast of Lanka. 
Hosts of gods and åñis assembled in the sky and joyously praised Räma. 
The monkeys surrounded Him roaring in exultation. All the remaining 
Räkñasas fled, astonished and dismayed. Räma felt elated and shone 
brightly amid the monkeys, even as the sun shines after an eclipse. 
Chapter 9 
Carnage Among the Räkñasas 
The Räkñasas ran quickly to Rävaëa and told him the news. “After 
wreaking havoc among the monkeys for some time, your glorious brother 
has been slain by Räma. His limbless and headless trunk lies half-
submerged in the sea, and his head now blocks the city’s main gate.” 
Rävaëa was shocked and seized by grief. He fainted. All around him his 
sons and other relatives sent up a wail of sorrow. They could not believe

381 
their ears. How could the invincible Kumbhakarna be killed by a mere 
human? 
Gradually Rävaëa came around and began to lament. “Alas, my brother, 
where have you gone? Without removing the thorn from my side how 
have you left me alone? What use now is my kingdom, or Sétä, or even 
life itself? I am deprived of my right arm, depending on which I had no 
fear from the assembled gods headed by Indra. Now those gods stand in 
the sky raising shouts of joy. I cannot brook this turn of events. I shall 
follow the path trodden by my brother. Either I shall slay Räma or Death 
may claim me too.” 
Rävaëa wept and tossed about in agony. He remembered Vibhishana’s 
advice. His virtuous brother had spoken wisely. He had been wrongly 
expelled from Lanka. Now Rävaëa was tasting the bitter fruit of that 
action. One who ignores the good advice of wise well-wishers always 
comes to grief. 
The Räkñasa king sank down in distress. Seeing him fallen into abject 
sorrow, his son Devantaka, who was not very thoughtful, said, “Why are 
you lamenting in this way, O king? Those endowed with power and valor 
do not give way to grief. The time has come for firm action, not 
lamentation. Only command me and I shall go out and exterminate your 
enemies.” 
Rävaëa’s other sons were heartened by Devantaka’s words. They also 
began boasting of their power. All of them clamored for the order to 
fight. They were all mighty in battle and had never experienced defeat. 
All of them knew the mystic missiles and all had received various boons 
from their practices of asceticism. Bragging loudly, they declared that 
they would all go out together and finish Räma and the monkeys in no 
time. 
Rävaëa was encouraged. Driven by his destiny, the demon stood up and 
embraced his sons, ordering them to march out for battle. Four of the 
Räkñasa’s sons, Trishira, Devantaka, Narantaka and Atikaya, along with 
two of his half-brothers, Mahaparshwa and Mahodara, were dispatched 
for the fight. Those gigantic warriors anointed themselves with 
medicinal herbs capable of warding off injuries, as well as with perfumes 
and sandalwood paste. They put on golden armor and took up their 
fierce weapons.

382 
Mahodara mounted an elephant that resembled a dark cloud. Trishira 
mounted a fine chariot drawn by the best of horses and equipped with 
thousands of weapons. Atikaya, who stood with a flaming crown on his 
head, mounted another superb chariot. On either side of him stood 
Devantaka and Narantaka, clutching frightful maces, both of them 
appearing like Viñëu holding the Mandara mountain. Mahaparshwa 
came behind them, mounted upon another elephant which resembled 
Airävata, the carrier of Indra. 
They came out of the western gate of Lanka, like six brilliant planets 
suddenly appearing in the heavens. Followed by the massed ranks of 
Räkñasa warriors, they raised their weapons and rushed joyfully toward 
the monkey army. 
The monkeys saw them advancing like a row of dark clouds. The earth 
shook and the sky resounded with their roars. Drums crashed and 
conches blew, filling the four quarters with a deafening clamor. 
The Vanara army thundered in response and took up crags and tree 
trunks. The two armies met with a clash and a terrible, confused fight 
ensued. Demons and monkeys gave out leonine roars as they assailed one 
another with fury. The monkeys sprang high, dragging down the 
airborne Räkñasas and dashing them to the earth. They smashed the 
demons with rocks and pounded them with their fists and feet. 
The Räkñasas sent volley after volley of arrows at the monkeys. They 
whirled their spiked maces and swords, viciously hacking down the 
enemy troops. The monkeys picked up one Räkñasa to strike another, 
and the Räkñasas did the same with the monkeys. Arrows with crescent 
or horseshoe heads sped through the air and lopped off arms, legs and 
heads. 
Narantaka sent up a tremendous roar and began carving a path deep 
into the monkey army. He left a trail of flesh and blood strewn with 
mountain-like monkeys lying stretched on the ground. The demon 
sundered the ranks of his enemy, piercing them with his spear and 
killing dozens at a time. The monkeys howled in fear as Narantaka 
fought with a maniacal fury. None could face him. 
Seeing the awful destruction being wrought by Narantaka, Aìgada came 
forward. He shouted to the demon. “Wait! Why are you showing your 
strength against ordinary monkeys? Throw your spear, which strikes like

383 
lightning, at my breast.” 
Narantaka spun round and glared at Aìgada. He hurled his great 
flaming spear at the monkey who stood firmly before him. The spear 
broke against Aìgada’s chest and fell to the ground. Aìgada leapt 
forward and dealt a blow to the head of the Räkñasa’s horse. The horse’s 
feet sank deeply into the ground and its eyes popped out. Narantaka 
jumped off the back of his slain horse and roared in anger. He struck 
Aìgada a terrible blow on the side of his head. The monkey vomited hot 
blood and fell back dazed. 
Crouching down and regaining his senses, Aìgada, who was thinking 
only of Räma, suddenly sprang forward. He swung his fist with all his 
might and hit the Räkñasa on the chest. Narantaka’s breast was split 
asunder by that blow. He sank to the ground with his limbs soaked in 
blood and gave up his life.  
The monkeys sent up a cry of joy and the gods beat their heavenly 
drums. Observing Aìgada’s incredible feat, even Räma was struck with 
wonder. Aìgada stood infused with vigor ready to continue the battle. 
Seeing his brother killed, Devantaka cried loudly with grief and fury. He 
gazed with bloodshot eyes at Aìgada. Followed by Trishira and 
Mahodara, he rushed toward the son of Vali, releasing thousands of 
arrows. Aìgada immediately seized a huge tree and swept aside all the 
arrows. He then hurled the tree at Devantaka, but it was torn to pieces 
by the arrows of Trishira standing close behind him. Aìgada threw trees 
and rocks one after another. Mahodara whirled his club and shattered 
them as they flew toward him. Suddenly the three powerful Räkñasas 
rushed simultaneously at Aìgada. Each of them struck him furiously 
with their clubs. Aìgada stood his ground tolerating the blows. He leapt 
toward Mahodara and struck the Räkñasa’s elephant with his palm. The 
elephant fell to its knees and toppled over. Aìgada then tore out a tusk 
from the dead elephant and struck Devantaka a terrific blow on the 
head. The demon reeled about, vomiting blood. 
Hanumän saw Aìgada engaged with the three towering Räkñasas and he 
ran over to assist the prince. Néla also rushed to Aìgada’s aid, hurling a 
mountain peak at Trishira, but the Räkñasa smashed the massive crag 
with his arrows. Devantaka swung his club in a full circle and caught the 
running Hanumän on his breast. Not minding that blow, although it was

384 
forceful enough to have rent the earth, Hanumän swung his fist at the 
Räkñasa. He caught him on his head with a crack resembling a peal of 
thunder. The demon’s teeth and eyes were forced out and his skull was 
shattered. He fell like a tree cut at its root. 
Hanumän roared loudly and sprang at Trishira. He clawed at the 
Räkñasa’s massive steed even as a lion would claw an elephant. Trishira 
took up a terrible javelin and hurled it straight at Hanumän. The 
monkey immediately caught it and snapped it in two. Trishira lifted his 
sword and thrust it at Hanumän, piercing him in the breast. Not shaken 
by the wound, Hanumän struck the Räkñasa a blow on the breast with 
his palm. Trishira fell unconscious and his sword slipped from his grasp. 
Hanumän snatched the sword and roared. The demon regained 
consciousness, awakened by Hanumän’s roar. He could not tolerate the 
sound and leapt up furiously, striking the monkey with his fist. 
Hanumän seized the Räkñasa by his hair, which was covered by a diadem. 
Pulling the demon’s head toward him, Hanumän severed it with the 
demon’s own sword. 
Even as Hanumän was slaying Trishira, Néla killed Mahodara with a 
tremendous blow from a fully grown sal tree. The mountain-like monkey 
Rishabha then engaged in a fierce fight with Mahaparshwa. The two 
combatants rendered each other unconscious again and again. Finally 
Rishabha pounded the Räkñasa to death with the demon’s own mace. 
Seeing five of their heroes killed in duels with the monkeys, the 
Räkñasas fled in all directions, resembling an ocean that has burst its 
shores. The demon Atikaya then came to the forefront of the battle and 
rallied the terrified Räkñasas. As the huge-bodied demon advanced the 
monkeys ran away howling. They thought that Kumbhakarna had 
somehow returned to life. Surrounding Räma, they cried for protection. 
Räma saw in the distance Atikaya, who resembled a great mountain. 
Amazed at this sight, Räma turned to Vibhishana and asked, “Who is 
that monstrous Räkñasa seated in a chariot drawn by a thousand horses? 
Surrounded by flaming pikes, he seems like a dark cloud encircled by 
lightning flashes. Indeed, with his golden bows on all sides of the shining 
chariot, he is illuminating the battlefield like the newly-risen sun. His 
blazing arrows going in all directions are like so many sunbeams. Tell me 
the name of this lion-like warrior.”

385 
Vibhishana replied that this was Rävaëa’s son, a powerful fighter who 
had performed much asceticism and had thus acquired from Brahmä 
different boons. The creator of the universe had made him invincible to 
gods and demons and had bestowed upon him many mystical weapons as 
well as the wonderful chariot he was now driving. With his arrows, the 
demon had even checked Indra’s thunderbolt and cut down Varuëa’s 
noose. Vibhishana advised Räma to tackle him at once before he 
annihilated the entire army of monkeys.  
Räma watched as Atikaya penetrated into the monkey ranks. At once 
he was surrounded by Néla, Dwivida, Mainda, Kumuda and Sarabha, five 
great heroes among the monkeys. They assailed the Räkñasa from all 
sides, hurling huge rocks and trees at him. The demon easily repulsed all 
of their missiles with his arrows, which were bedecked with bright red 
jewels. He pierced all five of the monkeys and sent them running. The 
demon struck fear into the monkey army as a furious lion would terrify a 
flock of deer. He looked around and saw Räma. Leaving aside the 
monkeys, the Räkñasa drove across to Räma and issued a proud 
challenge. “I do not care to fight with common warriors. If You have the 
courage and the strength, then stand against me today. I shall soon end 
Your power and Your fame.” 
Hearing this, Lakñman was infuriated. He seized His bow and twanged 
the string making a sound which reverberated all around the battlefield. 
Lakñman gazed at Atikaya with bloodshot eyes, placing a long shaft on 
His bow.  
The demon laughed derisively. “How do You dare to challenge me, O 
son of Sumitra? You are only a boy, unskilled in warfare. I cannot be 
faced by the Himalaya mountain nor even the earth itself. You seek to 
rouse the fire of universal destruction as it slumbers peacefully. Do not 
lose Your life in this way. Depart swiftly! Or if You choose to stand here, 
then be prepared for my arrows, which will quaff Your lifeblood, even as 
a lion would quaff the blood of a deer.” 
Lakñman could not tolerate Atikaya’s arrogant words. He thundered 
back at the Räkñasa, “Mere speech does not prove your prowess, O 
demon. Give up this empty boasting and demonstrate your strength at 
once. After you send at Me the best of your arrows and missiles, I will 
strike your head off even as the wind blows a ripe fruit from a tree.

386 
Whether I am old or young is of no matter; you should know Me as your 
death arrived here today. The three worlds were taken by Viñëu even 
while He was yet a child.” 
Atikaya flared up in anger. He instantly fired an arrow which flew with 
the speed of the wind, resembling a meteor and shooting tongues of fire. 
Lakñman loosed His own arrow, which intercepted Atikaya’s in mid-
flight and split it in two. Atikaya grew even more enraged and fitted five 
more arrows to his bow, sending them at Lakñman in a moment. Again 
Lakñman cut down his shafts as they sped toward Him.  
Lakñman seized a sharpened arrow which shone with splendor. Pulling 
His bow into a full circle He released the shaft and it pierced the demon 
in the brow. Atikaya shook like a mountain in an earthquake. Profuse 
blood ran down his head like oxides exuding from a mountain. The 
Räkñasa praised Lakñman’s feat. He quickly sent two dozen arrows at the 
prince which seemed to light up the sky, but Lakñman struck all of them 
down. 
Seizing his opportunity as Lakñman parried the arrows, Atikaya sent 
another fierce shaft which struck the prince on His breast. Lakñman 
bled profusely but pulled out the arrow and tossed it aside. He then 
charged an arrow with the force of the Ägneyastra, the powerful fire 
weapon. Seeing the arrow loosed for his destruction and blazing in the 
sky, Atikaya responded with an arrow imbued with the power of the sun-
god. The two mystic missiles met in space like two blazing planets 
colliding in the heavens. Reduced to ashes, they both fell to earth. 
Atikaya fired at Lakñman a weapon presided over by Yamaräja, but the 
prince countered it with a missile empowered with the force of the 
wind-god. Lakñman quickly responded by covering the son of Rävaëa 
with countless arrows, so that neither the demon nor his chariot were 
visible. Sweeping away those arrows with a sword, the demon did not 
feel at all harassed. He shot a deadly arrow at Lakñman, which hit Him 
in the chest and caused the prince to faint for some moments. Regaining 
consciousness, He shot razor-headed arrows which cut down the demon’s 
standard. He killed the charioteer and several rows of the Räkñasa’s 
horses. But although He struck the demon’s body with innumerable 
arrows, He could not hurt him in the least. 
As Lakñman stood confounded, the wind-god Väyu approached Him and

387 
said, “This demon is clad in an impenetrable armor bestowed upon him 
by Brahmä himself. Indeed, the Räkñasa cannot be slain except with 
Brahmä’s weapon.”  
Hearing the celestial voice, Lakñman took out a large golden arrow and 
fitted it to His bow. He recited the incantations to invoke Brahmä’s 
missile. As He chanted the mantras, the sky seemed to shake and the 
earth groaned. With that arrow on His fully stretched bow, Lakñman 
appeared like Death incarnate. He released the arrow and it sped with a 
terrible cracking sound toward the demon. 
Atikaya saw the diamond-bedecked arrow approach him blazing like the 
midday sun. The demon was struck with fear. Moving with blinding 
speed he hurled javelins, spears, pikes, maces and axes at the arrow. He 
also struck it with numerous arrows of his own. But the shaft could not 
be checked. It baffled the demon’s weapons and continued to course 
swiftly through the air. The blazing arrow caught Atikaya in the neck, 
severing his head and throwing it some distance onto the battlefield. 
When Rävaëa’s son was slain, the remaining Räkñasas sent up a wail. 
Crying in discordant, tones they ran about in fear, unable to find a 
protector. They turned their faces toward the city and hastily retreated. 
The monkeys surrounded Lakñman and praised Him, shouting with joy. 
The prince smiled and returned to Räma’s side. Räma embraced His 
brother and glorified His wondrous feat. Flowers fell from the sky and 
heavenly drums sounded. 
Chapter 10 
Räma and Lakñman Laid Low 
Rävaëa was becoming increasingly anxious. His fear overpowered the 
grief of losing his sons and brothers. He sat lost in thought on his golden 
throne. One after another his most powerful fighters were being slain. 
Even when the two human princes had been overcome and thrown 
down by Indrajit’s irresistible weapons, still they somehow recovered. 
When Räma had killed even the formidable Kumbhakarna, who was

388 
there left who could face the prince and live? Surely He was Viñëu 
Himself, the Räkñasas’ supreme enemy. 
Rävaëa’s eyes narrowed. He now faced a great peril. He ordered his 
ministers to check every defensive post around the city. Extra guards 
should be posted. Day and night there should be extreme vigilance. 
Anyone found neglectful of his duty would be immediately executed. 
The demon hissed with anger. The thought of surrender did not cross 
his mind for a moment. Victory or death were the only choices. 
Brooding on Atikaya’s fall, he went into his chambers and sat 
disconsolately on a golden couch. 
Indrajit then approached him and said, “O lord of the Räkñasas, why are 
you held in the grip of sorrow? Do you not see me by your side? How will 
those two humans survive when I go out again for battle? They were 
lucky to escape last time, but their luck has now run out. Behold them 
today lying prostrate on the ground, torn to pieces by my weapons.” 
Indrajit consoled his father by vowing that he would kill Räma and 
Lakñman. Rävaëa felt heartened. He gave his assent to his son and 
without delay Indrajit prepared for battle. 
The prince donned his impenetrable armor and mounted his great 
chariot drawn by tigers. Blowing his massive conch he proceeded along 
Lanka’s main highway. At once many other fierce Räkñasas began to 
follow. Some rode horses, some boars and some giant donkeys. Others 
mounted lions, jackals and even huge scorpions. Other Räkñasas, who 
had hideous, twisted faces, mounted crows, vultures and peacocks. Soon 
an enormous number of Räkñasas were assembled for battle, headed by 
Indrajit. 
Those demon warriors, equipped with every kind of weapon, marched to 
the sound of kettledrums and conches, making the earth vibrate. Indrajit 
sat aboard his chariot, which was covered over with a white parasol. He 
was being fanned by beautiful golden-handled whisks and worshipped by 
Yatudhanas chanting sacred hymns. As he proceeded for battle he shone 
like Indra amid the gods. 
Rävaëa stood upon a high rampart watching his son. He felt confident. 
No one in all the worlds could stand against Indrajit, be they gods, 
Dänavas or Daityas. What then of humans and monkeys? After all, 
Indrajit had already overpowered the two humans. Surely this time there

389 
would be no lucky escapes. 
Rävaëa shouted a blessing to Indrajit as he reached the northern gate. 
The demon prince turned to his father with palms joined, then raised 
his hand, and the army rushed out with a mighty roar. 
As the Räkñasas reached the battlefield, Indrajit halted them and had 
them surround him. He dismounted from his chariot and lit a fire. While 
reciting Vedic mantras the demon worshipped the sacred fire. He poured 
oblations of ghee into the fire and made offerings of lances, spears and 
swords in place of the traditional reeds and grasses. Clasping the neck of 
a dark-hued goat, the demon slit its throat and placed it on the fire. 
As the fire burst into flames, the fire-god appeared in person. Shining 
like refined gold he personally accepted the offerings. Indrajit then 
climbed back aboard his chariot. He sat in meditation and invoked the 
brahmästra. While the Räkñasa was charging all his weapons and his 
chariot with the force of that celestial missile, the heavens seemed to 
quake in fear. 
Having finished his incantations Indrajit blazed like a smokeless fire. By 
his own mystic power he became invisible, along with his weapons, 
chariot and all. He gave the order to charge and the army of Räkñasas 
went forward roaring in various dissonant tones. They struck the 
monkeys from a distance with their ornamented arrows and lances 
thrown with tremendous velocity. The Räkñasas then fell upon the 
monkeys in a fury. 
Remaining invisible, Indrajit assailed the monkey army with razor-
headed arrows, lances and maces. The monkeys realized the demon was 
fighting invisibly and surrounded the place from where his weapons 
flew. They hurled numerous trees and boulders at him, but the demon 
cut them to pieces. He tore apart the bodies of the monkeys with his 
irresistible arrows. With a single arrow the Räkñasa pierced as many as 
five, seven, or even a dozen monkeys. 
Even though they were being exterminated by Indrajit, the monkeys, 
who had dedicated their lives to Räma’s cause, stood their ground. They 
repeatedly surrounded the deadly demon, sending an endless shower of 
rocks and trees in his direction. 
Indrajit moved off invisibly and searched for the chief monkey warriors. 
One after another he pierced Néla, Jambavan, Sugréva, Aìgada,

390 
Rishabha, Dwivida and many other monkey heroes. He rendered all of 
them virtually unconscious with his terrible shafts. With great joy the 
Räkñasa beheld the Vanara army being overwhelmed on all sides by his 
cruel weapons. He rose into the sky above the monkeys and continued to 
rain down countless arrows, like a dark cloud in the monsoon season.  
With their bodies ripped apart, the monkeys fell shrieking like 
mountains thrown down by Indra’s thunderbolt. They could not see the 
demon or his chariot, but saw only an endless stream of sharp-pointed 
shafts falling from the heavens. Indrajit sent forth a shower of violent 
weapons which gave off sparks and incandescent flames. He covered the 
monkeys with axes, swords, lances and pikes, all of those weapons 
charged with mystic power. 
Indrajit then sought out Räma and Lakñman, covering Them with 
torrents of arrows. Not minding the arrows any more than a mountain 
would mind a shower of rain, Räma said to His brother, “This demon 
Indrajit has engaged the invincible weapon of Brahmä. Behold, our 
entire army has been virtually overpowered. We too will have to 
succumb to Brahmä’s weapon, I fear.” 
Räma knew that no being in the universe could resist the brahmästra, 
except by invoking the same weapon to counter it. But the meeting of 
two brahmästras was highly dangerous. It could bring about the 
destruction of the whole cosmos and would likely cause the death of 
millions of innocent creatures. Räma did not want that to happen. He 
and Lakñman sent hundreds and thousands of powerful shafts toward 
the Räkñasa, but Indrajit shrugged off Their arrows and continued 
aiming his weapons at the two brothers. 
The demon again and again recited the incantations sacred to Brahmä 
and sent fierce arrows at Räma and Lakñman. The princes were 
completely covered by Indrajit’s arrows. They bled all over and appeared 
like a couple of kinshuka trees covered in red blossoms. Grievously 
wounded by Indrajit’s assault, They both fell to the ground and dropped 
Their bows. 
Indrajit sent up a cry of victory. He considered Räma and Lakñman dead. 
The demon looked around the battlefield and saw that only a few 
thousand monkeys remained standing. The battle was surely won. Seeing 
the sun approaching the western horizon, Indrajit decided to return to

391 
Lanka and tell his father the good news. If any of the monkey army 
remained on the battlefield, he could finish them tomorrow. Appearing 
in the sky like a blazing planet, Indrajit commanded the Räkñasa troops 
to withdraw and they quickly entered Lanka, roaring in joy. 
On the battlefield Hanumän still remained standing. He looked around 
at the scene of devastation wrought by Indrajit. Even Räma and 
Lakñman, along with Sugréva, Aìgada, Néla and all the other powerful 
Vanara commanders, lay prostrate. The monkey ran up to the two 
princes and knelt by Their side. He was joined by Vibhishana who had 
also survived Indrajit’s attack. Tears fell from Hanumän’s eyes as he 
gazed at the unconscious brothers. They appeared to be severely 
wounded. Placing his hand on Hanumän’s shoulder, Vibhishana 
reassured him gently. 
“Do not give way to despondency, my valiant friend. These two brothers 
are not killed. Surely They have allowed Themselves to be brought 
under the power of Brahmä’s weapon in honor of the self-born creator of 
the universe. Räma and Lakñman are always protected by virtue. Indeed, 
They are virtue personified. We will yet see Them rise to defeat Rävaëa 
and his evil forces.” 
Hanumän embraced the Räkñasa and thanked him for his kind words. 
But what could he do now? How could the battle continue with only a 
handful of monkeys and bears still standing? Even Räma and Lakñman 
seemed in no condition to fight. 
As Hanumän and Vibhishana looked around they saw Jambavan lying 
nearby. The wise old leader of the bears was covered with arrows but his 
head was moving slightly. Vibhishana ran over to him and knelt down 
calling his name. Jambavan opened his eyes and looked at the Räkñasa. 
He spoke barely in a whisper.  
“O Vibhishana, I can hardly see you, wounded as I am by Indrajit’s 
arrows. Our army is now in grave danger, but if Hanumän still survives 
then there is hope. Tell me, does the son of the wind-god live?” 
Vibhishana was surprised that Jambavan had first inquired after 
Hanumän rather than Räma or Lakñman. He called Hanumän over and 
the monkey came quickly and knelt before Jambavan. Mustering his 
strength, the old bear began to speak. “My dear Hanumän, it is you alone 
who can save this army. Only you possess the power to fly from here to

392 
the Himälayas. You must go there at once to fetch the celestial healing 
herbs.” 
Jambavan explained that there was a mountain standing near Mount 
Kailäsa on which grew four precious herbs, placed there by the gods 
themselves. Jambavan described the four plants. “First there is 
sanjivakarani, capable of bringing a dead person back to life. Then you 
must find vishalyakarani, which can completely heal all weapon wounds. 
The other two herbs are sandhani and suvarnakarani, which together 
can restore a broken body back to its pristine state. They all grow 
together atop this mountain. O Hanumän, leave at once and bring them 
here.” 
Hanumän immediately stood up. He bounded across to the Trikuta 
mountain and quickly climbed to its summit. From there he leapt over to 
the Malaya mountain on Lanka’s coast. Standing there the monkey 
expanded his body till he appeared like a second mountain on top of the 
Malaya. He thought of Räma and Lakñman, and of Sugréva and all the 
other monkeys and bears lying mortally wounded. There was no time to 
lose. He crouched down and with a great shout of “Victory to Räma!” 
leapt toward the north. 
As he jumped he pushed down the mountain and made the whole island 
of Lanka shake. The city seemed to be dancing at night as its lights 
shook with the force of Hanumän’s leap. The Räkñasas were seized with 
fear, thinking that Lanka was about to be consumed by an earthquake. 
Hanumän soared through the heavens. Being followed by the wind, he 
felt no resistance and sped faster and faster toward the Himälayas. In a 
short time he saw the great range appearing ahead of him. From a 
distance the mountains appeared like masses of white clouds. As 
Hanumän came closer he saw the golden Rishabha mountain with the 
gods’ numerous residences atop it. Passing beyond Rishabha he saw 
Mount Kailäsa in the distance.  
Between Rishabha and Kailäsa, Hanumän saw the mountain where the 
celestial herbs grew. It shone brightly and the herbs growing upon its 
sides appeared like flashing lights. Hanumän came down upon the 
mountain and began to search for the four herbs Jambavan had 
described. As he moved among the lush foliage, however, the herbs, 
perceiving that someone had come to take them, hid themselves from

393 
view. Only the gods were able to use those divine medicines; no one else 
could find them. 
Hanumän ran about looking for the herbs. Where were they? What if he 
could not find them? What would happen to Räma and Lakñman? Could 
it be possible that the two brothers would die? No. He could not let that 
happen. He had to fetch the herbs even if it meant bringing the entire 
mountain. 
The monkey realized that the herbs had concealed themselves from his 
view. He became furious and roared loudly, thundering at the mountain, 
“O lord of mountains, as you have not shown any compassion even to 
Räma and Lakñman, you shall pay the price today. Watch now as I tear 
away your shining peak. I shall not return without the herbs.” 
Hanumän plunged his hands into the side of the mountain and broke off 
the entire section containing all the herbs. Lifting the huge mountain 
summit above his head, the monkey sprang into the air. Hanumän 
soared high into the sky, bearing aloft the mountain with its trees, 
elephants, tigers, deer and herbs. He blazed with his own splendor and, 
with the effulgent mountain held in his hands, he looked like the sun 
coursing through the sky. 
Once again, his father Väyu raced behind him and he soon arrived near 
Lanka. Having accomplished such an inconceivable feat in Räma’s 
service, Hanumän descended near the Trikuta and set down the celestial 
hill of herbs. Vibhishana rushed over and embraced the monkey. The 
Räkñasa then set about finding the medicinal herbs, perceiving them by 
virtue of his occult vision. 
Taking a handful of the herbs from Vibhishana, Hanumän went quickly 
to Räma and Lakñman. Both he and Vibhishana looked anxiously at the 
two princes, who appeared like the sun and the moon fallen to earth. 
They were hardly breathing. Hanumän dropped to his knees by their 
side. Was he in time to save them? Would the herbs work? His hand 
shook as he placed a bunch of herbs under Räma’s nostrils.  
For some time Räma showed no signs of movement. Hanumän was 
beside himself with anxiety. Then slowly, the prince began to stir. He 
breathed deeply, inhaling the celestial fragrance. Gradually His eyes 
opened. He looked up at Hanumän and smiled. The monkey breathed a 
deep sigh of relief. Quickly he began administering the herbs to

394 
Lakñman. Slowly, He too returned to consciousness. 
Sugréva then had Sushena, a monkey expert in healing, come and tend 
to the princes. Using the other herbs brought by Hanumän, Sushena 
healed Their arrow wounds. In a short time the arrows fell from Their 
bodies and Their wounds closed up and healed. Both brothers sprang to 
Their feet, Their bodies renewed and invigorated. With tears in His 
eyes, Räma embraced Hanumän and thanked him for his service. 
The surviving monkeys moved swiftly among the wounded troops, 
administering the herbs to them. They crushed the herbs and allowed 
the wind to carry the pungent fragrance. No demons lay on the 
battlefield, as Rävaëa had ordered that they be tossed into the sea when 
they were slain. The demon did not want the monkeys to gain strength 
from seeing how many Räkñasas were killed. 
By the potency of the healing herbs hundreds of thousands of the 
Vanara warriors were restored to consciousness and they jumped up 
shouting with joy. Even some monkeys who had been killed, but whose 
bodies were not destroyed, were brought back to life by the herbs’ 
potency. They felt as if they had awakened from a restful night of sleep. 
Soon the monkey army stood again in their millions, ready and eager for 
the fight. 
The night was drawing to a close and Sugréva, after consulting with 
Räma and Lakñman, decided to attack Lanka before the Räkñasas were 
aware of the situation. The monkeys took up flaming torches and moved 
like a surging ocean toward the city walls. Shocked and amazed to find 
so many monkeys clambering over the ramparts, the Räkñasa guards fled 
in fear. The monkeys set fire to the gates, houses and mansions in 
Lanka. Räma and Lakñman sent innumerable flaming arrows into the 
city and a great fire raged.  
Panic-stricken demons ran in all directions with their clothes and hair 
ablaze. Great mansions and palaces were completely consumed by 
flames. Golden archways and walls melted and crumbled to the ground. 
In less than an hour the city gave the appearance of the earth being 
consumed by the dread fire of annihilation. Searing red flames rose up to 
the sky and were reflected upon the ocean, making it appear like a 
charming sea of red waters. As the monkeys ran about setting fire to 
anything and everything, the Räkñasas’ screams were heard everywhere.

395 
They dashed out of their houses and were immediately assailed by the 
monkeys. 
Rävaëa was aroused from his intoxicated slumber by the clamor. He sat 
up in shock. What was happening? Surely this could not be the monkeys. 
There were only a few of them left. How could they attack Lanka while 
their leaders were both prostrate on the battlefield? 
Pulling his silk garment around his waist, the demon ran out of his 
chamber and called for his ministers. Seized with fear they ran to 
Rävaëa and told him that Räma and Lakñman had somehow risen up 
and attacked the city. The demon king was amazed. He immediately 
issued orders for the Räkñasa chiefs to march out. Tens of thousands of 
demons clad in golden armor came onto the city streets. They were led 
by Kumbha and Nikumbha, Kumbhakarna’s two powerful sons. The 
Räkñasas rushed roaring toward the monkeys, attacking them with 
swords, pikes, maces, javelins and countless arrows that screamed 
through the air. 
Numerous garlands, broken wine casks and burning incenses made the 
city fragrant as the bellicose opponents tore at each other in a frenzy. 
Monkeys picked up Räkñasas and whirled them about, striking down 
other Räkñasas, while the Räkñasas lanced five or seven monkeys at once 
with their terrible spears. Infuriated monkeys bit off the ears and 
crushed the skulls of the demons, pummeling them to a pulp with their 
fists and feet. Powerful Räkñasas tore off the heads of the Vanaras and 
lopped off their limbs with great scimitars. Everywhere there were 
shouts of “Stay!” “Give battle!” and “You are killed!” 
Gradually the battle spilled out of the city. Great duels were fought 
between the principal fighters on both sides. The Räkñasa Kampana 
challenged Aìgada and was slain by him with a blow from a mountain 
peak. Along with the two powerful Vanaras, Mainda and Dwivida, 
Aìgada alsomade short work of Sonitaksha, Yupaksha and Prajangha, 
three of the mightiest Räkñasas.

396 
 
Seeing his comrades killed, Kumbha roared with fury. Kumbhakarna’s 
son appeared awful and unassailable. He took up his tremendous bow, in 
no way inferior to Indra’s, and loosed venomous shafts by the thousand. 
Monkeys fell on all sides, screaming in pain. Mainda and Dwivida rushed 
toward the Räkñasa and challenged him to fight. Those monkey brothers 
looked like a couple of moving mountains approaching a third. 
As they neared Kumbha, the demon fitted a fierce arrow onto his bow 
and shot it at Dwivida’s chest. Hit by the arrow, Dwivida fell to the 
ground and lay there wriggling and gasping for breath. Mainda at once 
took up an enormous crag and hurled it with force at the Räkñasa. 
Kumbha shot five arrows that shattered the rock and it fell in pieces at 
his feet. Taking another long shaft, he struck Mainda on the breast and 
the monkey fell unconscious. 
Aìgada saw his two uncles laid low by Kumbha and he dashed across to 
challenge the Räkñasa. Kumbha laughed, making an ass-like sound which 
reverberated all over the battlefield. His eyes blazed like two red fires 
and he stood in his chariot looking like Death personified. As Aìgada 
ran toward him, Kumbha shot dozens of deadly arrows which penetrated 
the monkey’s body. Not shaken, Aìgada sent a shower of rocks and trees 
at the demon. Kumbha easily smashed the missiles with his arrows, 
laughing all the while.  
Kumbha then fired arrows, which hit Aìgada on the forehead and made 
a stream of blood flow down the monkey’s face. Pressing his wounds with 
one hand, Aìgada seized hold of a massive tree with the other. He 
whirled around and tossed that tree at the Räkñasa. It flew with the 
speed of the wind. Kumbha dropped to one knee and instantly shot 
seven steel arrows which sliced the flying tree to pieces. Without 
pausing for a moment Kumbha released seven more shafts, which struck 
Aìgada on the chest and sent him reeling. 
Räma saw that Aìgada was sinking to the ground under the force of 
Kumbha’s arrows. He immediately ordered Jambavan and a number of 
powerful monkeys to go to Aìgada’s assistance. They bounded toward 
Kumbha, throwing trees and boulders at the bellowing demon. Kumbha 
spun round and shot his fierce arrows, hitting all of the monkey warriors 
as they approached him. No one could get near the Räkñasa as he stood

397 
with his uplifted bow, any more than one could approach the orb of the 
sun. 
Sugréva then came forward to challenge the Räkñasa. He hurled huge 
rocks one after another at the demon’s chariot, advancing continually 
toward him. Kumbha smashed all the rocks thrown at him with arrows 
shot in a solid line. He moved with astonishing speed, striking down the 
rocks and simultaneously sending arrows at Sugréva. The monkey king 
was pierced all over, but he did not flinch. He suddenly sprang onto 
Kumbha’s chariot and snatched his bow, even as the Räkñasa fired 
arrows at him. Sugréva broke the bow in two and hurled it away. The 
monkey then leapt to the ground and addressed the Räkñasa. 
“O Kumbha, you are the equal of Indra, Kuvera and even the mighty 
Bali. Indeed, you are no less powerful than your uncle Rävaëa or your 
cousin Indrajit. You have struck down many powerful monkeys today, O 
demon, and this is most wonderful. But now your exploits will end. Fight 
with me, if you dare. I shall make short work of you.” 
Kumbha was flattered by Sugréva, and his martial enthusiasm increased 
like a fire fed with oil. Without a word, he leapt down from his chariot 
and rushed toward the monkey, who stood with his arms outstretched. 
The two heroes clasped each other and grappled together. The earth 
shook with their heavy steps. Sugréva leaned backwards and lifted the 
demon above his head. Spinning around, he tossed Kumbha into the sea. 
The Räkñasa sank down to the seabed, but soon swam upwards again. 
Suddenly emerging from the ocean, the demon flew up and struck 
Sugréva on the chest with his fist, with a blow that sounded like a peal of 
thunder and which emitted a brilliant flash. Sugréva did not budge and 
at once clenched his own fist, which was as hard as adamant. He swung 
around and brought his fist down upon Kumbha’s breast like one planet 
striking another. The demon’s heart was split by the blow, and he fell 
dead to the ground as Mars would drop from the heavens.  
Nikumbha saw his brother slain and his anger flared. He took up his 
terrific mace and gazed at Sugréva as if about to consume him with his 
wrath. His club was fitted with iron plates and steel spikes, inlaid with 
gold and bedecked with diamonds and other gems. The demon wore 
black iron armor studded with jewels, as well as brilliant golden armlets 
and earrings. With a garland of celestial flowers on his breast, he looked

398 
like a cloud flashing with numerous lightning bolts. He brandished his 
weapon, whirling it around above his head. His mace shot forth tongues 
of fire and it seemed to cause the very atmosphere to spin around. The 
monkey warriors fell back in terror, unable to even look at Nikumbha. 
Hanumän came forward and stood directly before the Räkñasa. He pulled 
back his arms and bared his massive chest. “Strike me at once, O 
demon,” he challenged. 
With all his strength Nikumbha brought down the mace upon 
Hanumän’s chest. The club splintered into a hundred fragments and fell 
to the ground like so many blazing meteors. Hanumän stood unmoved 
and he smashed Nikumbha on the breast with his fist. The Räkñasa’s 
armor was shattered and blood shot from his breast. He reeled but 
quickly recovered and seized hold of Hanumän, lifting him from the 
ground. Seeing this the other Räkñasas roared in joy. 
Taking hold of Hanumän, Nikumbha ran toward Lanka. The monkey 
struck Nikumbha on the head and disengaged himself from the Räkñasa’s 
grip. He landed on the ground in front of the demon. Hanumän struck 
Nikumbha down and then hurled himself onto the Räkñasa’s body. 
Pressing down all of Nikumbha’s limbs, Hanumän took hold of his neck 
and twisted it ferociously. He tore off the Räkñasa’s screaming head and 
hurled it into the ocean. Observing this incredible feat, the Räkñasa 
army fled pell-mell in all directions, some rushing into the city, some 
jumping into the sea, and others flying into the sky. Hanumän raised a 
great roar of victory and the monkeys surrounding him shouted for joy. 
Chapter 11 
Lakñman Battles Indrajit 
In Lanka, Rävaëa was stunned. Twice he had celebrated his seeming 
victory and twice he had been forced to think again. He sat brooding in 
his palace. This monkey army was charmed. They had been virtually 
wiped out by Indrajit, but suddenly they were back on their feet and 
fighting again. Now Kumbhakarna’s two invincible sons had been killed.

399 
Things were becoming desperate. Rävaëa looked across at Indrajit. This 
time he must not fail. Rävaëa spoke to his son, who was as powerful as 
his father in every way. 
“O heroic prince, these two mortals must die. Although twice defeated 
by you, They have somehow miraculously escaped death. Now Their luck 
must have run out. You are the conqueror of Indra. What then of two 
humans? Go forth again my son. Use any means whatsoever and kill 
Them!” 
Once again Indrajit went out from Lanka, accompanied by the 
remaining force of Räkñasas. After again worshipping the fire on the 
battlefield he stood up and began to brag of his power. “The two human 
brothers may be taken as killed. Today I shall secure an eminent victory 
for my anxious father. This evening he will rest peacefully, experiencing 
the highest happiness.” 
The Räkñasa prince used his powers of sorcery to create a thick blanket 
of darkness. Rising into the sky, he rushed toward the Vanara army, who 
were thrown into confusion. He rained down steel arrows in the 
hundreds of thousands. Again he targeted Räma and Lakñman. The two 
princes were enraged by his treacherous attack. Räma blazed up like a 
huge fire fed with volumes of ghee. He bent His great bow into a full 
circle and released deadly golden shafts that went toward Indrajit in the 
sky. Using the Shabda-astra, which sought out an invisible opponent, 
Räma grievously pierced the demon. He saw His arrows fall to the 
ground, soaked in the demon’s blood. 
Indrajit drove away from the princes, sending arrows at the monkeys 
and killing thousands. Seeing this, Lakñman lost all patience. He fitted 
an arrow to His bow and spoke to Räma. “I shall now release the 
brahmästra, charging it with the power to kill all the Räkñasas at once. 
We need tolerate their insolence no longer.” 
Räma reached out and checked His brother. “We should not slay 
innocent creatures unnecessarily,” He told Him. “The Räkñasas in Lanka 
have been sufficiently punished by our assault on their city. Let Us now 
simply annihilate the remaining warriors. I shall myself immediately kill 
this Indrajit if he remains on the battlefield for even a moment.” 
Räma declared that the time for Indrajit’s destruction had come. Even if 
the Räkñasa fled for shelter to the farthest reaches of the universe, he

400 
would not escape. Räma raised His bow and looked up to the sky. 
Divining Räma’s intentions, Indrajit quickly withdrew from the 
battlefield. He entered Lanka and considered what tactic he should use 
to kill Räma and His brother. Using his prodigious mystic powers, he 
conjured an illusory image of Sétä. Placing this false form on his chariot, 
he again went out onto the battlefield, this time remaining visible in the 
sky. 
Hanumän spotted the chariot of Indrajit drawn by its demonic tigers and 
he rushed toward it with a mountainous crag in his hands. As he looked 
up, however, he saw a woman held in the demon’s grasp. Although 
beautiful, she appeared wretched and sorrowful. She was clad in a single 
garment, unadorned, with her limbs covered in dust and mud. Gazing at 
her for a while, Hanumän recognized her as Sétä. 
As the monkeys looked on, Indrajit took out his sword and grabbed Sétä 
by her hair. He began to strike her and she cried out, “Räma! O Räma!”  
Hanumän was seized with agony upon seeing this and hot tears fell from 
his eyes. He angrily rebuked Indrajit. “O wicked one, your act is meant 
only for your own destruction. Although descended from a Brahmin åñi, 
you are ignoble, mean and sinful. How can you kill a helpless woman, 
torn from her home and her husband, weak, wretched and crying for 
protection? Your own death is close. You shall then descend to a dark 
and condemned region, inhabited by the lowest of creatures.” 
Indrajit laughed. Dropping the form of Sétä, he grabbed his bow and 
loosed off a thousand fierce arrows at Hanumän and the other monkeys. 
He then took hold of Sétä’s hair again and replied harshly to Hanumän. 
“She for whom you have all come so far and fought so hard I will now 
slay. I shall then make short work of Räma and Lakñman as well as you, 
O monkey. I care not for the immorality of my acts, for whatever causes 
pain to one’s enemy must be achieved by any means.”  
Indrajit raised his sword and cut the form of Sétä into two parts. 
Laughing loudly, he called out to the monkeys, “Here is Sétä now killed 
by me. Your efforts to recover her have all been in vain. Fight on, if you 
must, but all of you will meet the same end as she.” 
The demon rose high into the sky, wheeling about in his golden chariot. 
Hanumän was seized with grief and anger. Completely infuriated, he fell 
upon the Räkñasas in a frenzy. Repeatedly roaring he consumed the

401 
Räkñasa army like the fire of universal dissolution. He took up a massive 
rock and hurled it straight at Indrajit’s chariot, but the demon rose still 
higher and the rock fell short. It dropped to the earth, crushing 
hundreds of demons and opening a chasm in the ground. 
Hanumän was filled with despair. Looking around the at monkey army, 
he shouted to them, “Cease fighting! The object of our battle is now 
impossible to achieve, for Sétä lies killed. Let us withdraw and ask Räma 
what should be done next.” 
The monkeys pulled away from the fight and moved back toward Räma 
and Lakñman. Seeing this, Indrajit also withdrew, taking the demons 
with him. He made his way to a sanctuary in a cavern known as 
Nikumbhila. There he began to perform a ritual for assuring his victory 
in the battle. Worshipping the powerful goddess Kali, a fearful form of 
the personified material energy, he made offerings of blood into a 
sacrificial fire. The demon knew the final battle would soon be fought. 
He had been granted a boon by Brahmä that once having performed the 
ritual at Nikumbhila, he would remain completely invincible in battle 
until his enemy was defeated. The time for realizing that boon had 
arrived. Surrounded by other Räkñasas, Indrajit sat before the fire 
reciting the sacred mantras. 
* * * 
On the battlefield, Hanumän came before Räma and told Him the 
terrible news. Räma at once collapsed to the ground and lay there 
insensible, like a great tree cut at the root. The monkeys quickly brought 
cool, scented water and sprinkled His face. Lakñman, tormented by 
agony, knelt down and lifted Räma up. He spoke to His brother in a 
choked voice. “What is the value of a virtuous life? O Räma, how can 
one like You suffer such reverses? If righteousness brought any good 
results, then this calamity could never have occurred. Indeed, if good 
and bad fruits accrued to the righteous and unrighteous respectively, 
then Rävaëa would have long ago sunk into hell, while You would now 
be reunited with Your spouse. What can influence all-powerful destiny? 
It moves only according to its own will. Our acts are all feeble and their 
results always uncertain.” 
Lakñman cried out in pain. Thinking of the sinful Indrajit, His eyes

402 
blazed with fury. He urged Räma to rise up and avenge Sétä. Together 
They should at once completely destroy Lanka with all its buildings and 
citizens. 
As Lakñman spoke to Räma, Vibhishana arrived. He saw Räma lying in a 
swoon with His head on Lakñman’s lap. All around the monkeys were 
given over to grief and were lying on the ground and shedding tears. 
Vibhishana was gripped by despondency upon seeing Räma’s state. He 
knelt by Lakñman and asked Him what had happened. The prince told 
him about Sétä.  
Vibhishana, after reflecting for some moments, began to nod slowly. 
“The report of Sétä’s death is as absurd as the drying up of the ocean,” he 
said. “There is no possibility that Rävaëa would allow the princess to be 
killed. He is consumed by desire to possess Her. Even though he was well 
apprised by me of the consequences of keeping Her, the sinful demon 
would by no means return Her to You, O Räma. You have been tricked 
by the devious Indrajit. Know that woman killed by him to be mere 
illusion. There is no doubt in my mind.” 
Räma opened His eyes and looked up at Vibhishana. The Räkñasa 
explained that Indrajit must have created the illusion in order to 
weaken Räma and to buy time. He would now be performing a ritual in 
the Nikumbhila sanctuary. If allowed to finish his ritual, he would be 
impossible to overcome. There was no time to lose. The monkeys should 
go at once to the sanctuary and stop the ritual. Vibhishana 
recommended that Lakñman go, while Räma remained stationed on the 
battlefield. 
Still overcome by grief, Räma did not fully comprehend Vibhishana’s 
words. He asked the Räkñasa to repeat what he had said. Vibhishana told 
Him everything again and then said, “Rise up and take courage. Sétä will 
yet be recovered. Marshal the troops and send them with Lakñman. 
Surely Lakñman will be able to bring about Indrajit’s end with His deadly 
arrows.” 
Vibhishana explained to Räma about the boon granted by Brahmä. 
There was a condition that if Indrajit was disturbed during the course of 
the ritual, he could be killed. That was why he had created the illusion 
of Sétä’s death. He obviously considered that this would throw Räma and 
His army into total confusion for long enough. Vibhishana urged

403 
Lakñman on. “Go now, O valiant one. When Indrajit is killed, Rävaëa 
and his army will be finished for sure.” 
Räma stood up and spoke to Vibhishana. “What you say is true, O night-
ranger. Indrajit’s prowess in sorcery and in battle is formidable. He 
cannot be discerned even by the gods when he rides on his chariot in 
the sky. This one must be slain at once.” 
Räma turned to Lakñman and ordered Him to leave for Nikumbhila. 
Vibhishana would show Him the way and the foremost monkeys, headed 
by Sugréva and Hanumän, would accompany him.  
Lakñman felt delighted in mind. He bent down and touched Räma’s feet. 
Taking up His bow and sword, He stood ready for battle and said in a 
thunderous voice, “Today My swift-coursing arrows will pierce through 
Indrajit’s body and tear him to pieces. That Räkñasa is now as good as 
dead.” 
Räma uttered benedictory Vedic mantras and the monkeys cheered. 
Followed by the vast monkey army, Lakñman set off for the Nikumbhila 
sanctuary. After they had covered many miles Vibhishana pointed to 
the Räkñasa army laying ahead. Indrajit had placed them all around the 
sanctuary, in the distance they appeared like a great black cloud 
descended to earth. 
The monkeys and bears took up trees and rocks and charged straight at 
the Räkñasa army. The Räkñasas replied with all kinds of weapons and 
the sky between the two armies became filled with missiles of various 
shapes. The monkey army pressed forward and began to overrun the 
Räkñasas, who had been caught by surprise. The Räkñasas ran about 
crying in fear. They called for Indrajit to help them. Indrajit became 
indignant upon realizing that he was being disturbed. Who had been so 
insolent as to attack him during his sacrifice? With the ritual still 
unfinished he stood up and went out of the sanctuary. Seeing the battle 
raging, he quickly mounted his chariot and went out amid the Räkñasas. 
Hanumän had taken the lead in the battle and was wreaking havoc 
among the demons. With an enormous tree he battered innumerable 
Räkñasas to death. The Räkñasas surrounded him and rained down a 
shower of arrows, spears, swords and javelins. Hanumän laughed off 
those weapons and continued thrashing the demons with trees and 
boulders. Indrajit, seeing Hanumän destroying the Räkñasa army,

404 
ordered his charioteer to go quickly before the monkey. 
As Indrajit appeared before Hanumän, the monkey challenged him to a 
duel. “Stand here before me and display your strength of arms, O evil 
one. You shall not return with your life today.” Indrajit took up his bow 
and prepared to shoot arrows at Hanumän. Seeing this, Vibhishana 
urged Lakñman to engage with Indrajit immediately. Lakñman twanged 
His bow, making a terrific sound. Indrajit turned and saw the prince who 
called out to him, “I challenge you to battle. Stay before My vision and 
fight fairly, if you dare. Death now awaits you, O vile Räkñasa.” 
Indrajit spotted Vibhishana next to Lakñman and began to rebuke him 
with harsh words. “You are the disgrace of our race, O uncle. How can 
you display enmity toward me, who am as good as your own son? What 
do you know of virtue? You have abandoned your own people and sided 
with the enemy. Pointing out my vulnerability, O degraded one, you 
have rendered great harm to your own brother. Surely you do not know 
right from wrong.” 
Vibhishana replied that he did not share Räkñasa disposition. Although 
born in their race he did not take pleasure in the sinful acts they 
enjoyed. Citing texts from the Vedas, Vibhishana said to his nephew, 
“One should always abandon an unrighteous relative, even as one should 
quickly abandon a burning house. There is no greater sin than stealing 
another’s wife. By killing eminent åñis and waging war on the gods, 
Rävaëa has lost all sense of propriety. Now, having stolen Räma’s wife, 
he has filled his cup of sins to overflowing. Along with all his kinsmen 
he will soon die. But first, you shall die today at Lakñman’s hands.” 
Indrajit replied harshly to his uncle. Lifting his ornate bow he derided 
Lakñman, who was mounted upon Hanumän’s back. “How will You 
withstand my arrows loosed with the force of a thunderbolt? It is clear 
that You have already embarked upon the road to Yamaräja’s abode. I 
shall send You there at once, along with all these monkeys.” 
Lakñman was enraged to hear Indrajit’s bragging. He thundered back at 
him. “You are strong only with your words, O Räkñasa! Those possessed 
of actual prowess show it with deeds, not boasts. Heroes never need to 
fight invisibly. You are simply a thief and a coward. If you have any 
prowess, then show it today! Here I am within the range of your arrows.”  
Indrajit at once released dozens of arrows that hissed through the air like

405 
serpents. They struck Lakñman and pierced through His armor. The 
prince began to bleed and, swelling with fury, He appeared like a 
smokeless fire. Without the least hesitation, He took out five steel 
arrows worked with gold and fitted with eagle feathers. Pulling His 
bowstring back to His ear, He shot them at Indrajit. They flew like the 
rays of the sun, penetrating the Räkñasa’s breast. The demon replied 
with three more arrows of his own, which sped through the air in flames. 
The two combatants fought furiously, each seeking a quick victory. They 
appeared like two lions as they stood firmly on the battlefield hurling 
their weapons at each other. Fighting from Hanumän’s back, Lakñman 
displayed great dexterity. His arrows fell upon Indrajit from all sides, 
striking him like thunderbolts.  
The Räkñasa was stunned by Lakñman’s attack, and he reeled in his 
chariot. Regaining his senses, the demon shouted at Lakñman, trying to 
create fear in the prince. Indrajit reminded Him how He had been 
overcome by the Räkñasa’s weapons on two former occasions. Surely 
Lakñman had forgotten that or else how could He be so foolish as to 
stand before him again? 
The Räkñasa at once pierced Lakñman, Hanumän and Vibhishana, each 
with a dozen fierce arrows. Lakñman laughed and derided the demon’s 
strength. “These arrows are nothing. They strike Me like so many 
flowers and simply increase My desire to fight.” Lakñman covered the 
Räkñasa with swift-coursing arrows that tore off his heavy golden armor, 
which dropped from the demon like stars falling from heaven. He was 
covered in blood and he shone like the morning sun. 
In reply, Indrajit sent a thousand arrows at Lakñman and shattered His 
armor. The two warriors, lacerated with arrows, battled strenuously for 
some hours. Neither of them retreated nor felt any fatigue. Hails of 
arrows sped through the sky like showers falling from autumnal clouds. 
Both were expert in mystic missiles and they fired and countered those 
weapons again and again. Networks of arrows clashed together in the 
heavens, emitting fire and sparks. Huge fireballs were countered by 
sheets of water, while weapons producing roaring gales were checked by 
others which created immovable mountains. 
A vehement and terrible struggle ensued for a long time. The earth was 
covered with a mass of arrows that looked like a carpet of sacred kusha

406 
grass. The two princes, arrows sticking from every part of their bodies, 
bled profusely, appearing like mountains covered with trees and giving 
forth shining red oxides. 
As they fought, Vibhishana exhorted the monkeys to engage with the 
other Räkñasas. He told them that Indrajit was accompanied by all that 
was left of the Räkñasa army. Vibhishana named all the Räkñasa heroes 
who had been slain, thereby giving joy to the monkeys and increasing 
their enthusiasm. They lashed the ground with their tails and bared 
their terrible teeth. The monkeys stood gazing intently at the Räkñasas. 
Vibhishana himself then took up his bow and began sending his deadly 
shafts toward the Räkñasas. Roaring like lions, the monkeys leapt toward 
the Räkñasas and a fearful battle took place. 
Lakñman dismounted from Hanumän’s back, and the monkey dashed 
into the fray, whirling a great tree trunk and mowing down the Räkñasas 
in hundreds. Jambavan led his army of fierce bears straight into the 
battle and a melee spread in all directions, as monkeys, bears and 
Räkñasas tore and struck each other wildly. 
Lakñman stood on the ground facing Indrajit. The Räkñasa remained in 
his chariot and continued to release volumes of arrows at the prince. 
Becoming enraged, Lakñman sped four arrows at the four frightful-
looking tigers drawing the demon’s chariot. The chariot halted as the 
beasts were struck by Lakñman’s shafts. He then took a crescent-tipped 
arrow and forcefully released it at Indrajit’s charioteer, severing his head 
from his body. As the charioteer fell to the ground, four heroic monkeys 
bounded over to Indrajit’s chariot and fell upon the four tigers. Crushing 
and pounding them, the monkeys reduced them to a lifeless mass and 
then ran back to Lakñman’s side. 
Indrajit leapt to the ground and retreated back among the other 
Räkñasas. He ordered them to hold off the monkeys and keep Lakñman 
engaged. Then the Räkñasa prince rose swiftly into the air and entered 
Lanka to get another chariot. Within a short while he appeared again on 
the battlefield, driving a golden chariot equipped with every kind of 
weapon. Full of vigor for the fight, Indrajit at once assailed Lakñman and 
Vibhishana, while simultaneously firing innumerable shafts at the 
monkey warriors. So swift was his movement that it was impossible to 
see when he lifted his bow, pulled back the string or took out and fitted

407 
his arrows. All that could be perceived was an endless stream of whetted 
shafts being sent in all directions. 
Indrajit tore thousands of monkeys to pieces. They fell down, screaming 
and crying out to Lakñman for protection. His eyes blazing in anger, 
Lakñman shot five straight-going arrows which smashed Indrajit’s bow. 
Seeing this wondrous feat, the gods and åñis, assembled in the sky, 
applauded Lakñman. The prince then pierced Indrajit with a dozen more 
arrows, which went right through the Räkñasa’s body and fell to the 
ground like red serpents entering the earth. 
Vomiting blood, Indrajit grasped another bow and immediately released 
a hundred arrows at Lakñman. Those arrows screamed through the air 
shooting forth bright red flames. Lakñman remained calm and 
intercepted the blazing shafts with His own infallible arrows. Indrajit 
sped innumerable other arrows toward Lakñman but the prince parried 
them all. He answered the demon’s attack by again severing his 
charioteer’s head with another crescent-headed shaft. Although 
deprived of their controller, however, Indrajit’s steeds continued to pull 
the chariot, rising into the air and describing various circular 
movements. 
Lakñman displayed astonishing prowess. He completely covered 
Indrajit’s chariot with arrows and then pierced all of the other demons 
surrounding the Räkñasa prince. Indrajit again descended and shot three 
arrows which embedded themselves in Lakñman’s forehead, making Him 
appear like a three-peaked mountain. Lakñman at once replied with five 
searing shafts that thudded into Indrajit’s head. The two opponents, 
bleeding profusely from their wounds, looked like a couple of kinshuka 
trees in full blossom. 
As Indrajit reeled from his attack, Lakñman quickly shot four deadly 
arrows which killed the demon’s four horses. The Räkñasa leapt down 
from the chariot. As he jumped, he hurled a golden lance at Vibhishana 
that resembled a bolt of heaven. Lakñman instantly shot five arrows at 
that speeding lance and cut it to pieces. Vibhishana took up his bow and 
pierced Indrajit in the breast with a number of arrows that struck him 
with a sound like thunderclaps. 
Indrajit bellowed in anger. He took from his quiver a glowing arrow 
which he had received from Yamaräja. Seeing the Räkñasa fitting this

408 
mystic missile to his bow, Lakñman quickly invoked a weapon He had 
obtained in a dream from Kuvera. The two infuriated combatants pulled 
back their bowstrings with the divine weapons fitted. Both bows emitted 
a piercing noise like a pair of cranes. When released, the two weapons 
collided violently in mid-air and lit up the heavens. A great fire 
appeared in the sky along with billows of smoke. The missiles fell to the 
ground in hundreds of blazing pieces. 
Lakñman invoked the Varuëastra, the weapon presided over by the god 
of the waters. Perceiving this, Indrajit countered the weapon with 
another imbued with the divine energy of Çiva. The Räkñasa then 
released the Ägneyastra, but this was countered by Lakñman with the 
Süryastra, the missile charged with the immense potency of the sun-god. 
Remaining firm on the battlefield, Indrajit placed a long golden arrow 
on his bow and began reciting sacred incantations. Darts, maces, swords, 
axes, hammers and other weapons flew from his bow by the hundreds. 
Not disturbed, Lakñman invoked a missile presided over by the wind-god 
and immediately neutralized Indrajit’s weapon. 
The battle between man and demon raged furiously. Both of them 
relentlessly hurled their deadly missiles and filled the sky with volleys of 
arrows. Neither showed any sign of fatigue and both were worked up 
with a terrible anger. All around them the monkeys and Räkñasas 
clashed violently in a fearful and bloody battle. The gods, headed by 
Indra and accompanied by the great åñis, stood in the canopy of the sky. 
They prayed to Viñëu and showered blessings upon Lakñman and the 
Vanaras, wishing them victory.  
Lakñman saw numerous omens indicative of victory and He considered 
the time for Indrajit’s destruction to have arrived. After reflecting for a 
moment the prince invoked a divine arrow He had received from Räma 
which had formerly belonged to Indra. That beautiful shining arrow was 
imbued with inconceivable power. It was worked with gold and gems and 
fitted with peacock feathers. The arrow had rounded golden joints, its 
large steel tip was flat and broad, and its razor-sharp edges were inlaid 
with diamonds. As Lakñman placed it upon his bow and drew back the 
string He invoked the divine Aindrastra, presided over by the king of 
the gods. Within Himself He prayed, “If Räma is always true to His word 
and fixed in virtue, and if He possesses unrivaled power, then let this

409 
arrow end Indrajit’s life.” 
The heroic Lakñman concentrated His mind and released the arrow. It 
screamed toward Indrajit with blinding speed. Before the Räkñasa could 
make any move to counter the weapon it severed his head from his 
shoulders. That handsome head with its jeweled helmet and blazing 
earrings rolled on the ground, bathed in blood and shining like gold. 
Rävaëa’s son dropped to the ground with his bow falling from his hand. 
All the monkeys and bears, along with Vibhishana, loudly rejoiced; and 
in the heavens the gods, Gandharvas and åñis raised a shout of victory. 
Their leader slain, the Räkñasas lost all enthusiasm for the fight. Terror-
stricken they flung down their weapons and fled in every direction. 
Some rushed into Lanka, some hid in mountain caves and others 
dropped into the sea. Seeing Indrajit lying dead, they all vanished from 
the battlefield, even as the rays of the sun disappear when the sun has 
set. The Räkñasa prince lay on the ground like an extinguished fire. 
A roll of celestial drums sounded in the skies and the singing of 
Gandharvas and Apsaräs could be heard. The sky became clear and the 
sea calm. As the dust settled on the battlefield golden flowers rained 
from the heavens. Siddhas, Cäraëas and Gandharvas appeared there and 
gazed upon the dead Räkñasa. The monkeys leapt for joy, thundering and 
roaring, and applauding Lakñman. 
Surrounded by Hanumän, Jambavan and Vibhishana, Lakñman returned 
to Räma. After respectfully circumambulating Him, He stood by Räma’s 
side with bow in hand, even as Indra might stand by the side of Viñëu. 
Räma smiled, realizing that Lakñman had succeeded in His difficult 
mission. He looked with affection upon His brother. Vibhishana 
described how Indrajit had been slain. Räma cheered Lakñman upon 
hearing this report and He addressed Him with great delight. “Well 
done, Lakñman! You have achieved a great feat today. Without doubt 
this has assured our victory. You have cut off Rävaëa’s right arm and his 
best hope of success in the battle. Now that the merciless and evil-
minded Indrajit is killed, we will see the sinful Rävaëa issuing forth for 
battle. I shall then dispatch him to Death’s abode, along with all his 
army.” 
Räma thanked all of the warriors who had accompanied Lakñman. They 
had fought solidly for three days. All of them were badly wounded.

410 
Lakñman Himself was severely lacerated with arrow wounds, His body 
covered in blood. He was tormented with pain and breathing heavily. 
Räma summoned Sushena, the monkey skilled in healing. He ordered 
him to treat Lakñman and the others with the celestial remedies. They 
then rested on the field of battle, awaiting Rävaëa’s next move. 
Chapter 12 
Rävaëa Exhibits His Prowess 
The terrified Räkñasas ran to Rävaëa and informed him of Indrajit’s fall. 
“Having closed with a greater hero, your powerful son has met his end,” 
they reported. “The highly glorious Indrajit, after gratifying Lakñman 
with innumerable arrows, has gone to the next world.” 
Rävaëa looked at his ministers for some moments in a state of utter 
dismay. He then fell to the ground in a swoon and remained unconscious 
for some time. When he recovered he fell back onto his throne and sat 
with a downcast face, lamenting loudly. “O my son, where have you 
gone? You conquered Indra and chased away all the gods; how then have 
you been overpowered by Lakñman? When angered you were capable of 
terrorizing even Death himself. Your arrows could smash down the peaks 
of Mount Mandara. Time is truly all-powerful, for today you have been 
thrown down by that unconquerable force, even as you stood on the 
battlefield, weapons in hand.” 
Rävaëa was inconsolable. He praised his dead son in many ways. Surely 
Indrajit had now reached the regions reserved for heroes. Now that he 
was dead, the gods, åñis and guardians of the worlds would rejoice, their 
thorn being removed. 
Thinking of Mandodari, Rävaëa cried out in agony. “Your mother, the 
blessed queen, will surely lose her life today. Soon I will hear the cries of 
the Räkñasa women as they toss about on the ground. What perverse 
destiny has brought about your end before mine? O my dear Indrajit, 
how could you leave me here while Räma and Lakñman still live?” 
Seized by unbearable grief, the demon king fell from his throne and

411 
rolled about on the golden floor of his palace. A violent anger then took 
possession of him and he breathed heavily. Jumping to his feet, he 
knitted his brows and roared furiously. Flames blazed forth from his wide 
open mouths. He looked like Time personified about to consume all the 
worlds.  
The demon thought only of revenge. His eyes, red by nature, glowed 
brilliant red with anger. Tears fell from them like drops of molten metal. 
He ground his teeth, making a sound like two mountains being rubbed 
together. Taking up his long razor-edged sword, which shone like the 
bright blue sky, he held it aloft and thundered in fury. “Pleasing the self-
born creator of all the worlds by rigorous austerities, I received from him 
an infallible boon. Not even the gods and demons combined can kill me 
in battle, what then of a couple of humans? Bring my bow! Fetch my 
impenetrable armor! Today I shall march out and make short work of 
Räma and His entire army.” 
Looking as if he might destroy the universe itself, Rävaëa glared all 
around him. His ministers shrank back in fear, uttering plaintive sounds. 
The demon king said to them, “My dear son played a hoax upon Räma by 
killing an illusory Sétä. That hoax shall now become reality. I shall finish 
Sétä, who is so dear to Räma.” 
Bent on his evil purpose, Rävaëa immediately rushed out of his palace 
toward the ashoka grove. Seeing the infuriated demon coming out of his 
palace with upraised sword, the other Räkñasas felt heartened. Surely 
now the war would soon be ended. Rävaëa had overcome the four 
guardians of the world. He would certainly have no problem with an 
army of monkeys and bears. 
The demon stormed toward his gardens, but as he moved swiftly along 
the pathways his ministers ran up to him. They stood before him trying 
to dissuade him from his intention of killing Sétä. Already a terrible 
carnage among the Räkñasas had been wrought simply due to Her being 
kidnapped. What might happen if Rävaëa actually killed Her? 
Rävaëa would not be swayed. He strode into the gardens. Sétä saw him 
from a distance and began to tremble. Seeing his furious disposition and 
uplifted sword, She could understand that he intended to kill Her. The 
princess wondered about Her husband. Had He been slain? Why was 
Rävaëa so bold? If only She had gone with Hanumän. Why had She

412 
decided to stay in Lanka, tormented by this cruel Räkñasa? This was all 
the fault of the cruel Manthara. Soon that wicked maid would rejoice 
with her purpose fulfilled. If not already dead, then Räma would 
certainly not survive long when He heard of His beloved wife’s death. 
As Rävaëa came close to Sétä, a minister named Suparshwa got before 
him, saying, “How are you contemplating such a mean and pointless act, 
O ten-headed monarch? No good can ever come from killing a woman, 
for it is condemned by everyone. This lady should be protected. You 
should vent your wrath on Räma and Lakñman, your actual enemies. If 
you kill Them, this princess will then be yours to enjoy.” 
Rävaëa considered this advice. Perhaps Suparshwa was right. It would be 
foolish to needlessly lose the princess now after so much effort to retain 
Her. And Räma might yet be overcome. There was no need to kill Sétä 
now. Better to kill Räma; then She would surely submit to him. 
Overcome by anger and lust as well as a burning grief, the demon turned 
away from Sétä and made his way to his council chamber. Surrounded by 
his ministers, he entered the great hall, afflicted by agony. He sank onto 
his gem-encrusted throne and sat there snorting like a furious lion. With 
folded hands he addressed the assembly. “I now depend fully on all of 
you. The time to destroy our arrogant enemy has come. Tomorrow I shall 
march out to kill Räma. First, all of you should go out, weapons held 
high, and weaken the human prince and His army. I shall soon follow 
you.” 
The Räkñasas roared in joy. They rose up in a body and rushed out of the 
hall. Mounting horses, chariots, elephants and other carriers, they 
stormed out of the city. They immediately hurled a massive shower of 
axes, maces, spears, darts and iron clubs upon the monkeys, who replied 
with trees and rocks. The two armies again fell upon one another with a 
tremendous clamor. 
Räma decided it was time He demonstrated His own insurmountable 
prowess. He immediately penetrated deep into the ranks of the Räkñasas. 
He moved like a whirlwind, leaving a trail of slaughtered demons in His 
wake. The Räkñasas could hardly look at Him. No one could see His 
movements as He took out arrows from His inexhaustible quiver and 
sent them in all directions. By releasing the weapon of the Gandharvas, 
Räma made Himself appear in a multitude of forms. To the confused

413 
Räkñasas He seemed to be everywhere at once. They saw the curved 
golden ends of His bow whirling like a firebrand and seeming to 
completely surround them. His arrows flew from all directions 
simultaneously. They sliced the Räkñasas to pieces. In less than two 
hours, Räma had exterminated two hundred thousand Räkñasas, along 
with eighteen thousand elephants and fourteen thousand horses.  
The Räkñasas were completely routed and they fled in panic. Their 
chariots lay smashed and their armor and weapons littered the ground. 
With the mangled corpses of Räkñasas and animals lying everywhere, the 
battlefield appeared ghastly. The surviving Räkñasas rushed back to 
Lanka, looking back in fear of Räma.  
The monkeys cheered and surrounded Räma. Having withdrawn His 
divine weapons, He stood at ease, blazing with splendor. Sugréva, 
Hanumän and Vibhishana looked in awe at Räma who said to them, 
“Only the glorious Çiva and I can exhibit such ability with the celestial 
missiles.”  
As the monkeys walked around Räma with folded palms, the gods and 
åñis praised him from the skies and a shower of flowers dropped down. 
* * * 
Rävaëa sat sighing in his palace. All around him he could hear the 
woeful laments of Räkñasa women who had lost their husbands and sons. 
He was at his wit’s end. How had all this happened? What kind of 
humans were Räma and Lakñman? This was unimaginable. There were 
only a few powerful heroes left in the Räkñasa army. Even the gods could 
not have reduced him to such a plight. What then of an army of 
monkeys and bears led by a human? 
Rävaëa bit his lips and clenched his fists. His eyes were crimson, and he 
snorted loudly. Like a losing gambler impelled to stake his all, the demon 
summoned the last of his commanders and ordered them to again march 
out for battle. This time he would accompany them. Reluctantly, the 
Räkñasas accepted Rävaëa’s command. They were stricken with terror as 
they thought of Räma. 
Seeing his commanders trembling in fear, Rävaëa laughed and began to 
speak. “With an endless shower of arrows resembling the rays of the sun, 
I shall dispatch Räma and Lakñman to Yamaräja’s abode. Today I shall

414 
avenge my kinsmen and followers. I will wipe out the monkey battalions 
with waves of weapons surging like a violent ocean. Heads transfixed on 
arrows will appear on the battlefield like so many lotuses upon golden 
stalks. Each of my arrows will pierce one hundred monkeys. The vultures 
and jackals will be fully sated with the flesh of my enemies today. Fetch 
my chariot and weapons! I shall immediately march at the head of my 
army.” 
Rävaëa stood bellowing out his war cry. The demons felt heartened that 
their king was coming out to fight. That lordly Räkñasa had never been 
defeated in battle. Surely this spelled the end of Räma, Lakñman and all 
the monkeys.  
Quickly Rävaëa’s charioteer brought his golden war chariot. It was 
equipped with all the divine weapons and adorned with celestial gems. 
Around its sides were thousands of bright golden pinnacles. Rows of 
bejeweled pillars held its great canopy and a standard of cat’s-eye rose 
from its center like a massive palm tree. As it moved off, it thundered 
like a number of clouds, and it produced a beautiful ringing sound from 
thousands of small golden bells hanging around its sides. 
The Räkñasas were struck with wonder to see Rävaëa mounted on the 
chariot, which shone like the sun. The charioteer urged on the eight 
celestial steeds and the chariot sped along Lanka’s central highway. 
Right behind him came the last of his generals, Mahaparshwa, 
Virupaksha and Surantaka. Following them were the remainder of the 
Räkñasa forces: three hundred thousand elephants, a hundred thousand 
chariots, six hundred thousand horsemen and the same number of 
infantry. Rävaëa led his force through Lanka’s northern gate and they 
rushed toward Räma’s army, sending up loud shouts. 
Even as Rävaëa charged, the sun became dim and the four quarters were 
enveloped in gloom. Birds shrieked hideously and the earth shook. 
Clouds rained blood and a meteor fell from the sky with a crash. Rävaëa 
felt his left eye twitching and his face became pale. A large vulture 
perched upon his standard and crows circled above him. 
Not minding these fearful omens, Rävaëa careered madly toward the 
massed ranks of the monkey army. He plunged into them, immediately 
creating havoc. With arrows decked with gold he severed the heads of 
thousands of monkeys. Others were pierced in the heart and still others

415 
had their limbs lopped off. Some were crushed by his chariot and some 
smashed by his mace. Wherever his chariot moved, the monkeys could 
not stand and face him. An irresistible hail of arrows flew in all 
directions from Rävaëa’s chariot. He was as hard to approach as the 
scorching sun. 
Soon the battlefield was strewn with the corpses of slain monkeys. As 
Rävaëa ploughed into the Vanara forces they fled, tortured by his 
weapons. The demon king dispersed the simian ranks like the wind 
dissipating clouds. Having cut through the monkeys, Rävaëa searched 
for Räma. 
Sugréva became maddened upon seeing the destruction of his army. He 
threw himself into the battle and began annihilating the Räkñasas on all 
sides. Roaring at a high pitch, the Vanara king rushed at the Räkñasas, 
whirling a massive tree. He killed them even as the wind of destruction 
would knock down trees at the end of an age. Sugréva hurled upon the 
Räkñasas a formidable number of huge rocks in rapid succession, like a 
shower of hailstones falling upon a flock of birds. The Räkñasas fell by 
the hundreds, their heads smashed. They appeared like so many 
crumbling mountains hit by thunderbolts. 
Virupaksha leapt down from his chariot and challenged Sugréva. He shot 
a hundred fierce arrows at the monkey. The Räkñasa then mounted 
upon a great elephant and roared. Sugréva turned toward the demon and 
seized hold of a huge tree. He bounded into the air and brought the tree 
down upon the elephant’s head. The colossal beast staggered backwards 
and sank to its knees. Virupaksha leapt down and took out his sword. He 
rushed at Sugréva, who hurled a heavy crag at the demon. Dodging the 
rock, Virupaksha bounded forward and struck Sugréva a terrible blow 
with his sword. The monkey flew back and fell to the ground, breathing 
heavily. 
Coming back to his senses after some moments, Sugréva sprang up and 
aimed a blow at the Räkñasa with his fist. Virupaksha avoided the blow 
and again struck the monkey on the chest. Sugréva, blazing with anger, 
swung his hand with the speed of the wind. He struck the Räkñasa on his 
temple with the force of Indra’s thunderbolt. Virupaksha dropped to the 
ground with blood streaming from his mouth, nose, eyes and ears. He 
tossed about, bellowing in pain. Losing consciousness, the Räkñasa gave

416 
up his life. 
Headed by Räma and Lakñman, the chief monkeys fought in a frenzy. 
Sugréva, Aìgada, Hanumän and other principal Vanaras cut down the 
Räkñasa forces like a field of ripe wheat. The demon king Rävaëa 
agonized at seeing his army overwhelmed. He turned to Mahaparshwa 
and said, “O heroic one, my hopes now rest with you. Repay your debt to 
your master and destroy this hostile army of monkeys. Do not delay.” 
The Räkñasa folded his palms and bowed slightly to Rävaëa. Raising his 
mighty bow he rushed into the Vanara forces like a moth entering a 
flame. Endowed with extraordinary strength, he carved a path through 
the monkeys with his blazing arrows. With deadly accuracy he severed 
the arms, legs and heads of the monkeys, sending up his fearful war cry. 
Struck hard and reeling from Mahaparshwa’s attack, the monkeys ran to 
Sugréva for protection. 
The monkey king rushed at the Räkñasa and hurled a tremendous crag 
straight at his chariot. Mahaparshwa saw the rock flying at him and, 
unperturbed, released swift arrows that broke it to pieces. Shattered into 
a thousand fragments by a stream of arrows, the rock descended to the 
ground like a flock of vultures. Sugréva immediately tore up a tree and 
threw it at the demon with all his strength. Again Mahaparshwa fired 
arrows, which sliced the tree into pieces. 
Sugréva then picked up an iron bludgeon that lay on the ground nearby. 
He leapt forward and killed the team of horses yoked to the demon’s 
chariot. The Räkñasa jumped down clutching his dreadful mace. He 
hurled the spiked mace at Sugréva and the monkey struck it with his 
bludgeon. With a great explosion the two weapons shattered and fell to 
the ground. 
The two heroes fell upon each other and wrestled for some time. They 
struck each other with their fists, knees and heads, roaring and rolling 
about on the ground. Sugréva lifted the Räkñasa and threw him to a 
distance. Getting up at once, Mahaparshwa took hold of a sword and 
shield and rushed at Sugréva. The monkey quickly looked around and 
found another sword. With upraised weapons, the two powerful 
combatants met together, shouting in joy. 
A fierce sword fight ensued, creating a shower of sparks as the weapons 
clashed together. Suddenly Mahaparshwa brought down his sword with

417 
full force onto Sugréva’s shoulder. It embedded itself in the monkey’s 
armor. As the Räkñasa tried to extract it, Sugréva quickly swung his own 
weapon in a short arc and severed the demon’s head from his shoulders. 
As the gods and Siddhas looked on, the Räkñasa fell lifeless to the 
ground. His head rolled away with its teeth clenched and its golden 
earrings glittering. Sugréva stood with his blood-soaked sword, looking 
like a dark cloud graced by a bright sunbeam. The monkeys, overjoyed, 
cheered their leader and thronged around him. The Räkñasas fled 
toward Rävaëa, howling in fear. 
In the meantime the other powerful Räkñasa commander Surantaka had 
been slain in a duel with Aìgada. Now Rävaëa alone remained among 
the great Räkñasa heroes. He was consumed by rage. Looking around at 
his devastated army, he saw Räma and Lakñman fighting in the distance. 
The demon ordered his charioteer to go toward the princes. As his 
chariot moved across the earth, it gave off a sound like the rumbling of a 
thousand thundering clouds. The ground shook and the monkeys fled 
simply from hearing the terrifying sound. 
The demon king took out a brilliant arrow and placed it on his bow. He 
then invoked a missile presided over by Rähu, a malevolent and 
powerful enemy of the gods. Rävaëa released the fearful weapon, which 
then annihilated the monkeys by the hundreds of thousands. Blazing 
steel shafts sped in all directions, dispersing Räma’s army as the sun 
disperses a morning mist. None dared face the Räkñasa king as he rushed 
toward Räma. 
Seeing the demon approach like an onrushing comet, Lakñman sped 
innumerable arrows toward him. Those arrows could hardly be seen as 
they screamed through the air, but the demon displayed astonishing 
dexterity and cut them all down. Rävaëa went straight past Lakñman 
and approached Räma. He loosed a shower of arrows on Räma which 
were like venomous serpents with flaming heads. Räma stood on the 
battlefield like an immovable mountain. He immediately countered 
Rävaëa’s arrows with crescent-headed shafts that cut them to pieces. 
Rävaëa continued to send volleys of arrows at Räma, and the prince 
replied with equal numbers of His own. The sky was filled with arrows 
resembling flocks of golden birds. Räma and the demon circled each 
other from left to right, each fixing his gaze on the other. They appeared

418 
like Death personified and Yamaräja himself, meeting for a violent 
encounter. They completely covered the sky with their arrows and 
caused a shadow to envelop the battlefield. Both kept their bows bent to 
a full circle and both moved with great speed, keeping their weapons 
trained on the other. 
Räma’s blazing golden armor deflected Rävaëa’s shafts, while the 
demon’s impenetrable mail rendered Räma’s arrows ineffective. Seeing 
his arrows falling uselessly to the ground, Rävaëa sent a dozen fierce 
shafts which pierced Räma’s brow. With those golden arrows protruding 
from His head and producing profuse blood, Räma appeared to be 
wearing a shining crown decorated with a red garland. Impervious to the 
pain, Räma invoked the Rudrastra, presided over by Çiva, and sent a 
fearful hail of flaming arrows at the demon. They struck Rävaëa on 
every part of his body, seeking out his vulnerable points, but the demon’s 
celestial armor again repelled the shafts and they entered the earth, 
hissing like furious snakes. 
Rävaëa then invoked the fearful Räkñasa weapon, imbuing it with his 
own enormous personal power. As he released it all kinds of strange 
missiles sped toward Räma. Some had the heads of terrible lions with 
wide open mouths, and others had the heads of wolves, jackals, donkeys, 
boars, dogs, alligators and venomous serpents. Rävaëa’s mystic weapon 
produced a frightening and discordant sound. It assailed Räma from 
every side.  
Unshaken, Räma moved with great agility and dodged the shafts as they 
fell. He dropped to one knee and took out a blazing golden arrow. Fitting 
it to His bow, He invoked the Ägneyastra. With that weapon He 
produced arrows of every description. Some resembled the radiant sun, 
others the moon, and others appeared like blazing meteors. Some flew 
like flashes of lightning and some were flaming crescents. Others rose 
into the sky like shining planets, descending to the earth like brilliant 
constellations fallen from heaven. Those divine arrows struck down all 
of Rävaëa’s missiles which were killing the monkeys all over the 
battlefield. 
Rävaëa blazed up in anger as he saw his wonderful weapon neutralized. 
He took out another dreadful missile, which had been fashioned by 
Maya, the architect of the celestial demons known as Asuras. Rävaëa

419 
charged the weapon with the potency of Rudra and fired it into the sky. 
At once there dropped from all sides innumerable flaming pikes and 
maces, along with massive iron clubs. Mystical nooses and thunderbolts 
fell upon the monkey army, accompanied by a piercing gale, like the 
wind which blows at the end of an age. That demoniac weapon began to 
annihilate the monkeys. A vast number of blazing missiles directed 
themselves at Räma, who responded by invoking the Gandharva 
weapon. 
Immediately, countless arrows swept like a sheet across the entire 
battlefield. Without striking any of the monkeys, the arrows struck and 
disabled Rävaëa’s missiles. All of them were cut to pieces and they fell to 
the earth. Without a second’s delay Rävaëa employed the Süryastra. It 
brought into being a stream of large brilliant discuses which flew from 
Rävaëa’s bow. As they rose into view they lit up all directions as if a 
hundred suns had risen on the battlefield. 
Räma stood firm and pierced every one of the discuses with His own 
shafts, charging them with a force equal to that of Rävaëa’s weapon. 
They split apart the flaming missiles and rendered them harmless as 
soon as they left Rävaëa’s bow. As Räma countered his missile, Rävaëa 
sent ten barbed arrows which pierced the prince all over His body. 
Enraged, Räma instantly responded with a hundred of His own arrows 
which thudded deeply into Rävaëa’s limbs. 
Lakñman then came forward and challenged the demon. Raising His bow 
He sped a number of shafts at Rävaëa that cut to pieces the demon’s 
standard, which bore the emblem of a man’s head. With a single 
crescent-headed arrow, Lakñman severed the head of Rävaëa’s 
charioteer. Then with five more well-aimed arrows, He broke apart the 
Räkñasa’s gleaming bow. At the same time Vibhishana leapt forward and 
struck down with his mace the demon’s steeds, which were as tall as hills. 
Rävaëa quickly leapt from his chariot and gazed at his younger brother 
with flaming eyes. He hurled a blazing lance at Vibhishana which looked 
like a thunderbolt, but as it flew toward Vibhishana, Lakñman cut it to 
pieces with three razor-headed arrows. That golden lance, which was 
bedecked with jewels, fell to the earth like a shower of meteors. 
Rävaëa took up another lance even more terrible than the first. It shone 
with a lurid glow and emitted bright blue tongues of fire. Rävaëa raised

420 
his lance and fixed his gaze on Vibhishana. Lakñman saw His friend in 
danger and covered the demon king with countless shafts. Rävaëa was 
stunned by the ferocity of Lakñman’s arrows and he turned to face the 
prince. He shouted out in anger. “You have saved Vibhishana but now 
You are Yourself in grave danger. O proud one, stand ready! This lance, 
made by Maya Dänava for the destruction of the gods, will pierce Your 
heart, leaving Your body only after taking Your life.” 
Rävaëa leveled his infallible lance at Lakñman. It was adorned with 
eight golden bells and gave off a loud chiming as the demon pulled it 
back. With his bludgeon-like arm, Rävaëa hurled the lance with full 
force. It sped through the air cracking like thunder and spread a shower 
of brilliant sparks in its wake. Seeing it approach, Lakñman uttered an 
imprecation. “May you prove ineffectual. May your attempt to take My 
life fail. May all be well with Lakñman.” 
As the prince spoke the lance struck Him full on the chest. Grievously 
hurt by the weapon, Lakñman collapsed unconscious to the ground. 
Räma was seized with sorrow to see His brother reduced to that state. 
His eyes filled with tears and His mouth became parched and dry. As 
furious as the all-devouring fire of universal destruction, He glared at 
the demon.  
Räma ran over to His brother. The lance had pierced His armor and 
stuck into His body. Räma carefully extracted the lance and snapped it 
in two. He gently lifted Lakñman and embraced Him. As He held the 
grievously wounded prince, Rävaëa shot serpent-like arrows at Him. 
Without caring for the arrows Räma called to Hanumän and Sugréva. 
“Guard this prince carefully. The time has come for Me to manifest my 
strength. I shall make short work of this ten-headed monster. Here is My 
unfailing promise: the world will soon be devoid of either Rävaëa or 
Myself. Let the three worlds witness My power today in battle. I shall 
achieve a feat which will be spoken of by all beings for as long as the 
world exists.” 
Räma stood up and immediately released an endless stream of ferocious 
shafts at Rävaëa. Greatly harassed, the demon replied with a shower of 
flaming steel arrows and iron clubs. Räma countered Rävaëa’s missiles as 
they sped through the air, striking each and every one of them down. He 
fought wildly, sending screaming arrows that struck Rävaëa on every

421 
part of his body.  
The demon fell back as Räma closed on him. He was entirely covered by 
Räma’s golden-plumed shafts. Rävaëa could hardly do anything in 
response as Räma unleashed His fury. Completely overwhelmed, the 
Räkñasa turned and took to his heels. 
Chapter 13 
The Final Battle 
As Rävaëa retreated in fear, Räma went back to Lakñman. He dropped 
down by His side and cradled the prince’s head in His hands. Lakñman 
seemed dead. The wound in His chest looked terrible and Lakñman did 
not appear to be breathing. Choked by tears Räma spoke aloud, giving 
vent to His grief. “Oh, how painful it is to see My beloved brother in 
such a state. My strength is deserting Me as I look upon Him lying here. 
Even if I win this fight I will feel no joy at all without Lakñman. Indeed, 
this prince has followed Me through thick and thin. If He has now 
departed for the regions of Death, then I too shall follow Him.” 
Räma lamented loudly for some time. What would He say to Sumitra if 
He returned without Lakñman? How could He face Bharata and 
Shatrughna? Surely They would censure Him for failing to protect His 
younger brother. It would be better to give up His own life than hear the 
reproaches of those most dear to Him. Räma fell weeping to the ground. 
Hanumän raised Him up and comforted Him. He called for Sushena, the 
Vanara physician. Perhaps Lakñman would respond to his treatment of 
celestial herbs. Sushena approached the fallen prince and examined Him 
carefully. He looked up at Räma and said, “Your brother still lives. See 
how His bodily luster has not departed. And I can detect the movement 
of His life air and the beat of His heart. But He needs urgent treatment.” 
Sushena asked for more of the celestial herbs which Hanumän had 
fetched from the Himälayas. The herbs were brought quickly and 
Sushena administered them to Lakñman. By the divine power of the 
herb sanjivakarani the prince slowly returned to consciousness. Then

422 
Sushena carefully administered the herbs vishalyakarani and sandhani, 
which together healed Lakñman’s grievous wound and repaired His 
bones. Slowly He sat up and looked around. Räma was overjoyed. He 
pressed Lakñman to His bosom with tears in His eyes and said, “By good 
fortune You have been saved from the jaws of death. If You had died, I 
would not have been able to carry on this fight.” 
Lakñman, pained to hear His brother speak in that way, replied, “You 
have taken a solemn vow to kill Rävaëa and install Vibhishana on the 
throne of Lanka. You should not make that false for any reason. O great 
hero, fulfill Your vow at once! Let us see the evil Rävaëa lying dead on 
the battlefield, cut down by Your arrows.” 
Räma seized His bow. A terrible anger took hold of Him. Lakñman had 
spoken well. The time for the arrogant demon’s destruction had arrived. 
As Räma looked around He saw Rävaëa seated aboard his golden 
chariot. Having rested, the demon was again rushing at Räma as the 
malefic planet Rähu rushes toward the sun. From where He stood, Räma 
immediately shot a steady stream of arrows that shone like fire. They 
rained down upon the demon, who in turn loosed off torrents of shafts 
that hissed like serpents as they flew at Räma. 
From the sky the gods observed the combat. Seeing Räma standing upon 
the ground, Indra desired to assist Him. He summoned Mätali, his 
charioteer, and asked him to fetch his chariot. In a moment Indra’s 
radiant chariot appeared, drawn by its thousand steeds. Indra ordered 
Mätali to take it to Räma and the charioteer at once descended onto the 
battlefield next to the prince. With folded palms he respectfully 
addressed Räma. “Here is my Lord Indra’s chariot, O Raghava. Here also 
is his mighty bow and other infallible weapons, as well as his invincible 
golden armor. Please use all these to attain victory over Rävaëa, the 
enemy of the gods. I shall act as your charioteer.” 
Räma gazed with amazement at the wonderful vehicle. It was bedecked 
with glowing gems and wreaths of celestial flowers. A tall pole of cat’s-
eye stood in its center bearing a brilliant golden standard. The chariot 
was suspended a bow length above the ground and a crystal staircase 
came down to Räma’s feet. He circumambulated the chariot and then 
climbed aboard. The prince quickly donned Indra’s armor and took up 
his bow and celestial arrows. As He stood upon that divine chariot, He

423 
looked like the sun illumining all the quarters. At Mätali’s command the 
heavenly steeds surged forward and the chariot moved off with a 
rumbling sound that filled the earth and sky. 
Rävaëa, realizing that Räma was being assisted by his mortal enemy 
Indra, became even more enraged. He fired a celestial missile which 
unleashed hundreds of thousands of dreadful-looking serpents, their 
wide open mouths vomiting fire. Writhing and hissing they came from 
all sides and sped toward Räma.  
As the venomous snakes descended upon Him, Räma at once invoked a 
weapon presided over by Garuòa. A shower of arrows shot from his bow, 
turning as they flew into golden eagles with fierce talons and sharply 
curved beaks. The mystical eagles intercepted and destroyed all of 
Rävaëa’s serpents. 
The demon roared furiously. He struck Mätali and all of his steeds with a 
forcible torrent of shafts with glowing steel heads. The Räkñasa then 
sent a crescent-headed arrow which tore down the chariot’s golden 
standard. He followed this with countless other straight-flying arrows 
that struck Räma on every part of His body. In seconds Indra’s great 
chariot was completely covered by Rävaëa’s arrows, so that no part of it 
was visible. 
With his ten heads and massive bow Rävaëa stood in his chariot looking 
like the Mainäka mountain risen from the ocean. Observing the demon 
overwhelming Räma with his arrows, the gods and åñis felt despondent. 
The monkeys became fearful and they observed grim-looking omens. 
The sun became dim and the sea tossed with waves that seemed to rise 
up to the sky. Jackals howled and ghosts and wraiths darted about on the 
battlefield.  
So intense was Rävaëa’s assault that Räma was unable to lift His bow 
and fit His arrows. Räma’s eyes turned crimson with rage. He began to 
think of the destruction of the entire Räkñasa race. With great expertise 
Mätali drove the chariot upwards and away from the hail of Rävaëa’s 
arrows. It burst forth like the sun emerging from a cloud. The gods 
showered blessings on Räma while the Daityas and Dänavas uttered 
benedictions upon Rävaëa. 
When the king of the Räkñasas saw his adversary again stationed before 
him, he took up a fearful looking dart. That terrific weapon had spikes

424 
resembling mountain peaks. It had a flaming point which glowed with a 
brilliance that could not be looked upon. That dart was dear to Rävaëa 
and had been carefully kept and worshipped by him, reserved for a time 
when he faced a deadly enemy. It was irresistible to gods and demons 
alike. Rävaëa raised it with his serpent-like arm and roared with full 
force. The earth shook and the mountains trembled, sending their lions 
and elephants fleeing in fear. Looking at Räma, the Räkñasa thundered, 
“This dart, powerful like a thunderbolt, will now take Your life. Hurled 
by me it will strike both You and Your brother, leveling You with all the 
Räkñasas You have slain. Guard Yourself if you can!” 
The demon at once threw the dart. It flashed through the air, covered by 
a circle of lightning and emitting a deafening scream. Räma instantly 
sent a hundred arrows at the dart but they were deflected and fell useless 
to the ground. Without losing a moment, Räma took up Indra’s celestial 
javelin. He forcefully hurled it and it flew like a blazing meteor straight 
at the dart. Struck by the divine lance, Rävaëa’s weapon was split apart 
and dropped to the earth. The javelin, giving off a delightful sound from 
the many bells tied around it, returned again to Indra’s chariot. 
Räma immediately followed that astonishing feat by sending a fierce 
volley of arrows at the demon. They struck Rävaëa in all his limbs and 
pierced his ten heads. The demon blazed with anger and replied with an 
equal number of his own arrows. Räma intercepted Rävaëa’s arrows 
while simultaneously continuing to strike him. The Räkñasa then 
released an even greater number of shafts which penetrated Räma’s 
defense and pierced through His armor. With blood shining on His 
breast Räma looked like a great kinshuka tree in full blossom. 
Neither opponent could easily see the other, so great was the number of 
arrows filling the air. Räma pulled clear of Rävaëa’s attack and laughed 
heartily. He rebuked the demon. “You are proud of your strength, O 
Räkñasa, but it will not save you now. Indeed, since you stole away My 
consort while I was not present, you cannot be considered heroic. You 
are a shameless coward given over to vanity alone, vaunting yourself as a 
hero. Had you tried taking Sétä from My presence you would not be alive 
today. By good fortune I see you now on the battlefield. Prepare to 
receive the results of your despicable and evil acts, O vile one! 
Carnivorous birds and beasts will soon feast upon your flesh and blood.”

425 
With redoubled strength Räma then sent wave upon wave of arrows 
straight at Rävaëa. The prince felt increased enthusiasm for the fight. 
He invoked all the celestial missiles and they immediately appeared 
before Him on the battlefield. In great joy, Räma fired the weapons at 
the demon one after another. He recited the incantations with full 
concentration as He released His arrows. Charged with the mystic power 
of the divine astras the arrows tore into Rävaëa and sent him reeling. As 
he staggered about on his chariot, the Räkñasa was showered with rocks 
and trees by the monkeys. The demon was reduced to a sorry plight, 
being unable to lift his bow or do anything in his defense. He sank down 
on the floor of his chariot. Seeing this, his charioteer veered away from 
the fight and retreated. 
Rävaëa remained stunned for some time. Gradually returning to his 
senses, he saw that his charioteer had taken him away from the 
battlefield. He immediately chastised the charioteer with harsh words. 
“How have you disdained me in this way, O evil-minded one? Obviously 
considering me to be bereft of power, heroism and prowess, you have 
covered me with shame. Today you have nullified my valor, dignity and 
fame. While my enemy stood expectantly before me, deserving to be 
gratified by my arrows, you have made me into a coward.” 
Rävaëa was beside himself with fury. He accused the charioteer of siding 
with the enemy and ordered him to return immediately to Räma’s 
presence. The charioteer replied that he had only done what he felt was 
his proper duty. Rävaëa had been completely overpowered by Räma’s 
weapons. Out of affection he had desired to save his master’s life. Citing 
verses from scripture supporting his actions, the charioteer begged 
Rävaëa’s forgiveness. The demon king was appeased. He nodded at his 
charioteer and commanded him to return with all speed to the fight. 
Urged on by Rävaëa, the charioteer lashed his horses and within a few 
moments the chariot stood again before Räma. 
On the battlefield, Räma was Himself expressing His exhaustion from 
the fight. In the heavens the great Åñi Agastya saw this and desired to 
assist Him. Agastya had been observing the battle from the sky along 
with the gods. He now descended to Räma’s chariot and spoke to Him. 
“O mighty-armed Räma, please listen as I tell You the secret of a highly 
confidential prayer, the Aditya-Hridaya. This prayer will invoke the

426 
powerful spiritual energy from the heart of the sun. This is the very 
effulgence of the Supreme Viñëu Himself. With this power one can 
overcome any obstacle and destroy to the roots all one’s enemies.” 
Agastya instructed Räma how to recite the prayer, which would summon 
the combined power of all the gods, emanating from the bodily rays of 
Viñëu. With that power Räma would be able to quickly overcome 
Rävaëa before nightfall, when the demon’s own power would be 
doubled. 
The åñi returned to the heavens and Räma turned toward the sun. After 
sipping water for purification He recited the Aditya-Hridaya. At once 
He felt extreme happiness, and His mind became highly enlivened. All 
His fatigue vanished and He took up His bow. He stood firmly on Indra’s 
chariot. Fixing His gaze upon Rävaëa, who had again appeared before 
Him, He urged Mätali forward toward the demon. 
In the heavens the sun-god stood in person amid the other gods and 
uttered benedictions upon Räma, saying, “May victory attend You!” 
Räma saw Rävaëa’s chariot flying toward him, filling all quarters with its 
thunderous rumbling. That chariot was drawn by huge black steeds with 
the heads of hideous fiends. It shone with a dreadful luster and was 
adorned all over with brilliant rubies and celestial sapphires, with rows 
of pennants flying from its sides. Moving rapidly through space it looked 
like a cloud containing streams of shining water and issuing forth 
torrents in the form of arrows. 
Räma said to Mätali, “From the way in which he is darting back into the 
fray it appears that this Räkñasa is bent upon his own destruction. Close 
upon him with care. I shall destroy his chariot even as the wind would 
blow away a cloud.” 
Grasping Indra’s bow, Räma tempered His anger with patience as He 
awaited His opportunity to attack the demon, who was maneuvering on 
the battlefield. Mätali skillfully drove the chariot in circles and gradually 
closed on Rävaëa, the two opponents releasing streams of arrows and 
appearing like two proud lions intent on killing each other. 
Suddenly many frightful omens appeared. Blood rained down on 
Rävaëa’s chariot while violent whirlwinds tossed it about. A flock of 
vultures circled over the demon. In the distance Lanka was shrouded in 
a red glow. Great meteors fell from the sky and the earth shook. The sky

427 
became darkened even while the sun shone. Terrible thunderbolts and 
flashes of lightning fell upon the Räkñasa army. Rävaëa’s steeds shed hot 
tears and emitted sparks from their mouths. 
Around Räma were seen many favorable signs that portended His 
imminent victory. The sun illuminated Him brilliantly and a gentle 
breeze blew behind Him. He felt His right eye and arm throb and His 
mind felt joyful. 
As Räma and Rävaëa met in fearful combat, the two armies stood 
motionless with their weapons held fast in their hands. Observing the 
man and demon engaged in a desperate duel, all the warriors, along with 
the gods, Gandharvas and åñis, watched in wonderment. The two 
belligerent opponents each exhibited their full prowess on the 
battlefield as they hurled blazing weapons at each other.  
Räma fitted a highly-sharpened shaft to his bow, as irresistible as a 
thunderbolt and shining with splendor. Drawing back his bow to a full 
circle, He released the arrow at Rävaëa’s standard. It severed the tall 
pole and the demon’s ensign fluttered to the ground. 
Rävaëa burned with indignation. He sent a hail of flaming steel arrows 
at Räma’s steeds. Struck by the arrows the celestial horses neither 
flinched nor shook but continued to draw the great chariot, describing 
various circles and movements and baffling Rävaëa’s arrows. The demon 
fired a tremendous shower of maces, iron clubs, discuses and mallets, as 
well as mountain peaks, trees, pikes and double-headed axes. At the 
same time he released tremendous volleys of arrows which fell toward 
Räma’s chariot like streaks of golden lightning. 
By Mätali’s expert handling, Indra’s chariot constantly foiled Rävaëa’s 
weapons. The Räkñasa became more and more infuriated and he directed 
his mystic missiles upon the army of monkeys. Seeing this, Räma fitted 
celestial weapons to His bow which sent innumerable arrows into the 
sky. Those arrows fell upon Rävaëa’s weapons and smashed them to 
pieces. No arrow shot by Räma failed to find its mark. The sky was 
completely filled with his golden-plumed shafts. The missiles of the two 
fighters met together in hundreds and thousands. They created 
explosions of fire and billows of smoke across the whole battlefield. 
Räma and Rävaëa fought vehemently for hours without interruption. 
Exchanging blow for blow, neither felt wearied nor inclined to give an

428 
inch to the other. Those observing the fight felt their hairs standing on 
end. No one could take their eyes off the furious fighters as they battled 
on, relentlessly seeking victory. Rävaëa sent twenty, then sixty, then a 
hundred and then a thousand arrows at Räma, aiming at His vital parts, 
or seeking to kill the charioteer and His horses. Räma responded with 
twice that number, digging shafts into Rävaëa’s steeds and charioteer, 
while at the same time constantly covering the demon. 
Even after fighting for half a day, neither seemed to have the upper 
hand. Rävaëa then composed himself and once again invoked the 
Räkñasa-astra, imbuing it with all his mystic potency. Immediately the 
air was filled with a thick shower of every kind of weapon. The entire 
globe seemed to shake and the ocean became agitated. Serpents and 
devils appeared screaming in the sky and emitting fire from their 
mouths. The sun lost its brilliance and the wind ceased to blow. 
In the heavens the gods themselves became fearful and cried out, “May 
all be well with the worlds.”  
With full concentration, Räma again invoked the Gandharva-astra, 
which caused hundreds of thousands of arrows to appear and counter 
Rävaëa’s weapons. Those awful and demoniac missiles fell to the ground 
and burned up, being pierced by Räma’s fiery shafts. 
The battle between Räma and Rävaëa could only be compared to itself. 
Such a fight had never been seen at any time even by the gods. They 
watched anxiously as Räma came under repeated ferocious attacks from 
the lord of the Räkñasas. Räma remained calm. He took from His bow a 
great razor-headed arrow that resembled a venomous serpent. In an 
instant He fitted and fired the arrow at Rävaëa. That arrow, imbued 
with mystic power, divided into ten and tore off the demon’s heads. But 
they immediately grew again. Räma sent another weapon which again 
severed the Räkñasa’s heads and again they grew back. 
Räma struck down one hundred heads, but the demon remained 
standing. Without slowing His attack for even a moment Räma 
contemplated this wonderful phenomenon. How was this demon to be 
killed? No weapon seemed able to take his life. It looked like the fight 
might go on forever. 
Vibhishana quickly approached Räma. He told him that the demon had 
a boon from Brahmä that his heads and arms could never be destroyed.

429 
In Rävaëa’s heart was a store of celestial nectar which renewed the life 
in his body. The only way to kill him was to strike at his heart with a 
divine weapon that could dry up the nectar. 
As Räma considered his next move, all the while raining arrows upon 
Rävaëa, Mätali turned to Räma and spoke. “O Räma, the time for this 
one’s death has come. Recall now the prayer Agastya told You. Agastya 
also gave You an arrow when You were in the forest. Imbue that arrow 
with the force of the brahmästra and kill the demon by piercing his 
heart.” 
Accepting Mätali’s advice, Räma remembered the celestial arrow which 
Agastya had given Him long ago in the forest. At once it appeared in 
His hand and He fitted it to His bow. Its shaft was made of ether and its 
weight consisted of the Mandara and Meru mountains. The wind-god 
presided over its shaft, the fire-god over its plumes, and the sun-god was 
installed at its point. It looked like the rod of universal destruction 
wielded by the Time-spirit himself. Räma again chanted the Aditya-
Hridaya prayer and then invoked the infallible brahmästra. 
As Räma drew back the arrow, He shone so brilliantly that no one could 
look at Him. He released the weapon and it flew at Rävaëa, lighting up 
the earth and sky and roaring like a tumultuous ocean. It struck the 
demon on his chest even as he stood firing his own weapons at Räma. 
Piercing right through his heart, the arrow emerged from Rävaëa’s body 
soaked in blood and entered the earth. Rävaëa whirled around and let 
out a cry which seemed to shake the entire creation. His bow dropped 
from his hands and he fell from his chariot like a mountain struck down 
by Indra’s thunderbolt. 
The Räkñasas fled panic-stricken in every direction. They shed tears of 
grief on seeing their lord slain. The monkeys leapt about, chasing the 
fleeing Räkñasas and shouting with joy. The sound of drums and other 
celestial instruments sounded from the sky. Delightful breezes blew on 
the battlefield carrying heavenly odors. A dazzling shower of brilliant 
flowers fell from the sky and covered Räma’s chariot. The gods and åñis 
praised Räma, who stood blazing with splendor. The battle was over. 
Räma climbed down from the chariot and was surrounded by Lakñman, 
Sugréva, Hanumän, Aìgada, Jambavan and Vibhishana, who all praised 
and cheered Him for His incredible feat.

430 
As he gazed upon his brother’s dead body, Vibhishana then began to 
lament. “Alas, O Rävaëa, how have you been killed? After displaying 
your power for a long time you now lie motionless with your brilliant 
diadem thrown off. The very fate which I predicted has come to pass. 
Why did you not heed my counsel that was meant always for your good? 
Overcome by lust, greed and anger, you have met the sure result of 
harboring these three mortal enemies of the soul. O my brother, now 
that you have been slain everything seems void; the sun has fallen to 
earth, the moon has merged in darkness, fire does not emit flames and 
all energy has become bereft of effort. All of Lanka is lost.” 
Although shunned by Rävaëa, Vibhishana had loved his brother and 
had always desired his welfare. He fell by his side and continued to cry 
out. Räma approached him and placed an arm around him, consoling 
him with soft words. “Your brother has died a hero’s death. No hero has 
ever been known to be always victorious. Sooner or later a warrior will 
die at the edge of weapons. This is the end sought by all great fighters. O 
Vibhishana, there is no need to mourn for Rävaëa, for his death was 
glorious.” 
Lakñman also consoled the grief-stricken Vibhishana by telling him 
spiritual truths. Although Rävaëa’s body had fallen, his soul remained 
alive. Indeed, having been purified by Räma’s weapons and by his death 
in battle, he would surely have attained an exalted destination. There 
was no gain in lamenting over a corpse once the soul has departed. 
Vibhishana should now perform the last rites for his brother and then 
assume the rulership of Lanka. 
As Lakñman finished speaking with Vibhishana, Rävaëa’s wives 
suddenly appeared on the battlefield. Crying like female elephants, they 
fell upon their husband’s body and bathed him with tears. Dozens of 
Räkñasés, their hair and garments in disarray, surrounded the fallen 
Räkñasa. They rolled on the ground and wailed in agony. Rävaëa’s 
principal wife, Mandodari was at their head. She swooned upon seeing 
her husband dead on the battlefield. After regaining her senses, she 
gazed upon his face and lamented loudly, her voice choked with tears. 
“Alas, my lord! How have you fallen at the hands of a man? You—who 
struck terror into the hearts of the gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and even 
great åñis—now lie killed by a mere mortal who came walking from

431 
Ayodhya, a city of humans. I do not consider Räma to be an ordinary 
man. He must surely be Viñëu, the sustainer of all the worlds, the 
unborn, inconceivable and all-powerful Supreme Person. None other 
could have laid you low. 
“O Rävaëa, although you conquered your senses, winning great boons 
from your austerities, in the end you have been conquered by those 
senses. Fallen prey to lust, you desired to enjoy the sinless Sétä. By 
stealing away that godly lady, the very emblem of chastity and nobility, 
you brought destruction upon yourself and all your kinsfolk.” 
Mandodari could not contain her grief. She slumped over Rävaëa’s body 
and continued to wail in piteous tones. 
“O hero, where have you gone now, leaving me forlorn? When I was 
always your devoted servant, why did you long for Sétä? Alas, my life is 
useless as I could not satisfy my lord. Although we roamed and sported 
together in every delightful region of heaven, I am now fallen into a 
fearful ocean of grief. Woe be to the fleeting fortune of kings.” 
Mandodari looked up with tear-filled eyes and saw Rävaëa’s brother 
nearby. “Here stands the pious Vibhishana,” she cried. “Having ignored 
his wise advice, you now lie slain. Surely a sinner always reaps the results 
of sin in the end, just as the virtuous also receive their results. Your 
brother will now enjoy royal fortune while you are sent to the next 
world.” 
Mandodari cried over her husband’s body for a long time. Everyone 
stood by silently, allowing her to vent her grief. Finally the Räkñasa 
king’s other wives gently lifted her up. They supported her on both sides 
and led her away while she continued to wail. 
Räma spoke again to Vibhishana. “Death has ended all animosity. 
Rävaëa is now the same to Me as you. Please perform the proper rites for 
his everlasting spiritual good.” In accordance with time-honored custom, 
Räma wanted to immediately perform the last rites for His fallen foe. 
Vibhishana stood reflecting for some moments. He told Räma that he 
felt unable to perform the funeral rites for his brother. Rävaëa was 
cruel, merciless and given to heinous sins. Although his brother, he was 
not worthy of Vibhishana’s respect. Rävaëa’s obsequies were an act of 
worship he could not honestly perform. 
Räma smiled. “O Vibhishana, no disdain should ever be felt for the soul.

432 
Once dead, a person’s soul leaves his body and proceeds to its next life. 
Rävaëa’s sinful body is now dead, but his pure soul continues to live. 
The soul is always worthy of respect. You should therefore carry out the 
rites for the eternal good of your brother’s immortal soul.” 
Vibhishana looked down at Rävaëa’s body. It was a fact. The soul of all 
beings was a pure part of the Supreme Lord. Ignorance only exists in the 
external material body, not the soul. Rävaëa’s sins, which proceeded 
from his ignorance, had ended with the end of his body. Especially as he 
had been slain by the Lord himself. All taints of sin were surely cleansed 
by such a death.  
Vibhishana at once began the necessary rituals. He had his brother’s 
body brought into Lanka and he lit a sacrificial fire, making offerings of 
grains and ghee and worshipping Viñëu on Rävaëa’s behalf. Along with 
the elderly Räkñasas and Yatudhanas, headed by Rävaëa’s grandfather 
Malayavan, Vibhishana carried out all the rituals strictly in accord with 
the instructions of scripture. 
Rävaëa’s body was placed on a huge bier. He was draped with golden 
silks and covered with flower garlands. To the sound of various musical 
instruments, the dead Räkñasa was borne by a hundred demons to a 
consecrated spot. Brahmins among the Räkñasas carried the sacrificial 
fire in front of Rävaëa. They built a pyre out of logs of fragrant sandal 
and padmaka wood along with ushira roots and bhadrakali grass. 
The demons then placed Rävaëa upon the pyre and threw handfuls of 
parched rice, sesame seeds and kusha grass. After uttering sacred 
mantras and sprinkling the pyre with ghee, Vibhishana set it alight. It 
quickly blazed up, and within moments the Räkñasas king’s body was 
reduced to ashes. 
Chapter 14 
Sétä’s Ordeal 
After witnessing Rävaëa’s destruction, the gods and åñis departed 
joyfully for their various heavenly abodes. Mätali bowed before Räma

433 
and received permission to return with his chariot to Indra. Räma 
watched as the celestial vehicle rose high into the sky and disappeared. 
His fury with the Räkñasas had completely subsided. He now thought of 
Vibhishana’s installation as the new king of Lanka. As the city was upon 
the earth, it was within the jurisdiction of the earth’s emperors, 
although inhabited by the Räkñasas. Thus Räma desired to install the 
pious Vibhishana as its righteous ruler so as to quickly reestablish order 
in the devastated city. 
Räma asked Lakñman to perform the ceremony of consecrating 
Vibhishana on Lanka’s throne. Lakñman immediately had the monkeys 
fetch seawater in large golden jars. With that water He duly consecrated 
Vibhishana, carefully following the directions given in the Vedas. 
Vibhishana sat upon the throne and blazed with regal splendor. The 
Räkñasas were joyful to see Rävaëa’s brother assume the rulership of 
Lanka, and they brought him many gifts and offerings. Vibhishana 
offered all of these to Räma, who accepted them out of His love for the 
Räkñasa. 
When the ceremony was complete, Räma asked Hanumän to go quickly 
to Sétä. He was aching to see Her again and He said to Hanumän, “Please 
inform the princess of the good news. I long to see Her. Tell Her to make 
Herself ready so that very soon I may meet with Her.” 
Hanumän at once left for the gardens. As he made his way through 
Lanka he was honored by the Räkñasas, who folded their palms as he 
passed by. Quickly reaching the ashoka grove, he saw Sétä still lying at 
the foot of the simshapa tree. She was unaware of Räma’s victory and 
appeared mournful. Upon seeing Hanumän, however, She quickly stood 
up in hope. Surely the monkey must be bearing good news. The princess 
listened expectantly as Hanumän told her all that had happened. 
“O godly lady, Your husband has come out victorious. The demon 
Rävaëa is no more and the virtuous Vibhishana is now the ruler of 
Lanka. Dear mother, Your woes are ended. Please prepare Yourself to see 
Your Lord Räma.” 
Sétä was stunned with joy. She could not make any reply and simply 
stood for some time gazing at Hanumän with tears flowing from Her 
eyes. At last She said in a choked voice, “O good monkey, I cannot think 
of anything I can offer you in return for this news. Not gold nor silver

434 
nor gems nor even the sovereignty of all the worlds is equal to the value 
of this message.” 
Hanumän replied that hearing Her joyful reply was itself more valuable 
than any gift. And, having seen Räma emerge victorious and happy, 
Hanumän desired nothing more. 
Sétä praised Hanumän again and again as the monkey stood with his 
head bowed and palms joined together. When the princess stopped 
speaking he said to her, “If you permit me, I shall punish these wicked 
Räkñasés who have made Your life so miserable. I would like to give them 
a good thrashing. They surely deserve death for their evil conduct 
against You, O divine lady.” 
Sétä pondered for some moments within Herself. She looked at the 
Räkñasés who sat at a distance, no longer concerned with Her now that 
Rävaëa was dead. Turning to Hanumän, Sétä replied, “These Räkñasés 
were simply carrying out Rävaëa’s order. No blame should be attached to 
them. Furthermore, any suffering I felt was surely the result of My own 
past misdeeds, for such is the universal law. Indeed, there is an ancient 
maxim which is always the code of the virtuous: ‘A righteous man does 
not consider the offenses of others against him. At all costs he always 
observes the vow of not returning evil for evil, for the virtuous consider 
good conduct their ornament.’” Sétä said that compassion should always 
be shown toward sinners, for no one was ever found to be free of sin. 
Admonished in this way, Hanumän bowed to Her and made no 
argument. Sétä had spoken well, quite in accord with Her noble 
character. After reflecting on Her words for some moments the monkey 
then asked, “I wish to return now to Räma. Please give me a message for 
Him.” 
Sétä replied that She only wished to see Him. Hanumän assured Her that 
She would very soon see Räma. Bowing once again he left and made his 
way back to Vibhishana’s palace, where Räma was waiting.  
Hearing of Sétä’s condition, Räma asked Vibhishana to arrange that She 
be given celestial clothes and ornaments. “O king of the Räkñasas, please 
have that princess bathed with heavenly unguents and dressed in the 
finest silks. Then have Her brought here. My heart is burning with 
desire to see Her again.” 
Vibhishana personally went to Sétä with Räma’s instruction, but Sétä,

435 
anxious to see Räma said, “I wish to see My husband immediately, 
without having bathed and dressed.”  
Sétä had suffered through almost a year of torture. She had never 
stopped thinking of the day She would be reunited with Räma. Here it 
was at last. How could She possibly wait another moment? 
Vibhishana replied gently that it was Räma’s desire that She prepare 
Herself. Sétä, accepting Räma’s word as Her order, acquiesced, and 
Vibhishana immediately arranged for Her bath and clothing. In a short 
while the princess was adorned in costly robes and jewels worthy of the 
consorts of the gods. She mounted a golden palanquin bedecked with 
celestial gems and was borne into Räma’s presence. 
Crowds of Räkñasas and monkeys filled the streets, all anxious for a 
glimpse of the princess. Seated on the palanquin behind a silk veil, Sétä 
shone like the sun shrouded by a cloud. Räkñasas wearing dark jackets 
and turbans and carrying staffs fitted with bells cleared a path for Her. 
The crowds of onlookers, who were roaring like the ocean, parted as the 
palanquin made its way slowly along the main highway. 
Vibhishana went ahead and informed Räma that His wife was on Her 
way. Hearing that She was on a palanquin, Räma said to Vibhishana, 
“The princess should be asked to dismount and proceed on foot. The 
people desire to see Her and that is not condemned by scripture. A 
house, a veil or a costume are never the protection of a chaste woman. 
Her character alone is her shield.” 
Lakñman, Sugréva and Hanumän looked at Räma with surprise. He 
appeared to be displeased with Sétä. His expression was stern and 
thoughtful. As Vibhishana conducted Sétä into His presence Räma 
looked at Her without smiling. 
Sétä was overjoyed to see Räma again and Her face shone like the moon, 
but She felt abashed when She saw His grave expression. Her limbs 
trembled and She stood before Him with Her head bowed and hands 
folded. 
Räma’s heart was torn. He deeply wanted to show His love for Sétä and 
to take Her back at once, but He feared public censure. As a king He 
wanted to set the highest example for the people. Sétä had been in the 
house of another man for almost a year. Whatever the circumstances, 
that would surely be criticized by some of the people. Questions about

436 
Her chastity might be raised. That would never be acceptable for the 
wife of an emperor. 
Looking at Sétä, whose face was bathed in tears, Räma said, “O blessed 
one, I have won You back today. After conquering My enemies in battle, 
I have avenged the insult given Me through Your abduction. You, too, 
are fully avenged, O princess. The evil Rävaëa is no more.” 
Räma stopped speaking, His heart balking at what He had to say next. 
Steadying His mind He continued to address the tremulous Sétä. “Now 
that I have wiped off the stain of insult on My noble house and 
established My truthfulness and resolve, no further purpose remains for 
Me in this matter. O gentle lady, I have not undergone this endeavor out 
of a desire to again have You as My wife. You have long dwelt in the 
house of another. How then can I take You back into My house? Your 
good character has become suspect. Rävaëa clasped You in his arms and 
looked upon You with a lustful eye. Therefore, My attachment for You 
has ended. Please go wherever You may desire. Perhaps You may now 
find shelter with Lakñman or Bharata or Shatrughna, or even 
Vibhishana. As beautiful as You are, O Sétä, how could Rävaëa have left 
You alone?” 
Sétä was shocked. She wept loudly and shook like a sapling caught in a 
storm. Greatly shamed by Her husband’s words, She shrank into Herself. 
Räma’s speech had pierced Her like poisoned arrows and She cried in 
pain for a long time. Gradually gathering Her senses She replied to 
Räma in faltering tones. 
“Why do You address Me with such unkind words, O hero, like a 
common man addressing some vulgar woman? You are judging all 
women by the standards of a degraded few. Give up Your doubts in Me 
for I am without blame. When Rävaëa snatched Me I was helpless and 
dragged against My will. Although I could not control My limbs, My 
heart remained under My control and did not deviate from You even 
slightly. If, in spite of Our living together in love for so long, You still do 
not trust Me, then I am surely undone for good.” 
Angry, Sétä admonished and taunted Räma. Why had He gone to such 
great endeavors? He could have sent a message with Hanumän telling 
Her that He was rejecting Her. Then She would have immediately given 
up Her life and saved Him all the effort of war. It seemed He had given

437 
way to anger alone, just like an ordinary man. Like a mean man, He had 
not considered Her devotion and chastity toward Him. He had forgotten 
Her divine origins and taken Her to be an ordinary woman. 
Sétä, still weeping, turned to Lakñman. “O prince, please raise for Me a 
pyre. This is My only recourse now. I no longer desire to live, being 
smitten with false reproaches. As My husband has renounced Me in a 
public gathering, I shall enter fire and give up My life.” 
Lakñman was indignant. How could Räma act in this way? He looked at 
His brother, but Räma remained impassive. He returned Lakñman’s 
glance with a slight nod. Lakñman understood His desire and, feeling 
deeply pained and perplexed, constructed a pyre. 
Räma stood like Yamaräja, the god of justice. No one dared approach 
Him or say anything. Only Sétä came near Him. She walked around Him 
in respect and approached the blazing fire. The princess then prayed 
with folded hands. “If I have never been unfaithful to Räma either in 
mind, words or body, may the fire-god protect Me on all sides. As My 
heart ever abides in Räma, so may the fire-god save Me now. As all the 
gods are witness to My chastity, let the fire-god protect Me.” 
After uttering this prayer Sétä walked around the fire and then fearlessly 
entered it before the vast assembly. Sétä seemed like a golden altar with 
its sacred fire. Gods, åñis, Gandharvas, Siddhas and other divine beings 
observed Sétä walking deep into the fire and all the women in the 
assembly sent up a great cry as they watched Her ascend the pyre, like a 
goddess fallen from heaven and entering hell. A gasp of amazement and 
shock came from the crowd as She disappeared into the flames. 
Räma was blinded by tears. He was afflicted to hear the cries of the 
people. With His mind set on virtue and His heart wracked with grief, 
He watched Sétä walk into the fire. From the sky the gods, headed by 
Brahmä, addressed Räma. “How are You allowing this divine lady to 
enter fire? Do You not recall Your actual identity? What is this play of 
Yours, O Lord?” 
Räma looked at the gods and folded His palms. He replied, “I take Myself 
to be a human. My name is Räma, the son of Daçaratha. Let Brahmä tell 
Me who I was in My former lives.” 
From the sky the four-headed Brahmä, seated upon his swan carrier, 
replied, “O Räma, I know You as the original creator of the cosmos. You

438 
are Viñëu and Näräyaëa, the one supreme person who is known by many 
names. All the gods come from You and the worlds rest upon Your 
energy. You exist within and without all things and reside in the heart 
of every being. Your existence and actions are inconceivable. You have 
appeared as Räma for the destruction of Rävaëa and the deliverance of 
Your devoted servants. Now that You have accomplished Your purposes 
You should return to Your own abode.” 
Räma bowed His head and said nothing. At that moment the fire-god 
emerged from the fire holding Sétä in his arms. The princess was dressed 
in a red robe and She shone brightly like the rising sun. She wore a 
garland of celestial flowers and She was adorned with brilliant gems. Her 
dark, curly hair framed Her face, which glowed with transcendent 
beauty. 
Agni placed Sétä before Räma and spoke in a voice that boomed out like 
thunder. “Here is Your wife Sétä. No sin exists in Her. Neither by word, 
deed nor thought, not even by glance has She ever been unfaithful to 
You. Rävaëa forcefully snatched Her away while She was helpless and 
forlorn. Although kept captive by him, Her mind and heart remained 
focused on You at every moment. She did not give a single thought to 
Rävaëa despite being tempted and threatened by him in many ways. 
Therefore, O Räma, accept Her back with an open heart.” 
Räma experienced great joy upon hearing Agni’s speech. His eyes 
flooded with tears as He replied to the fire-god: “Sétä needed this 
purificatory ordeal. Otherwise the world would have condemned Me as 
foolish and controlled by lust. She dwelt in Rävaëa’s house for a long 
time and Her chastity had to be proven to the world, although I know of 
Her undivided love for Me. Indeed, guarded as She is by Her own moral 
power, Rävaëa could not have violated Sétä any more than the sea could 
transgress its bounds.” 
Räma declared Sétä to be as inseparable from Him as sunlight from the 
sun. He could no more renounce Her than a virtuous man could 
renounce righteousness. 
Sétä bloomed with happiness. She sat next to Räma on a golden throne. 
The gods and åñis appeared in the assembly offering praises to Räma. 
Çiva personally came before Räma and said, “You have killed the scourge 
and dread of the universe, O Räma. You should now depart for Ayodhya

439 
and comfort Your relatives there. Then be pleased to rule over this 
world for a long time.” 
Çiva told Räma that His father Daçaratha was present, seated in a 
celestial chariot in the sky. Räma looked up and saw the chariot 
descending slowly. His father, appearing in a body that shone with 
celestial splendor, gazed down at Him. Leaving the chariot, he came 
down to earth and embraced Räma tightly. He sat next to his son and 
began to speak. 
“Although I reside with Indra, I do not feel as much pleasure there as I 
do now upon seeing You again. The words uttered by Kaikeyi when 
sending You into exile are still impressed upon my heart, but today I am 
fully rid of my sorrow. I have been redeemed by You, dear Räma. 
Fourteen years have passed and Your exile is ended. I long to see You 
return to Ayodhya and assume the throne, after pacifying Kaushalya 
and the mighty Bharata. O Räma, I now understand Your identity. You 
are the Supreme Lord, born on earth for the good of the world.” 
Räma asked His father to retract the words He had uttered when he had 
disowned Kaikeyi and her son. They were both blameless in every 
respect. Daçaratha assented to Räma’s request. He embraced Lakñman 
and praised Him for His selfless service to Räma, asking Him to continue 
that service when Räma became the emperor.  
Daçaratha then spoke to Sétä. “O daughter, do not think ill of Räma for 
His repudiation of You. He only desired to prove Your absolute purity. 
Your entering the fire was an act which will forever overshadow the 
renown of all virtuous ladies.” 
Sétä folded Her palms and bowed to Her father-in-law, who rose again to 
his aerial chariot and left for the heavens. The other gods paid their 
respects to Räma and then left for their own abodes. Indra approached 
Räma and said, “A sight of the gods can never go in vain. O Räma, pray 
tell us what You desire and it shall be done at once.” 
Smiling, Räma asked Indra to return to life all the slain monkeys, even 
those whose bodies had been torn and devoured. He also asked that 
wherever the monkeys may live there should be abundant fruits and 
roots for their food. 
Indra replied, “Although difficult to grant, Your desire shall be fulfilled. 
Let all the monkeys rise again, even those whose heads and limbs have

440 
been severed. Let them be reunited with their families and let trees full 
of fruits, even out of season, forever grow where they dwell.” 
The powerful god sprinkled celestial nectar from the sky. The monkeys 
who were killed then rose from the ground, amazed to see themselves 
healed and restored to life. They looked at one another and asked, 
“What miracle is this?” They leapt and shouted for joy, coming together 
like a great roaring ocean.  
Indra bid farewell to Räma and departed along with all the other gods. 
As the gods’ blazing chariots disappeared into the sky Räma ordered that 
the monkeys camp for the night, while He and Sétä rested in 
Vibhishana’s palace. 
Chapter 15 
Back to Ayodhya 
The following morning Vibhishana approached Räma and told Him His 
bath was ready. The Räkñasa said, “Hot and cold baths, as well as every 
sort of cosmetic, unguents and perfume are ready, and we have prepared 
heavenly garments and garlands. Excellent maidservants, well-versed in 
the arts of decoration, are at Your service, O Räma.” 
Räma replied that He had no desire for any kind of pleasure until after 
He had seen Bharata. He told Vibhishana, “That prince is now living in 
austerity. He bathes in cold rivers and eats only roots and fruits gleaned 
from the forest. How can I accept any luxuries?” 
Räma asked Vibhishana to find some means by which He could return 
quickly to Ayodhya. Vibhishana replied that the heavenly Pushpaka 
chariot was available. “Rävaëa took this chariot, which moves according 
to one’s will, from Kuvera. It still remains in Lanka, desiring to render 
You service, O Räma.” 
Vibhishana bowed low before Räma and repeatedly requested Him to 
stay for a while in Lanka and accept his hospitality, but Räma was 
anxious to depart. He thought of His mother and of Bharata—how they 
must long to see Him again! His exile was now over. He had promised to

441 
return immediately. If He did not return, they would surely be consumed 
by grief and anxiety. Bharata might even give up His life.  
Räma said, “You have already fully honored Me with your first-class 
counsel and advice. You have served Me well on the battlefield and I am 
deeply indebted to you. But now you must grant Me leave, O valiant 
Räkñasa. My task is accomplished and I must return quickly to 
Ayodhya.” 
Vibhishana acceded. He at once invoked the Pushpaka, and it appeared 
in the sky. Räma gazed with wonder at the glowing golden chariot, with 
its lofty, jewel-encrusted mansions and countless golden trellises 
wreathed with garlands of heavenly flowers. 
After inviting Räma to board the chariot, Vibhishana said, “Is there any 
final service I can render You before You leave?” 
Räma asked the Räkñasa to bestow riches upon all the monkeys. “Give 
them abundant gold and jewels to take back with them. The king should 
always reward his army. They should be well cared for and given 
everything they desire, for they must lay down their lives for his sake.” 
Vibhishana at once made arrangements for profuse wealth to be 
distributed to the monkeys. Then he helped Räma and Sétä to ascend 
the chariot. Räma again thanked Vibhishana for his service and the 
Räkñasa sorrowfully watched Him prepare to leave.  
Just as Räma was about to depart, Sugréva approached Him. “O Räma, 
pray take the monkeys with You,” he begged. “We all desire to see You 
installed as the emperor. After that we will return to our own lands.” 
Räma smiled and agreed. He invited all the monkeys to mount the 
celestial chariot, which was like a golden city. Looking at Vibhishana He 
added, “You too should accompany Me, O noble one. With all your 
kinsfolk and friends, please mount this chariot and come to Ayodhya.” 
Once everyone was on board, the Pushpaka rose high into the air. It flew 
gracefully, with an image of a great swan at its front seeming to draw it 
along. As it flew Räma pointed out to Sétä the sights below. He showed 
Her the battlefield, telling Her how all the principal Räkñasas had been 
slain. While they crossed the sea He explained how Hanumän had leapt 
to Lanka. 
As the chariot reached Kishkindha, Räma had it stop and He told 
Sugréva, “Quickly descend and fetch your wives and kinsfolk, O monkey.

442 
They too should be brought to Ayodhya.” 
With all the monkeys back aboard, the chariot continued. Soon they 
passed over the forest where Räma had spent His exile. When they 
reached Bharadväja’s hermitage, Räma desired to meet with the åñi. He 
stopped the chariot and went down to see the sage, bowing low before 
him. Bharadväja offered his blessings and informed Räma that Bharata 
was anxious to see Him. The sage knew of everything in Ayodhya from 
his disciples, who visited the city frequently. He told Räma that 
everyone was expecting His return at any moment. 
Räma replied, “Please exert your power and make all the trees 
surrounding Ayodhya fill with heavenly fruits. All those who will travel 
to the city to witness My coronation should be amply fed.” 
At once Bharadväja meditated and, by his mystic power, all the trees for 
twenty miles around Ayodhya became heavy with fruits. The sage said to 
Räma, “You should enter Ayodhya tomorrow after sending ahead a 
messenger.” 
Räma agreed and turned to Hanumän. He asked the monkey to proceed 
ahead to the city and inform Bharata that He would soon arrive. On the 
way the monkey should stop at Sringavera and inform Guha of the news. 
Räma then said to Hanumän, “Closely observe Bharata’s features when 
you tell Him that I am returning. I wish to know His reaction. A 
kingdom rich in lands and wealth could surely attract anyone’s mind. If 
He has developed an attachment for the kingdom, then I shall let Him 
continue to rule as emperor.” 
Hanumän left at once. He bounded swiftly through the forestlands and 
soon reached Guha’s abode, telling him the happy news. The Niñadha 
king was overjoyed and he immediately set about preparing to leave for 
Ayodhya. 
Without delay Hanumän continued on to Ayodhya and he arrived early 
the following morning. At a distance of two miles from the city he found 
Bharata’s dwelling. There he saw the prince, clad in black deerskins, 
emaciated from fasting, His hair matted. He sat by His wooden hut and 
shone with ascetic glory, and He was surrounded by His ministers and 
priests, dressed in similar ascetic clothing.  
Hanumän approached Bharata and found Him continuously repeating 
Räma’s name. The monkey at once lay flat on the ground, offering his

443 
obeisances. Then, with folded palms, he stood before the prince and said, 
“Having completed His exile and slain Rävaëa, Räma will soon arrive, 
accompanied by Sétä and Lakñman. He has asked after Your welfare and 
He longs to be reunited with You.” 
Bharata was overwhelmed with joy and sank to the ground in a faint. 
After regaining consciousness He stood up and embraced Hanumän. 
The prince shed tears of happiness and He spoke in an exuberant voice. 
“O monkey, I do not know if you are a god, a åñi or what, but you have 
told Me the most wonderful news! I shall give you a hundred thousand 
cows and many beautiful maidens, adorned with gold and jewels.” 
Bharata asked Hanumän to tell Him in full what had happened to Räma 
since his departure and the monkey recounted the tale. Bharata was 
delighted. He told Shatrughna to go into the city and spread the news of 
Räma’s impending return. Bharata ordered that the city be fully 
decorated with pennants and garlands, and everyone should come out to 
greet Räma. 
Hanumän could easily understand Bharata’s heart. Räma should have no 
doubt about His brother. His devotion for Räma was obviously no less 
than the devotion Hanumän himself felt. The monkey shed tears of joy 
as he witnessed Bharata’s display of love for Räma. 
Shatrughna, along with Bharata’s ministers, went into the city and 
began to prepare. They had Kaushalya and Sumitra placed upon 
palanquins and brought to Nandigram, where Bharata was living. 
Behind them came thousands of citizens, some walking, some on 
elephants or horseback, and others in chariots. The blast of conches and 
the roll of drums was tumultuous. A great roar came from the huge 
crowds, and it appeared as if the entire population of Ayodhya had come 
out of the city. The fourteen years of Räma’s exile had already ended 
and all the citizens longed only for His return. Many other monarchs 
were also present in Ayodhya, having been invited by Bharata to be 
present when Räma returned. 
By the end of day the whole region of Nandigram was completely 
crowded with people, all hoping for a glimpse of Räma. Bharata stood 
gazing to the south. He felt anxious. Had this monkey been telling the 
truth? Was Räma really about to return? When would He arrive? He 
questioned Hanumän again and again, and the monkey repeatedly

444 
reassured Him. 
Suddenly Bharata saw in the distance the shining Pushpaka. Hanumän 
then shouted, pointing it out to Bharata. “Here comes the highly 
glorious Räma!” he cried. 
The shout was echoed by the crowd of citizens and a great clamor arose. 
They looked with amazement at the celestial vehicle carrying Räma and 
Sétä, which appeared above the horizon like the sun and moon joined 
together. Bharata fell to the ground like a rod, offering His prostrated 
obeisances with His arms outstretched toward the chariot. 
The Pushpaka descended to earth and Räma dismounted along with 
Lakñman and Sétä. Bharata ran over to Them with Shatrughna, and the 
four brothers embraced each other for a long time. All the principal 
monkeys, headed by Sugréva, Aìgada and Hanumän, assumed human 
forms and disembarked from the chariot. Along with Vibhishana they 
were greeted warmly by Bharata, who embraced them all. Bharata said to 
Sugréva, “You are like a fifth brother to all of Us, O monkey king!” 
Räma saw Kaushalya nearby and He broke free from the crowd of people 
who were pressing in around Him. Quickly approaching His mother, He 
fell before her and clasped her feet. She was pale and emaciated through 
grief and separation from her son. Next to her was Sumitra, who 
appeared in a similar condition. Räma also bowed before her and 
touched her feet with reverence. As they met Räma the faces of both of 
those ladies looked like celestial lotuses in full bloom. 
Räma greeted Kaikeyi and the other royal ladies who had come there. 
He offered His obeisance to Vasiñöha and the Brahmins, who uttered 
auspicious hymns from the Vedas. Räma then bowed at the feet of His 
father-in-law Janaka, who shed tears of joy to see Him returned safe with 
Sétä. As He stood up and looked around, Räma smiled at the citizens, 
bringing joy to their hearts. 
Bharata brought Räma’s sandals, which had been kept upon Ayodhya’s 
throne. He placed them before Räma and said, “Here is the entire 
kingdom, held in trust by Me on Your behalf. Now I render it back to 
You, O Räma. My birth has borne fruit today and My deepest desire is 
fulfilled, for I see You returned as the king of Ayodhya.” 
Bharata told Räma that everything in the kingdom, its exchequer, 
storehouses, army and crops, had increased tenfold while He was gone.

445 
“All this is due to Your influence alone, O Räma, for I ruled the 
kingdom thinking only of Your example.” 
Räma embraced Bharata again and again, and the two brothers shed 
tears of joy. Seeing the display of affection between Them, the monkeys 
and Vibhishana wept.  
Räma then looked up at the Pushpaka and said, “O Pushpaka, you may 
now return to your master, Kuvera. I thank you for your service.” The 
heavenly chariot then rose into the sky and disappeared.  
When everyone was seated, Bharata addressed Räma. “Please assume the 
rulership of this world. Although I have officiated in Your absence, I can 
no more rule in Your presence than a candle can give light in the 
presence of the sun. Let the world see You shining with dazzling 
splendor after being consecrated upon the throne of Ayodhya. We all 
long only for this, O Raghava.” 
Räma replied, “Let it be so,” and a great cheer went up from the 
assembly. Räma then had the royal barbers cut His hair which was still 
in a mass of matted locks. He took His bath and dressed in costly silks 
and brilliant gold ornaments. Many garlands of celestial flowers were 
hung around His neck and He was daubed with sandal-paste of various 
colors. 
Emperor Daçaratha’s widows dressed and decorated Sétä. Her splendid 
beauty captivated the soul of whoever looked upon Her. When Räma 
and His three brothers were all prepared, Bharata summoned Sumantra 
and the royal chariot. He personally took the reins and Räma climbed 
aboard with Sétä. As the chariot proceeded toward the city, Lakñman 
and Vibhishana fanned Räma on either side with white whisks, while 
Shatrughna held the royal parasol over His head.  
Hundreds of sages walked in front of the chariot chanting mantras and 
hymns. Behind the chariot came Sugréva, still in human semblance, 
riding upon a great elephant and followed by nine thousand other 
elephants bearing other monkeys. The procession moved in state 
through Ayodhya accompanied by the blast of countless conches and the 
roll of thousands of drums. They were followed by crowds of citizens all 
anxious to see Räma’s coronation. 
The city streets were beautifully decorated with flags and garlands. From 
the balconies of the mansions women threw handfuls of flower petals

446 
and parched rice. Räma looked around at everyone and smiled, raising 
His hand in blessing. 
Räma entered His father’s palace and ordered Bharata to take Sugréva to 
his own palace. Bharata left Räma to rest for the night and, after 
arranging for all the monkey’s accommodations, He told Sugréva, “The 
coronation will take place tomorrow. Please arrange to fetch water from 
the ocean and rivers.” 
Sugréva agreed and summoned Hanumän, Jambavan, Rishabha and 
Gavaya. He gave each of them a golden pail encrusted with gems and 
told them to bring water from each of the four oceans in the north, 
south, east and west. The monkeys bounded away and swiftly carried out 
the order. Another five hundred monkeys fetched water from different 
sacred rivers all over the country. By morning all this water had been 
given to Vasiñöha for the ceremony. 
The coronation began early in the morning and Räma was ritualistically 
bathed by the Brahmins. Sixteen beautiful virgin girls consecrated Him, 
in accordance with the scriptural procedure. Following this, Räma was 
bathed by His ministers and chief warriors, and then by the leaders of 
the trading community. 
From the air the four guardians of the worlds sprinkled Räma with 
celestial nectar. When the bathing was over Vasiñöha had the crown 
placed on Räma’s head. This crown had been created by Brahmä and was 
first worn by Manu himself. It shone with the brilliance of the sun. 
Wearing that golden crown and seated upon a throne made of precious 
stones, Räma was radiant and difficult to behold. Seated next to Him 
was the exquisitely adorned Sétä, enhancing Räma’s grandeur and 
magnificence. 
Väyu came in person and presented to Räma an unfading garland of a 
hundred celestial lotuses, which imbued its wearer with unfailing vigor 
and energy. At the urging of Indra he also gave Räma a priceless 
necklace of pearls interspersed with heavenly jewels of every variety. 
Taking that necklace, Räma turned and placed it on Sétä’s breast. She 
immediately lifted it in her two delicate hands and glanced over at 
Hanumän. Understanding her desire, Hanumän knelt before the 
princess and she placed the necklace over his head. Rising up again with 
that celestial ornament on his chest, Hanumän appeared like a dark

447 
thundercloud decorated with lightning bolts. 
Gandharvas sang while the Apsaräs danced their mind-stealing dances, 
filled with movements and gestures deep with meaning. The huge 
crowds cried out “Victory to Räma!” and “All glories to Sétä and Räma!” 
The earth itself seemed to rejoice and gave forth abundant crops and 
fruits, as well as flowers which released a delightful fragrance carried on 
gentle breezes. The gods filled the canopy of the sky, and all the divine 
beings experienced the highest ecstasy upon seeing Räma united with 
Sétä.  
Räma turned to Sétä and smiled. His purpose was fulfilled. 
 
Epilogue 
 
A month had passed since the coronation. Gradually the celebrations 
ended and life in Ayodhya returned to normal. Knowing that His guests 
were thinking of returning to their own kingdoms, Räma began to say 
His farewells. He spoke first to His father-in-law, Janaka, who had been 
staying with Him in His palace. Folding His palms in reverence, Räma 
said, “My lord, surely you are our immovable support. We stand 
protected by you, O king. By virtue of your ascetic power and your 
blessings I was able to slay Rävaëa. The bonds of affection between our 
two families are unbreakable. Please accept these gifts and then feel free 
to proceed back to Mithila at your pleasure. Bharata and Shatrughna 
will follow at your heels to escort you there.” 
Tears filled Janaka’s eyes as he witnessed Räma’s humility. He looked 
over at the great pile of riches Räma was offering him. “I feel gratified 
simply by Your sight, O Räma. Let all this wealth be bestowed upon my 
daughter Sétä. I have no wish to leave, but duty dictates that I return to 
Mithila. I shall now depart, but my mind will never leave You.” 
Janaka rose to leave and tightly embraced Räma. He then went out of 
the chamber followed by his ministers and by Bharat and Shatrughna. 
One by one, Räma said fond farewells to all the other kings who had 
come for the coronation, offering each of them gold and other wealth as 
parting gifts. Those kings all expressed their sorrow to be leaving and

448 
gazed at Räma’s face without feeling satiated. After circumambulating 
Him in respect, they gathered together their followers and armies and 
slowly marched out of Ayodhya. The earth shook as the many hundreds 
of kings and princes left the city on their golden chariots, accompanied 
by their multitudes of troops. As they left they expressed their 
disappointment that they and their armies had not been able to join 
Räma in His fight against Rävaëa. “Surely this great display of might is 
useless as we were not able to engage it in Räma’s service,” they 
lamented. “Bharata summoned us too late.” 
When all the kings had gone, Räma spoke with the monkey chiefs. He 
thanked them again for all their service and embraced them with love. 
Taking valuable ornaments from His own body, Räma placed them on 
the bodies of Aìgada and Hanumän. He spoke affectionately to all the 
monkeys, offering them profuse quantities of riches. “O Vanaras, you 
should depart now for Kishkindha. Rule over your subjects with justice 
and love. You have all rendered Me a very great service which I shall 
never forget.” 
Hanumän knelt before Räma and folded his palms. “O Räma, I do not 
know how I can leave You. I have one request before I go. Please let my 
supreme affection for You stand forever. May my devotion remain 
constant and may life remain in my body for as long as Your story is 
being told on this earth. Let me stay in some heavenly region, 
continuously hearing Your story being told to me by Apsaräs and other 
celestial beings. In this way my pain of separation from You will be 
allayed.” 
Räma smiled. “It shall be so, O prince of monkeys. Your life and indeed 
your fame will endure for as long as My story lasts in the world. That will 
be for as long as the worlds themselves last. I am forever indebted to you, 
O monkey. May My obligation to you stay always in My heart. May the 
time never come when I need to repay your service, for such times are 
times of difficulty.” 
The monkeys, who felt as if the past month in Räma’s company had 
been only a day, reluctantly departed from Ayodhya, their eyes filled 
with tears and their minds absorbed in thoughts of Räma. 
Räma then said his farewell to Vibhishana, asking him to rule Lanka 
with righteousness. He also instructed the Pushpaka chariot to make its

449 
way back to Kuvera in the heavenly planets. Within a few days everyone 
had left and Räma began His rule of Ayodhya, assisted by Lakñman and 
guided by the åñis. Within some days of His guests’ departure, Räma was 
visited by a number of great sages, headed by Agastya. After they had 
been received with all respect by Räma, they took their seats in His 
assembly hall. Questioned by Räma, Agastya related everything about 
Rävaëa’s birth and history, as well as that of all the principal Räkñasas. 
The sage also told the royal court about the history of the great Vanaras. 
After Agastya had finished speaking, Räma said, “O all-powerful sage, I 
am amazed at hearing your wonderful narrations. By your very sight we 
have all been blessed, but I have one request. Soon I shall perform 
sacrifices for the good of the world. Please bless Me that these will be 
successful. Indeed, if it pleases you, then come again to Ayodhya at that 
time to grace us with your holy presence.” 
Räma requested all the sages to attend His sacrifice and they replied, “It 
shall be so.” Then they rose in a body and left the assembly. 
* * * 
As Räma ruled over Ayodhya everything became auspicious. It was seen 
that nobody died prematurely, nor was their any fear of diseases. The 
world had no robbers and no one suffered any harm from others. Every 
creature felt pleased and all men were devoted to righteousness. They 
performed all their duties as service to Räma, and they always thought of 
Him within their hearts. Rains fell when desired and the earth gave 
forth abundant produce. All people had everything they needed and 
were fully satisfied, being free from avarice. 
Two years passed. One day Räma was walking with Sétä in the palace 
gardens. Having just heard that She had become pregnant, He smiled 
broadly and exclaimed, “Excellent! O beautiful lady, tell Me what desire 
of Yours should be fulfilled.” 
As they strolled Sétä admired the many blossoming trees and bushes in 
the garden. She was reminded of Her time with Räma in the forest. 
Remembering the celestial beauty of the forest, she said, “O Lord, I have 
a longing to once more visit the penance groves inhabited by the sages. 
Let Me stay there for a night at the feet of those åñis.” 
Räma squeezed Sétä’s hand. “O princess, be it so. You will surely go

450 
tomorrow.” 
The couple sat down in a shaded bower where They were entertained by 
Apsaräs and Näga damsels, who danced to the exquisite music played by 
Gandharvas. Soon the sun set and They retired for the evening into the 
palace inner chambers. 
The following morning after He had performed His religious rituals 
Räma entered His council hall. Taking His seat on a great golden 
throne, He enquired from His chief minister, “O Bhadra, tell Me what 
are the talks of the people? What do they say about Me and about My 
rule? Kings who are not devoted to duty are criticized everywhere.” 
With joined palms Bhadra replied, “O King, delightful are the talks I 
have heard from the people. Mostly they discuss Your conquest over 
Rävaëa and recovery of Mother Sétä.” 
Bhadra glanced downward as he spoke and Räma, catching the gesture, 
asked, “What else do they say, O minister? Leave nothing out. Tell Me 
both the good and the ill words which are spoken. I shall then know 
what must be done by Myself. O Bhadra, speak without any fear or 
anguish.” 
Bhadra took a deep breath. “O Lord, listen as I relate the words I have 
heard while moving among the people. Everywhere—in market places, 
public squares, crossroads and in the forests—the people are heard to 
recite the glories of Your wonderful victory. However, O great emperor, 
I have also heard criticism.” 
Bhadra described how some of the citizens were questioning Räma’s 
acceptance of Sétä back into His home. “They say that the princess, 
having been taken onto Rävaëa’s lap and kept by him for almost one 
year, cannot now be considered pure. Because, O Räma, You have 
allowed Her back into Your house, these people say they will have to 
tolerate similar unchaste behavior from their own wives. Whatever a 
king does becomes acceptable behavior for all the people.” 
Bhadra looked down at the mosaic floor. Tears fell from the corners of 
his eyes. He had not wanted to tell his master about the criticisms, but 
he knew that nothing could be kept concealed from Räma. 
Räma appeared shocked. He looked around at His other ministers. “Is 
this true? Are such talks indulged in by the citizens?” 
All the ministers appeared aggrieved. They affirmed what Bhadra had

451 
said, each of them bowing low before Räma as he spoke. 
Räma became pensive. He dismissed the court and asked that Lakñman 
be summoned. As the prince entered the court He saw Räma sitting with 
downcast expression, seeming like an eclipsed sun. He hurried to His 
side and asked what was wrong. Räma explained everything, then said, 
“Dear brother, the calumny of the people eats into My very vitals. It can 
never be tolerated by a virtuous monarch. Surely I knew that this 
criticism would ensue, and thus did I test Sétä at the time of Her return. 
However, it seems that even though the gods have attested to Her purity 
the citizens are still not satisfied. Alas, surely one’s infamy is easily 
proclaimed in this world.” 
Räma shook His head as He went on, “Infamy is to be avoided by all 
means. It is censured even by the gods. As long as one’s infamy remains 
current on earth one stays in hell. Great souls always endeavor for fame 
and good repute in this world. To avoid disrepute I would give up My 
brothers or even My own life—what then of Sétä?” 
Räma instructed the astonished Lakñman to immediately take Sétä out of 
Ayodhya and into the forest, where She should be left. She was already 
expecting to go there for a visit, so He would not need to tell Her the 
truth. Räma spoke gravely, “I will not hear any arguments against this, 
dear brother. Sétä should be taken this very day to Välméki’s ashrama 
which lies on the banks of the Ganges. After leaving Her there, come 
back alone to Ayodhya.” 
Having spoken, Räma left the court and went with a heavy heart to His 
personal quarters. Lakñman slowly made His way toward Sétä’s rooms. 
Surely this was the most difficult task He had ever faced. If it were left 
to Him, thought Lakñman, He would go out and find the men who were 
criticizing Räma and put them straight. Where was the question that 
Sétä could ever be unchaste? What fault had Räma committed? But 
Räma’s order could not be avoided. Lakñman had Sumantra prepare His 
chariot and He went before Sétä, telling them that Räma had asked Him 
to fulfill Her desire to visit the forest. 
Highly pleased, Sétä asked Her servants to gather together many costly 
garments and precious jewels. “I shall distribute these to the wives of the 
åñis,” She said, smiling.  
Lakñman said nothing in reply. He turned and walked toward the

452 
chariot, with Sétä following behind. As She walked She began to notice 
unusual omens. She spoke in surprise. “O son of Sumitra, why is it that 
My right eye throbs and My limbs shiver? My heart feels heavy and My 
mind is filled with anxiety. The earth itself seems distressed and all 
quarters appear desolate. May all be well with My lord and indeed with 
all living beings.” 
Sétä prayed with folded hands as She made Her way out of the palace. 
Reaching the chariot, Lakñman said, “All is well, O Queen. There is no 
cause for fear. I think Your mind is disturbed at the thought of 
separation from Räma for even a day. Ascend the chariot and we shall 
leave at once for the banks of the auspicious Ganges.” 
Feeling reassured, Sétä climbed aboard the large chariot and Lakñman 
jumped up next to Sumantra in the front. The charioteer urged on the 
horses and they set off for the forest. After journeying for most of the 
day they arrived at the riverbank, close to Välméki’s ashrama. The three 
travelers got down and offered their respects to the holy river, bowing 
their heads to the ground. 
Thinking of Räma’s order that He return at once, Lakñman looked at 
Sétä, who was kneeling by the side of the river offering prayers. The time 
had come to leave Her. She would have no difficulty finding Välméki’s 
ashrama, which lay only a short distance away along a smooth forest 
path. Ashamed of Himself for abandoning the queen, the prince did not 
want to enter the ashrama. He sighed deeply. Now He would have to tell 
Sétä the truth. Losing control of Himself, He suddenly let out a great cry 
and fell to the earth. 
Sétä looked up in surprise. “What ails You, O Lakñman? We are here by 
the banks of the sacred Ganges and about to see the great åñis. Why do 
You wail at such a happy moment? You are making Me sad. I know You 
are always by Räma’s side. Is it that separation from Him for even two 
days is so intolerable? O hero, take heart. Räma is just as dear to Me, but 
I do not give way to such sorrow.” 
Sétä asked Lakñman to take Her to the ascetic’s hermitage. “Let us spend 
a single night with those sages, dear Lakñman, and then return to Räma’s 
presence.” 
Lakñman slowly got up. His face was covered with tears and His body 
trembled. He folded His palms and replied with difficulty, “O auspicious

453 
one, My heart feels as though pierced with a dart. I have been entrusted 
with a task that will make Me worthy of the whole world’s censure. 
Surely I would rather die.” 
Sétä was mystified. She had no idea what He meant. Feeling perturbed, 
She asked, “What is wrong, My dear brother? Is something amiss with 
Räma. Speak out the truth at once.” 
Lakñman sighed. Gazing downwards, He said, “O Janaki, before we left 
Ayodhya Your husband was told about a most painful rumor circulating 
among the people. The words He heard cannot be repeated by Me. Yet 
even though You have been proven to be free from blame by the gods 
themselves, Räma could not ignore the complaints. Struck with grief, He 
ordered Me to bring You here and then return alone. O gentle lady, You 
have been forsaken by Him out of fear of disrepute.” 
Lakñman broke off, too pained to continue. Sétä stood as though 
petrified. She could hardly believe what She was hearing. Had She been 
born only to experience grief? Covering Her face with Her two 
bejewelled hands, She dropped to the earth with a piteous wail. 
Getting a grip on Himself, Lakñman said, “Do not give way to sorrow, O 
queen. Here is Välméki’s delightful ashrama. Approach him for shelter 
and live here peacefully. Remain loyal to Your husband, observe fasts 
and practice prayer and meditation. Keeping Räma forever in Your 
heart, You will doubtlessly secure Your everlasting welfare.” 
Sétä fainted and lay on the ground looking like a wild creeper bedecked 
with blossoms and torn from a tree. Coming round after some moments, 
She began to lament, “Alas, this mortal frame was certainly fashioned by 
the creator simply for sorrow. Indeed, today it seems like the very 
embodiment of grief. What sin did I commit that I should suffer in this 
way? How can I live all alone in the hermitages of the sages? What will I 
say to those ascetics when they ask Me why I was abandoned by the great 
Raghava? I would at once drown Myself in the flowing Ganges, but I 
would thus break Räma’s line by killing His unborn child. O Lakñman, 
do what You must. Forsake Me, the miserable one, but listen first to 
what I have to say now.” 
Sétä got to Her feet. Shaking with sorrow, She held onto a tree for 
support as She spoke to Lakñman. “O tiger among men, go then to 
Ayodhya and leave Me here. After offering My respects to all My

454 
seniors, please say this to My lord: ‘O Raghava, You should always act in 
such a way as to ensure Your unrivalled fame in this world. Surely My 
abandonment is necessary to save You from ill-repute. Thus, although 
torn by grief, I feel no anger. For a chaste woman the husband is the 
master, deity and preceptor.’” 
Having spoken Her message for Räma, Sétä dropped again to the ground. 
Lakñman looked at Her with tear-filled eyes. Unable to make any reply, 
He cried loudly and bowed His head to the earth. He then walked 
around Sétä with His palms folded. After regaining His balance of mind, 
he said, “O faultless one, to say farewell I now look upon Your face for 
the first time. Oh, how can I bear to see You separated from Räma and 
dwelling in the deep forest?” 
Crying, Lakñman bowed again to Sétä and then ascended His chariot, 
where Sumantra sat in silent sorrow. He urged on the horses and the 
chariot moved off. As He went along the path away from the river, the 
grief-stricken Lakñman could hear Sétä’s plaintive cries echoing through 
the woods, resembling those of a peacock calling for its mate. 
Shortly after Lakñman had left, a couple of young ascetics were walking 
in the woods to gather firewood when they heard Sétä’s sobs. Spying Her 
through the trees, they ran back to their hermitage and spoke to 
Välméki. “Sir, some noble lady looking exactly like the Goddess of 
Fortune lies near the riverbank, crying loudly in despair. Perhaps She 
has descended from the heavens. She certainly does not deserve any 
pain or sorrow. In our view She is a divine woman who has sought your 
shelter. O lord, we feel She is worthy of your protection.” 
Välméki could understand everything by virtue of his inner vision. 
Taking up an offering of arghya, he went quickly toward the river 
followed by his disciples. The effulgent sage found Sétä lying with Her 
arms outstretched, weeping. He spoke to Her comfortingly. “O gentle 
one, I know You are Daçaratha’s daughter-in-law and the beloved queen 
of Räma. I am Välméki. Welcome to my hermitage. By my meditations I 
have understood why You are here. Indeed, all that exists within the 
three worlds is known to me. I thus know of Your purity and 
blamelessness. O child, be composed and accept this offering. Come with 
me to the ashrama of the female ascetics. They will surely take care of 
You as if You were their own daughter. It will be exactly like Your own

455 
home.” 
Sétä bowed respectfully to the sage and accepted the arghya he was 
proffering. She replied, “Let it be as you say, O great åñi.” 
Välméki led the way to the ladies’ ashrama. As they reached that 
secluded and delightful part of the woods, some of the elder ladies came 
out to greet them. One of them asked, “What would you have us do, O 
greatest of sages?” 
Välméki introduced Sétä to the ladies and asked that they take good care 
of Her. He told them that She was expecting Räma’s child and should be 
afforded all affection and respect, exactly as they would show the sage 
himself. Receiving their assurances, he then returned back to his own 
ashrama, Sétä began to reside with the ascetics, Her mind always rapt in 
thought of Räma. 
* * * 
For some time Lakñman and Sumantra traveled in silence, thinking of 
Sétä. Finally, as the chariot came out of the forest and onto the main 
road leading to Ayodhya, Lakñman said, “O charioteer, how great must 
be Räma’s grief that He is again separated from Sétä. Truly this is the 
effect of destiny. Fate is inexorable. Is it not astonishing that Räma, who 
could extirpate the entire celestial hosts, should have to submit to fate? 
It seems to Me that Räma was more pained by banishing Sétä than He 
was by His own exile and even Her abduction. Why did He submit to the 
cruel words of the citizens? What virtue did He acquire?” 
Sumantra comforted Lakñman. He then told Him of a story he had long 
ago heard from the Åñi Durväsä. “This sage once stayed at Vasiñöa’s 
hermitage. O prince, at that time your father went there and I drove his 
chariot. He enquired from Durväsä about the prospects for his sons—
how long they would live and rule over the world. Durväsä then 
narrated the following history.” 
Lakñman listened attentively as Sumantra repeated what he had heard 
from the åñi. Durväsä had described how in ancient times the Daityas 
had been conquered in battle by the gods. They had fled and sought 
shelter in the ashrama of the powerful sage Bhrgu. Only the sage’s wife 
had been present and, out of compassion, she let them hide in the 
ashrama. When Viñëu, who was assisting the gods in their campaign

456 
against the Daityas, learned of this, He became angry with Bhrgu’s wife 
and severed her head with His discus. Bhrgu had then returned and seen 
his wife slain by Viñëu. He immediately cursed Viñëu, saying, “As You 
have killed my innocent spouse, so You will take birth in the mortal 
world and meet with separation from Your wife for many years.” 
Sumantra concluded his story. “As soon as he uttered the curse Bhrgu 
became sorry and he bowed at Viñëu’s feet and worshipped Him. 
However, Viñëu said, ‘O sage, for the good of the world I shall accept 
this curse.’ Durväsä then went on to explain that, although Räma would 
become the Lord of Ayodhya and rule over the earth for eleven 
thousand years, He would be separated from Sétä. Thus it has come to 
pass, O Lakñman, for the words of the åñis can never fail.” 
As Sumantra ended his story the chariot approached Ayodhya. Entering 
the city, Lakñman went at once to the royal court. He found Räma 
seated on His throne with His face downcast. Lakñman fell at His feet 
and told Him that Sétä had been left at Välméki’s ashrama. In a pained 
voice He said, “Do not grieve, O tiger among men. All gains end in loss, 
all elevations end in a fall, all union must end in separation, and life 
itself always ends in death. The wise therefore do not become attached 
to wives, sons, friends or riches. You know this well, O Räma, therefore 
take heart and shake off Your sorrow.” 
Lakñman assured Räma that the disrepute among the people would now 
be destroyed by Räma’s act of sending Sétä away. Räma appeared 
encouraged by Lakñman. He smiled and replied, “What You say is true, 
O hero. I shall take joy in the execution of My duties, for this is the path 
to everlasting happiness. Let Us rest now for the night.” 
Räma stood up and embraced His brother, and They then retired to 
Their quarters. 
* * * 
Twelve years of Räma’s rule went by. During that period His dominion 
over the earth became firmly established as all other monarchs paid Him 
tribute. His brother Shatrughna slew a powerful demon named Lavana 
and all other demonic elements were subdued. Räma then thought of 
performing an Ashvamedha sacrifice for the benefit of the world. 
Arrangements were made and invitations sent out to all the kings of the

457 
earth, as well as to many great åñis. Välméki was also invited and he 
prepared himself to go to Ayodhya. 
While in Välméki’s ashrama Sétä had given birth to twin sons named 
Lava and Kusha. The boys had been lovingly raised by Välméki as if they 
were his own sons. Despite never having seen their father, they had 
flourished in Välméki’s ashrama and grown into powerful youths. 
Välméki had taught them all Vedic knowledge and had also taught them 
Räma’s story, which they became expert in reciting. 
As the time for Räma’s sacrifice approached, Välméki took both Lava 
and Kusha, as well as hundreds of his other disciples, and went to 
Ayodhya. He entered the sacrificial arena like the sun surrounded by 
glowing planets. As soon as Räma saw him He immediately ordered that 
he be worshipped and offered a place of honor in the sacrifice. After he 
had been shown to his quarters, Välméki said to Lava and Kusha, 
“Tomorrow you two should go among the Brahmins here and sing the 
Rämayana. Go also to Räma’s palace and sing this most holy narration 
where the king will hear it. If Räma calls you before Him, then you 
should recite to Him the poem in its entirety. Sing it to the best of your 
ability and with a pure heart. Do not let your minds be captivated by the 
opulence and wealth that you see. If Räma should ask whose sons you 
are, you should tell Him that you are two disciples of Välméki.” 
The two humble and obedient boys replied, “We shall do exactly as you 
ask, O lord.” The boys were eager to meet Räma. As well as knowing the 
Rämayana by heart, they had heard their mother speak many times 
about Räma and, although they had come to see Välméki as their father, 
they knew they were Räma’s actual sons. Looking forward to meeting 
Räma the next day, they lay down happily for sleep by the side of the 
sage. 
Two hours before sunrise the boys rose and performed their ablutions. 
After saying their morning prayers they made their way to the assembly 
of Brahmins and began to sing the Rämayana. As they sang they 
expertly played upon lutes, and the music they produced stole the heart 
and captivated the mind. The Brahmin sages were enthralled and they 
repeatedly applauded the boys. “Excellent! Well done! We are all amazed 
by this magnificent poem. Its exquisite music and meter are without 
compare. It is replete with the nine sentiments of love, pathos, mirth,

458 
heroism, terror, wrath, disgust, wonder and serenity. The boys’ expert 
singing creates a vivid picture of the story they are telling, and we feel as 
if we are seeing it actually happen.” 
The sages gazed in wonder at the twins. They both looked like Räma 
himself and were endowed with many auspicious marks. After making 
various gifts to the boys, the Brahmins said, “This song, composed by 
Välméki, will be sung by poets throughout all the ages. It is conducive to 
long life, begets prosperity, invokes all good fortune and ravishes the 
ears and mind of the hearer. Go now, dear boys, and recite it for the 
pleasure of Räma Himself.” 
The twins offered their obeisances to the sages and went at once to the 
palace compound, where they again began to sing. Hearing them from 
within the palace, Räma immediately ordered that they be brought in. 
They were offered golden seats within the royal court and Räma said to 
them, “O ascetics, we have heard your excellent singing. Please recite 
your poem here for the pleasure of the Brahmins in this court, as well as 
My brothers and Myself. I think there is no song its equal, nor indeed 
singers such as yourselves.” 
Räma looked carefully at the two boys. He turned to Lakñman and said, 
“Although dressed as ascetics, these two appear like rulers of the earth. 
Surely they are from royal stock, or even have some divine origin. Let 
Us listen now as they repeat their wonderful poem.” 
The entire royal assembly sat enchanted while the boys sang. As evening 
approached and they completed their recitation, Räma said, “Wonderful, 
wonderful! O boys, we desire to know who you are and from where you 
have come. I wish to bestow upon you gold and other gifts in 
abundance.” 
The boys replied that they were Välméki’s disciples. Remembering the 
åñi’s instructions, they politely declined Räma’s offer of wealth and asked 
His permission that they be allowed to return to Välméki. Räma agreed 
and the boys departed, leaving the assembly astonished and entranced 
by what they had heard. 
After they had gone Räma dismissed the assembly and sat alone. 
Hearing His sons recite His life story had made Him think of Sétä. He 
longed to see Her again and it was ordained by scripture that a king 
should perform sacrifice with his wife. It had been twelve years since

459 
Sétä’s departure and He had not seen Her since. His heart had often 
ached with Her separation but He had wanted to make absolutely 
certain that the people had no cause at all to criticize Him. Feeling that 
this had now been achieved, Räma desired to bring Sétä to the sacrifice. 
He summoned Bhadra and said, “Please have the venerable sage Välméki 
informed that I would like him to fetch Sétä. Let both he and the Queen 
Herself take oath before the assembly that She has always remained 
pure. I do not want any further obloquy about Myself or Sétä circulating 
in the kingdom.” 
Bhadra, surprised and gladdened by Räma’s request, replied, “It shall be 
done as You wish, my Lord.” Envoys left at once and told Välméki of 
Räma’s desire. The sage immediately made arrangements for Sétä to be 
brought from his hermitage. He told the messengers that She would be 
present the following day and they left to inform Räma. 
The next morning Räma addressed the royal court. “Today the noble 
Sétä will come to the sacrifice. There She will take oath as to hHer 
purity, supported by the great Åñi Välméki, who has given Her shelter 
these last twelve years. I desire that all the kings and sages hear this 
testimony. Indeed, let as many people as may desire be present.” 
The assembly cheered Räma and everyone began to make their way to 
the sacrificial arena outside the city. All of them longed to see Räma and 
Sétä united again. Although they did not question Räma’s judgment, it 
had broken their hearts when He had sent the queen away. For twelve 
years they had prayed for this day when She might return.  
Gradually the vast arena filled up with royalty and åñis. All the greatest 
sages in the world came there. Närada, Parvata, Vasiñöa, Vamadeva, 
Kaçyapa, Viçvämitra, Durväsä, Cyavana, and hundreds more were seen 
there. Representatives of the Räkñasas, as well as many Vanaras, 
Gandharvas and other celestials arrived. In the sky the gods assembled 
and Räma took his place in the arena.  
Välméki then made his way into the center of the arena, followed by 
Sétä. She was dressed in an ochre-colored sari and Her golden earrings 
glinted in the sunshine as She walked with Her head down. Although 
She thought only of Räma within Her heart, out of fear She did not look 
up at Him. She folded Her palms in respect and stood silently before Her 
husband.

460 
Seeing the queen with downcast expression, the assembly was agitated 
and gave out various cries. Some were sorrowful, some praised Räma, 
and still others praised Sétä. When everyone finally settled down, 
Välméki began to speak. 
“O son of Daçaratha, out of fear of criticism this pious Sétä of righteous 
conduct was left by You near my hermitage. She will now testify to You 
as to Her unfailing purity. I too can swear that this chaste lady is sinless. 
I do not remember ever having spoken an untruth. O Räma, know for 
sure that Sétä is entirely free from wicked conduct of any kind. Know 
also that the two boys who recited the Rämayana to You are certainly 
both Your sons. I have practiced penance for many thousands of years 
and if my words are false, then may I not obtain the fruit of that 
asceticism. Knowing that Sétä was innocent, I accepted Her into my 
ashrama. She is devoted to You only, O Raghava, and will never sway 
from You under any circumstances.” 
Räma smiled. “It is exactly as you say, O Brahmin. I also know Sétä to be 
without blame. This was previously established by even the gods and 
thus did I allow Her to enter My house. Only due to public censure did I 
send Her away again, even though I never doubted Her innocence. 
Please forgive Me. I hereby proclaim My love for the chaste Sétä. I also 
accept these two boys, Lava and Kusha, as My sons. Let Her now take 
oath before this assembly and establish Her purity once and for all.” 
Sétä slowly looked up at Her husband who gazed at Her with affection. 
She glanced around the assembly. As well as many kings and åñis, She 
saw all classes of celestials standing there—Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, 
Sädhyas, Viçvadevas, Nägas and numerous others. Above the assembly 
on his swan carrier sat Brahmä, the universal creator, surrounded by all 
the principal gods. Everyone waited silently for Sétä to speak. 
With Her hands folded in front of Her face, Sétä looked down again and 
said in a tremulous voice, “If I have never even thought about anyone 
other than Räma, then may the earth goddess grant Me shelter. As I 
worship only Räma in mind, speech and action, so may the earth give 
Me space. If I have truthfully said that I know only Räma as My lord, let 
the earth receive Me now.” 
Sétä felt that She had become a problem for Räma. Despite having been 
declared pure by even the ever-truthful gods, still the doubts remained.

461 
It seemed that as long as She was present there would be those who 
would find fault with Räma. She would have given up Her life the very 
day She had been sent away to the forest if She had not been pregnant 
with Räma’s sons. Now the boys were old enough to join their father in 
the city. It was time for Her to depart. Räma’s reputation could not be 
sullied by even the slightest doubt and only Her departure could ensure 
that.  
As Sétä finished speaking the ground next to Her opened up and a 
celestial throne rose up. That brilliant, bejewelled seat was borne on the 
heads of four great Näga snakes. Sitting on it was Bhumi, the earth 
goddess, glowing with her divine effulgence. She rose up and held out 
her hand to Sétä with gentle words of welcome. Sétä got onto the throne 
and sat next to Bhumi. Suddenly a great shower of fragrant flowers fell 
from the sky and covered Sétä. The gods loudly praised Sétä and, as all 
the kings and åñis looked on in amazement, the throne slowly re-entered 
the earth. Everyone glorified Sétä for Her incomparable devotion and 
chastity to Räma. 
Räma himself cried out as Sétä disappeared into the earth, which again 
closed as the throne entered within. He leaned on the side of His seat 
and wept in grief. Wringing His hands in despair, He said, “Upon seeing 
Sétä enter the earth I am afflicted with a sorrow greater than I have ever 
known before. How can I tolerate it? How shall I allow Sétä to be taken 
by the earth? When She was stolen by Rävaëa I crossed the vast ocean 
on foot to recover Her. I shall again bring Her back or go with Her for 
good.” 
Räma looked down at the earth. Becoming angry, He said, “O goddess, 
you should return Sétä to Me or you will feel My wrath. Sétä was 
formerly brought out from your womb, thus you are My mother-in-law. 
Therefore be kind to Me and return Sétä, or else grant space to Me also. I 
will stay with Sétä wherever She has gone, whether it be heaven or the 
nether regions. O earth-goddess, hear My words or else I shall destroy 
you with all your mountains and forests.” 
Räma’s eyes blazed in anger and He stood up, reaching for the bow by 
His side. Brahmä then spoke from his position above the sacrifice. 
“O Räma, Lord of all the worlds, do not be grieved. Remember Your 
identity as Viñëu. By Your own arrangement has this separation from

462 
Sétä been ordained. The pure and noble daughter of Janaka has gone to 
celestial realms where You will see Her again without doubt. O Lord, 
listen now as Your sons finish the narration of Rämayana. They will 
recite to You all of Your future acts, culminating in Your return to Your 
spiritual abode. Everything is happening according to Your will, O 
Räma. Do not therefore destroy the world.” 
Räma was pacified by Brahmä’s speech and He sat down again. Seeing 
Him peaceful, the gods departed for the heavens. As evening fell the 
assembly dispersed and Räma went sorrowfully back to His palace, taking 
His two sons with Him. 
The following morning Räma had Lava and Kusha sing the remaining 
portion of Rämayana, dealing with future events. Sitting amid His 
ministers and the court Brahmins, Räma listened as the two boys recited 
the beautiful poetry they had heard from Välméki. They briefly 
described the period of Räma’s rule over the earth, a time of 
unparalleled peace and opulence. Their narration was concluded with a 
description of how Räma and His brothers would finally leave the world. 
* * * 
After Sétä’s departure from the world, Räma often thought of Her. He 
could not even think of taking another wife and He had an exquisite 
gold image of Sétä made by expert artisans. That statue sat next to Him 
in the royal court and at sacrifices, serving as the queen. A period of 
eleven thousand years passed with Räma ruling the world, assisted by His 
three brothers. He performed ten thousand great sacrifices and the earth 
enjoyed unprecedented opulence. All creatures were happy and 
everything functioned in accordance with the arrangement of the 
Supreme Lord. Religion was firmly established and everyone led pious 
lives. 
One day, toward the end of his rule, Räma was visited by an unusual 
ascetic, who glowed with a divine radiance. That Brahmin, having been 
worshiped by Räma, introduced himself as a messenger of Brahmä. He 
asked for a private audience with Räma, saying, “O emperor, no one 
should hear the words that pass between us. If anyone should interrupt 
us, then they must be killed by You.” Agreeing to this request from the 
Brahmin, Räma brought him into His personal quarters. He told

463 
Lakñman to stand outside and prevent anyone from entering, explaining 
to Him what the ascetic had said. 
When they were alone, the ascetic said to Räma, “O Lord, You should 
know that I am Death. Brahmä has asked me to come here and inform 
You that the time allotted for Your earthly pastimes is drawing to a 
close. You have achieved all that You desired to achieve. Now, if it so 
pleases You, You may return to Your own eternal abode.” 
Death described to Räma some of His former incarnations in the 
material world, concluding by saying, “O Räma, You are the eternal 
Supreme Being. You appear in the world to establish religion and 
destroy the demons. The time set by Yourself for this incarnation is now 
almost over. Be pleased then to resume Your place as the Lord and 
protector of the gods.” 
Räma laughingly replied, “O destroyer of all, welcome is your visit here. 
Surely your words fill Me with pleasure. It is indeed time for My 
departure. Please return to Brahmä and tell him that I and all My 
brothers shall leave within a short time.” 
As Räma spoke with Death, the great mystic Durväsä came to the city. 
Desiring to see Räma, he was shown into the palace, where he was met 
by Lakñman. He asked for an audience with Räma, but Lakñman told 
him Räma was busy at that time. Immediately blazing up with anger, 
Durväsä said, “I will not be kept waiting. Go at once, O son of Sumitra, 
and inform Räma of my presence. Otherwise know that I shall curse 
You, Your brothers, this territory and all Your descendents. Indeed, my 
anger is already difficult to contain.” 
Seeing the irascible sage preparing to utter a curse, Lakñman bowed to 
him and quickly went towards Räma’s quarters. Thinking, “Let there be 
only My death rather than that of all My kinsmen,” He entered the 
room, where He saw Räma speaking with Death. 
When Räma heard that Durväsä was waiting, He immediately came out 
to greet him. Touching the åñi’s feet, He asked, “What shall I do to please 
you, O great one?” 
Durväsä replied that he had been fasting for one thousand years and 
desired to take food that day and break his fast. “Kindly bring me cooked 
foods, O Räma, so that I may end my long penance.” 
Räma had Durväsä seated comfortably in the palace and He personally

464 
served him with varieties of excellent food. After the sage had left, and 
Death had also departed, Lakñman said to Räma, “I must now die, dear 
brother, for that was the promise You made to Death. Punish Me in 
accord with Your word to that deity.” 
Remembering His discussion with Death, Räma felt shocked. Speechless 
with grief at the thought of separation from Lakñman, He shed tears and 
stood gazing at His beloved brother. How could He be killed? 
Lakñman folded His palms and said, “Do not feel sorrow for Me, O 
gracious one. Time is all-powerful. Bound by our former acts, we must all 
come under death’s sway. O King, keep Your promise without fear. 
Those men who break their promises will go to hell.” 
Räma sat down on His throne, struck with sorrow. He called for His 
ministers and informed them of what had taken place. Vasiñöa then said, 
“O Räma, all this was foreseen by me. The time for the conclusion of 
Your pastimes has arrived. You should abandon Lakñman now. Do not 
give up Your promise, for if You do, then righteousness in this world will 
perish. Along with righteousness all beings will also be destroyed. 
Therefore, O lion among men, be separated from Lakñman today.” 
Räma looked at Lakñman. “I leave You, O son of Sumitra. Let not virtue 
suffer. Desertion and slaying are considered equal according to the wise. 
Therefore do I abandon You today.” 
Lakñman prostrated Himself before Räma with tears in His eyes. He then 
stood up and left the palace, going directly to the forest. Reaching the 
banks of the Sarayu, He sat down in meditation, preparing to observe 
the praya vow of fasting till death. With His eyes half-closed, He 
suspended His breathing and entered a deep trance. As He sat absorbed 
in thought of the Supreme, Indra came there invisible to all and took 
Him away to the heavens. Thus it appeared to all men that Lakñman had 
died. 
Hearing of this, Räma was overcome by grief. He felt that He could not 
remain on earth any longer. Crying out in pain, He said, “I shall confer 
the kingdom on Bharat. This very day I will follow the path taken by 
Lakñman.” 
Bharat replied, “How can I think of ruling the world in Your absence, O 
Räma? Along with Shatrughna, We shall all leave together. Bestow the 
kingdom upon Your two sons.”

465 
Vasiñöa agreed with Bharat. “This is proper, O Räma. The time fixed by 
Yourself for Your rule has all but ended. Surely You must now depart, 
taking Your brothers who are all a part of Yourself. Knowing this, the 
people have become afflicted with sorrow. They are lying prostrate on 
the ground, mortified at the thought of losing You.” 
Räma was upset to hear of the citizens’ unhappiness. He called for their 
chief representatives and said, “What should I do to assuage your grief? I 
must now leave this world.” 
The citizens begged Räma to take them all with Him. “Wherever You are 
going, O Lord, be it the forest, mountains, ocean, heaven or even hell, 
we desire to follow You. If it pleases You, let us accompany You.” 
Räma assented. “It shall be so.” He then arranged for His sons to be 
coronated. Lava and Kusha could hardly face the prospect of separation 
from their father. They loudly lamented and fell to the earth when they 
heard that Räma was departing. Räma gently raised them and said, 
“Dear sons, you must remain on earth to carry on a righteous rule. 
Establish your capitals in the northern and southern territories. Always 
thinking of Me, lead the people with justice and compassion. Surely we 
will be united again in the future.” 
Lava and Kusha tightly embraced their father and then left Ayodhya for 
their respective kingdoms, which became known as Kushavati and 
Sravasti, taking vast amounts of wealth with them. 
After this Räma dressed Himself in pure white silks and prepared to 
leave Ayodhya. The next morning He had Brahmins take His sacred fire 
from the palace and lead the way toward the forest. With Vasiñöa 
reciting hymns from the Säma Veda, Räma went slowly out of the city 
seated on a great golden chariot. Those with divine sight could see by 
His two sides the goddesses Lakñmé and Bhumi. Ahead of Him went the 
personified power of resolution, while all around Him were His weapons 
in human forms. Räma was followed by the Vedas in the form of 
Brahmins, as well by the goddess Gayatri and the personified form of 
Omkara, the divine syllable always meditated upon by great yogés. 
All the female inhabitants of the palace then followed, accompanied by 
Bharat and Shatrughna. Crowds of ascetics, chanting Vedic mantras, 
came at the head of the citizens, who were grouped according to their 
respective classes. Hundreds of thousands of Vanaras, Räkñasas and bears

466 
also followed behind. Everyone left Ayodhya to go with Räma. Even the 
animals and birds left the city and went with the procession. No living 
creature of any kind remained in Ayodhya and they all made their way 
westward to the banks of the Sarayu. 
As they travelled Räma met one last time with Hanumän to say His 
farewells. Embracing the monkey, He said, “You have made your 
decision to remain here on earth, so do not let your words become false.”  
Hanumän replied, “Surely I shall always be in Your presence simply by 
hearing of Your glories, O Lord. So long as Your divine narration 
circulates in this world, so I shall remain.” 
Räma also asked two other Vanaras, Mainda and Dwivida, to stay 
behind, as well as the king of the bears Jambavan. They all bowed before 
Räma saying, “So be it.” Meeting with Vibhishana, Räma said to him, “O 
best of the Räkñasas, you should stay in the world to rule over your 
people. As long as the sun and moon stay in the heavens, so will your 
rule last. Always worship Viñëu in His form as Jagannatha, the presiding 
deity of the Ikñväkus.” Accepting that order, Vibhishana prostrated 
himself before Räma and then left for Lanka. 
Followed by His vast entourage, Räma traveled upriver to the point 
where it joined the Ganges, then went along the course of that holy 
river until He reached the foot of the mountain from where it emanated. 
At that place, where the path to heaven could be found, millions of 
divine chariots appeared. All the gods, headed by Brahmä, were visible. 
Celestial music played by the Gandharvas could be heard and showers of 
flowers fell from the skies.  
It was seen that Viñëu appeared in the sky on the back of Garuòa. 
Within the sight of all, and being praised by the gods, Räma and His two 
brothers entered Viñëu’s form. Every creature present, who were all 
absorbed in thoughts of Räma, then gave up their mortal bodies and 
assumed their eternal spiritual forms. The gods saw them rising up on 
celestial chariots toward Räma’s undecaying abode in the spiritual world. 
It seemed to those celestials that the very city of Ayodhya went with 
Räma. 
Astonished by this unprecedented sight, Brahmä and the gods left for 
their own abodes, praising Räma within their hearts. His pastimes were 
complete.

467 
Jaya Çré Räma! 
The End 
Appendix 1 
The Story of the River Ganges 
Told by Viçvämitra to Räma and Lakñman upon reaching the Ganges 
 
In the far north there stands Himalaya, the king of mountains, whose 
presiding deity is known as Himavan. This Himavan, through his 
consort Mena, the daughter of the celestial Mount Meru, begot two 
charming daughters, both matchless in beauty. The elder of the two was 
named Gaìgä and, upon the supplication of the gods, she later became 
this holy river. The other girl was called Umä, and her father conferred 
her upon the unlimitedly powerful Çiva to be his wife. After marrying 
that girl, who is also known in this world as Parvati, Çiva sported with 
her in regions of celestial bliss.  
Becoming concerned, the gods with Brahmä at their head went before 
Çiva. They fell prostrate before him and said to him, “O lord, the worlds 
will not be able to bear your seed should it be released into Umä. The 
combined power of you and your consort will surely be unbearable to all 
beings. Please therefore retain your vital energy within your supremely 
splendid self. You will thereby preserve the worlds from being burned by 
the brilliance of your progeny.” 
Çiva, who always remains fixed in thought of Viñëu and is ever 
compassionate to all beings, replied, “It shall be as you say, for the words 
of the gods can never be denied. But my vital seed already stands 
dislodged from my heart. Where then shall it fall?” 
Brahmä replied, “Your seed should fall upon earth, for she alone is 
capable of withstanding its power, bearing as she does the weight of all 
creatures.” 
Çiva let fall his seed, which covered the whole globe. Brahmä instructed 
Agni, the god of fire, “Accompanied by Väyu, move quickly across the

468 
surface of the earth and suck up Çiva’s mighty seed. Previously the gods 
had asked me that I provide them with a powerful commander for their 
army. Cause Çiva’s seed to be borne by Gaìgä, so that she may bring 
forth a blazing son who will become the general of the gods.” 
Agni at once caught up all of Çiva’s vital fluid and went before Gaìgä, 
saying, “Be pleased to receive Çiva’s seed, O Goddess!” 
Gaìgä assumed an ethereal human form of exceptionally exquisite 
beauty. Upon seeing this form, Çiva’s seed melted and the god of fire 
impregnated Gaìgä all over with that glowing fluid. 
Burning with Çiva’s fiery seed coursing through her veins, Goddess 
Gaìgä said to Agni, “O shining one, I cannot bear this flaming seed, 
which has been made even more powerful by your touch.” 
Agni told her to discharge the seed upon the Himälayas and Gaìgä 
immediately expelled it from her body. It emerged from her in a brilliant 
stream and fell upon the earth, forming vast veins of gold and silver. 
Even at a great distance mines of copper, lead and tin were created by 
that divine fluid. 
At the exact spot where Çiva’s vital seed landed there grew up a thicket 
of brilliant white reeds. The union of Gaìgä with the seed of Çiva 
conceived a child who was born from out of those reeds. He has become 
known in all the worlds as Skanda. Indeed, he is the powerful general of 
the gods, also famous as Kärttikeya, for he was raised by the six goddesses 
known as the Krittikas. Even now that god can be seen in the sky 
shining amid the constellation of Krittika. 
After Kärttikeya’s birth the gods approached Çiva’s consort and, pleased 
in mind, worshipped her. However, she felt angry at having been denied 
union with her consort and, with bloodshot eyes, she pronounced a curse 
upon both the gods and the earth. “As I was denied my desire of getting 
a son, so too shall all you gods remain always issueless. This earth shall 
have a jagged surface of many shapes and forms and shall have many 
masters. She shall never enjoy the delight of having a son since she has 
deprived me of my own child.” 
Some time after this, a king named Sagara ruled over Ayodhya. From 
out of his two wives the king had sixty thousand and one sons. By the 
gods’ arrangement, one wife gave birth to a fetus shaped like a gourd, 
which then split into sixty thousand pieces. These pieces were placed in

469 
sixty thousand pots of ghee and gradually they grew into babies. The 
other wife gave birth to a boy in the normal way.  
The sixty thousand sons were of wicked conduct and caused pain to all 
living beings. The one son, however, was pious and became the beloved 
of all the people. 
One day King Sagara performed a horse sacrifice for the good of the 
world. Upon seeing the sacrifice, Indra became concerned that Sagara 
may exceed him in pious merits and thereby take his post in heaven, 
which Indra himself had won by the performance of pious acts of 
sacrifice. Indra thus assumed the form of a fierce Räkñasa and seized the 
sacrificial horse, taking it away to a distant place. 
King Sagara ordered his sixty thousand sons to search out that horse. 
The princes traveled all over the earth, but could not see the horse. 
They excavated the earth’s surface and searched the subterranean 
regions, but still to no avail. Excavating and looking in all directions, the 
princes created havoc and killed innumerable creatures. The gods went 
before Brahmä and asked that he stop them. Brahmä informed them 
that Mother Earth is always protected by the Supreme Lord Viñëu, who 
was at that time dwelling in the earth’s subterranean region. Sagara’s 
sons would soon be destroyed by that very Lord, who had assumed the 
form of a sage named Kapila. 
In time the princes arrived before Kapila and found him seated in 
meditation. The sacrificial horse was grazing nearby, left there by Indra. 
Becoming furious they said to Kapila, “O evil-minded one, you have 
stolen this horse! We shall now kill You and take it back!” 
Hearing this threat and seeing before Him the sixty thousand sons of 
Sagara, Kapila, a sage of immeasurable power, became angry. Due to 
their offense in having assailed the divine Åñi Kapila, all the princes 
were immediately burned to ashes by a fire which emanated from their 
own bodies. 
After some time King Sagara became concerned about his sons. He 
ordered his one remaining son, Amsuman, to go after them. Amsuman 
also found Kapila sitting in meditation and saw before Him his brothers’ 
ashes, destroyed by their offense against the sage. Grieved by his 
brothers’ deaths, Amsuman looked all around and saw Garuòa, Viñëu’s 
great eagle carrier who had come to serve his master. Garuòa told

470 
Amsuman that he should devise some plan to bring the Ganges to earth 
so that her waters could flow across his brothers’ ashes and thus liberate 
them from hell. Amsuman offered prayers to Kapila and received from 
Him the horse, whereupon he went back to his father. 
Despite every attempt to perform sacrifice and pray to the gods, neither 
Sagara nor his son were able to cause the Ganges to flow across the 
earth. It was several generations later that the famous King Bhagératha 
finally succeeded. By dint of his great asceticism he pleased Brahmä, who 
ordered the Ganges to fall to earth. 
The river Ganges, known in heaven as the Mandakini, emanated 
originally from Viñëu’s foot. When He kicked a small hole in the shell of 
the universe, the waters of the causal ocean, in which all the 
innumerable universes float, entered. Falling down to the heavens, the 
water was entered by the goddess Gaìgä who then, on Brahmä’s order, 
brought it down to earth. This water filled the huge excavation made by 
Sagara’s sons and thereby became the great ocean. It flowed down to the 
subterranean region where it liberated the sixty thousand princes by 
covering their ashes. It is that same sacred river, made holy by the touch 
of Viñëu’s foot, which you now see before you, O valiant princes. To this 
very day anyone whose ashes are placed in this river is immediately 
liberated. 
Appendix 2 
The History of Viçvämitra 
Told to Räma by Satananda, the priest of King Janaka 
 
The sage Viçvämitra was once a king who ruled over the earth for many 
thousands of years. Collecting a great army comprising hundreds of 
thousands of soldiers on elephants, chariots, horses and foot, he set out 
on an expedition to examine his kingdom. Marching through many 
cities and states, over mountains and rivers, Viçvämitra came at last to 
the dwellings of the åñis. There he reached the hermitage of Vasiñöha,

471 
the leader best and indeed the best of all the åñis. This most beautiful site 
was rich with all kinds of flowers, creepers and trees and was graced by 
the gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Cäraëas. It thronged with multitudes 
of celestial seers and sages, who shone like fire, and it hummed with the 
constant recitation of sacred Vedic hymns. Some of the sages there lived 
on water and air alone, others on leaves fallen from the trees, while 
others subsisted on a spare diet of fruits and roots. All of them had 
mastered their senses and minds and were engaged in asceticism and 
meditation. The mighty Viçvämitra looked upon this region as if it were 
the residence of Brahmä himself. 
Approaching Vasiñöha and bowing low before him, Viçvämitra greeted 
him with praises and prayers. Vasiñöha then said to Viçvämitra, 
“Welcome is your appearance here, O king. Please be seated comfortably 
and ask of me anything you desire.” 
The two of them spoke for some time in great delight, partaking of 
simple forest fare. Vasiñöha saw that Viçvämitra was accompanied by a 
vast army and he said to the king, “I wish to offer full hospitality to you 
and all your troops. Please accept my desire without any question, O 
king. I am not satisfied by simply offering you fruits and water.” 
Viçvämitra was unwilling to take anything from Vasiñöha, whom he 
viewed as his superior. He declined politely, saying, “I am fully honored 
by your words and audience alone. Indeed your very sight is sufficient. 
How could I ask anything more? I am satisfied with the fruits you have 
offered. With your permission, I shall now depart. Please look upon me 
with love and let me leave taking only your blessings.” 
But the sage was intent on offering Viçvämitra further hospitality. 
Viçvämitra tried again and again to dissuade him, but the pious-minded 
Vasiñöha would not be refused. He continuously requested the king to 
remain there longer. At last, seeing that this would be most pleasing to 
the sage, Viçvämitra relented and agreed. 
Vasiñöha felt joy and he stood up and called for his celestial cow, Sabala. 
“Come, come, my beloved Sabala,” he said. “I wish to entertain this king, 
Viçvämitra, and all his army with a sumptuous feast. Please make every 
preparation.” 
Vasiñöha’s wonderful cow began to produce from her body all kinds of 
food and drink in enormous quantities—steaming rice heaped high as

472 
hills, cooked vegetables of every variety, soups, breads, cakes, pies, 
pastries, sweetmeats, butter, cream and yogurt—all in silver dishes and 
plates filled to the brim. Streams of delicious juices flowed and pots filled 
with ambrosial milk drinks appeared there. Viçvämitra and his entire 
army were fully satisfied by that splendid array of foodstuffs, every 
morsel of which tasted like nectar.  
The king was astounded to see that it had all been produced from a cow, 
and he went before Vasiñöha, saying, “Your cow is highly amazing, O 
magnanimous one. I wish to ask from you that she be given to me in 
exchange for a hundred thousand other cows. As the king I should 
always be offered the best of everything and I see this cow to be the very 
best of her species. Therefore kindly give her to me, O sage.” 
But Vasiñöha replied, “I shall never part with Sabala, even in exchange 
for a thousand million cows. Not even for heaps of gold and silver. 
Sabala is inseparable from me even as glory is inseparable from a man 
practicing asceticism.” 
Vasiñöha had no interest in worldly wealth. His life was dedicated to the 
practice of sacrifice and austerity. All his happiness was derived from 
within himself. Even if Viçvämitra had offered him the entire world, the 
sage would not have been interested. But Sabala was dear to him. She 
had long served the åñi. Assisted by her Vasiñöha was able to perform 
many sacrifices for the good of the world. This was his sacred duty and 
he had no intention of renouncing it. He continued, “My very life 
depends upon this cow. For a long time she has sustained me with her 
milk. Each day she provides me with all the requisites for my sacrificial 
performances. She has become as dear to me as my own self and I shall 
not part with her under any circumstances.” 
Viçvämitra was not used to being refused anything. He was incensed by 
the sage’s insistence on keeping the cow. He did not want to be denied 
and spoke angrily to Vasiñöha. “How is it you are refusing to give this 
cow to your king? I am a warrior by nature and therefore see strength as 
the means of achieving my ends. If you will not give me this wonderful 
creature, then I shall remove her by force.” 
The king was overwhelmed by pride and anger. Taking hold of Sabala 
with his exceptionally powerful arms, he began to drag her away, 
surrounded by his soldiers.

473 
Vasiñöha looked sorrowfully upon the scene and said to Viçvämitra, “As 
the king it is appropriate for you to use such force to achieve your 
purpose. As a Brahmin it also behooves me to exercise forgiveness, for 
that is my sacred duty in all circumstances. Nor can I ever use force, for 
gentleness is always prescribed for the Brahmins. Therefore, O king, I 
forgive you.” 
Although deeply pained to see his cow being dragged away, Vasiñöha 
controlled his feelings. By his own power he was able to prevent her 
being taken, but he stood by silently, without doing anything. Sabala 
cried out in distress as the king seized her and she spoke to Vasiñöha, 
“Are you now abandoning me, O lord? What wrong have I done that I 
am now being removed in this wretched condition by wretched men, 
even as my master, the all-powerful Vasiñöha, looks on?” 
Sabala broke loose from the king. She ran to Vasiñöha with tears in her 
eyes and all her exquisitely formed limbs trembling. Looking up at 
Vasiñöha she implored, “Am I now to be forsaken by you, O almighty son 
of Brahmä?” 
Vasiñöha, his heart tormented with grief, replied to Sabala, “I am not 
abandoning you, nor have you ever wronged me, O Sabala. Intoxicated 
with power and depending upon his huge army, this great king, the ruler 
of the earth, is taking you away. What then can I do, being only a poor 
Brahmin?” 
Sabala divined his deeper meaning and answered, “The wise have 
declared that a Brahmin’s strength is always superior to that of a warrior. 
The strength of the sages is spiritual while that of the warriors exists in 
their arms only. Therefore simply order me to stay and this arrogant 
king will not succeed in taking me away.” 
Vasiñöha at once said to Sabala, “Stay!” 
Immediately the wish-fulfilling cow brought forth from her body a vast 
army of fierce fighters, equipped with weapons of every kind, who fell 
upon the army of the king with terrible cries. 
Seeing his own army routed by the fighters created by Sabala, 
Viçvämitra stood his ground and released various kinds of weapons to 
beat them back. Wave after wave of ferocious looking warriors issued 
forth from Sabala, some rising up from her roar, some coming out of her 
udders, while others appeared from her anus. They rushed at the army of

474 
the king and in a short time Viçvämitra saw his forces completely 
defeated and dispersed by the warriors of mystic creation. 
Viçvämitra had been accompanied by his one hundred sons. They 
became furious with Vasiñöha and surrounded him. They shot powerful 
weapons at the sage which sped toward him like blazing comets. 
Vasiñöha, not roused to anger, uttered a powerful Vedic mantra to check 
the weapons. Simply by the power of Vasiñöha’s utterance the princes 
were instantly reduced to ashes. Only one was left standing. 
Viçvämitra looked on in complete astonishment. He stood alone, filled 
with fear and shame. Resembling the furious ocean after it has become 
becalmed, he became lusterless like the eclipsed sun. He had lost his sons 
and his army and he felt miserable, his strength and spirit shattered. 
Ordering his remaining son to take on the earth’s administration, he 
resolved to retire to the forest to practice asceticism in order to increase 
his power. 
After a long period of ascetic practice aimed at pleasing Çiva, the 
extremely powerful and beneficent god finally appeared and said, “Why 
are you engaging in such austerities, O king? What do you wish to 
achieve? I am capable of bestowing boons. Therefore ask from me 
whatever you may desire.” 
At that time Viçvämitra had only the knowledge of lesser celestial 
weapons and did not know how to use the missiles presided over by the 
principal gods. He fell prostrate before Çiva and offered many prayers, 
saying, “If you are pleased with me, O lord, then please bestow upon me 
the knowledge of every divine weapon presided over by all the gods, 
including the weapons of yourself and Brahmä. Tell me the complete 
science of archery and warfare with all its innermost secrets.” 
Saying “So be it,” Çiva immediately disappeared, and by his mystic power 
he conferred upon Viçvämitra the knowledge of warfare along with all 
the mystic weapons. After receiving the weapons, Viçvämitra, who was 
already full of pride, became even more arrogant. Swelling with power 
like the ocean on the full moon, he took Vasiñöha, the most eminent of 
all seers, to be dead there and then. 
He went at once to the hermitage and began to discharge all his weapons 
in Vasiñöha’s direction. The beautiful grove was consumed by the fire of 
the missiles and the sages rushed about in all directions, tormented and

475 
alarmed by the attack. 
Vasiñöha saw the sages, as well as the beasts and birds, fleeing by the 
thousands, afflicted by Viçvämitra’s weapons. He called out, “Do not 
fear! I shall now put an end to Viçvämitra’s display of might, even as the 
sun dispels a morning mist.” 
Vasiñöha was enraged. He went before Viçvämitra, shouting, “Here I am, 
O wicked fellow. Show me, then, the limits of your strength!” 
Viçvämitra aimed at Vasiñöha the missile presided over by the fire-god, 
and it went toward him glowing like the sun. 
Smiling even as the weapon raced toward him, Vasiñöha called out to 
Viçvämitra. “What use is your martial power, O unworthy disgrace of 
your race? See today the power of the Brahmins!” 
Vasiñöha was standing with only his staff. He held it up and the fire 
weapon was immediately absorbed into it. Viçvämitra then let go each of 
the divine weapons one after another, including those presided over by 
Väyu, Varuëa, Indra, Yamaräja, Brahmä, the immortal Çiva, Dharma the 
god of virtue, and even Viñëu, the supreme controller. All of them were 
drawn into Vasiñöha’s staff and entirely neutralized.  
As he stood there blazing in his own glory, Vasiñöha looked like the 
smokeless fire of universal destruction. Imbued with the force of the 
divine weapons, he shot forth tongues of flame from all his pores. Hosts 
of gods and celestial åñis assembled in the canopy of the sky and, being 
fearful, spoke to Vasiñöha, “Today you have humbled the mighty 
Viçvämitra. Your power is infallible, O most noble soul. Extinguish the 
fire blazing from your body and save the world.” 
When he heard the heavenly voices, Vasiñöha regained his calm and 
stood silently with his mind controlled. Freed from anger, he told 
Viçvämitra, “You may leave in peace. Do not act again in such a foolish 
way.” 
Viçvämitra, dejected, heaved a deep sigh. He considered his strength 
useless and said, “Weak indeed are my weapons when used against a 
Brahmin. Where is my pride now? The might of a warrior’s arms are 
nothing in comparison to Brahminical powers. I shall therefore return to 
the forest and perform severe penance until I attain the status of a 
Brahmin.” 
Viçvämitra went again to the forest, having made enemies with a highly

476 
exalted soul. Meanwhile, Vasiñöha recreated his hermitage by his mystic 
powers and began again the performance of his religious duties, meant 
only for the benefit of mankind. 
Viçvämitra practiced extremely difficult austerities. He lived only on 
fruits and roots and sat in meditation, perfectly controlling his mind by 
fixing it upon the Supreme and not indulging in any thoughts of sensual 
enjoyment. During the cold winters he would remain submerged in 
water up to his neck. In the blazing heat of the summer he sat 
surrounded by sacrificial fires on four sides. Once, for a very long period 
of time, he stood upon one leg with his arms upraised. A thousand years 
passed by as Viçvämitra practiced his asceticism. 
While Viçvämitra remained in the forest, Vasiñöha had become the royal 
priest in Ayodhya. A king named Trishanku, a distant ancestor of 
Daçaratha, appeared in the line of emperors who ruled from Ayodhya. 
King Trishanku desired to attain the heavens in his own bodily form 
and he asked Vasiñöha to perform a sacrifice for that purpose. Vasiñöha 
replied, “O king, no man can attain heaven other than at the end of his 
life after the performance of piety and religion. This is the universal rule 
established by God. Therefore I shall not perform any sacrifice with the 
aim of placing you in heaven in your present body. You should give up 
this sinful desire.” 
Trishanku, however, was set upon his aim and did not care for Vasiñöha’s 
good advice. He decided to seek out Viçvämitra, knowing him to possess 
great powers as a result of his long practice of asceticism. He considered 
that Viçvämitra, being a king who had preceded him in his own line, 
might be more amenable to his desire. Trishanku also intelligently 
considered the animosity of Viçvämitra toward Vasiñöha, feeling that 
this would provide a further impetus to Viçvämitra to perform the 
sacrifice refused by Vasiñöha. 
After reaching the forest and finding Viçvämitra, the king requested 
him to perform the sacrifice. Viçvämitra, hearing that Vasiñöha had 
refused and remembering his enmity with the great mystic, agreed. 
Viçvämitra then began a sacrifice, carefully following the procedures laid 
down in the Vedas. He sat before a blazing fire and uttered prayers to all 
the gods headed by Viñëu, pouring offerings of ghee into the flames. At 
the proper moment he said, “Witness now my ascetic powers! By my

477 
command this king shall rise to heaven, even in this body of flesh and 
bones. O Trishanku, by virtue of the merits of my austerities, ascend 
now to heaven where you shall attain the state of the gods!” 
As soon as Viçvämitra said this, Trishanku rose up to the skies, but as he 
approached heaven, Indra checked him. Indra said in a voice booming 
like thunder, “O king, how are you trying now to enter heaven? You 
have earned no place here through religion or piety. Indeed, your own 
preceptor Vasiñöha has refused your illegal desire for heaven. O foolish 
man, fall headlong back to earth!” 
Trishanku began to drop swiftly toward the earth and he cried out to 
Viçvämitra, “Save me!” 
Viçvämitra, seeing Trishanku falling back down, called out, “Stop!” 
Immediately the king’s downward progress was halted and he remained 
situated in the sky. Seated amid many åñis the great sage Viçvämitra 
became overwhelmed with anger at seeing Indra’s refusal to allow 
Trishanku into heaven. He said, “Since this jealous god will not let the 
king attain the heavenly regions, I shall now create a second heaven by 
dint of my mystic power. Trishanku shall then live there in peace.” 
Like another Brahmä, Viçvämitra evolved from his mind a galaxy 
consisting of twenty-seven lunar mansions which appeared in the sky. 
The sage then set about creating another hierarchy of gods to inhabit 
those heavenly planets. Observing this disturbance to the universal 
situation, Indra and the gods became alarmed and approached 
Viçvämitra, saying, “This king does not deserve a place in heaven, O 
blessed sage. Rejected by his own guru, he now stands divested of all his 
pious merits.” 
Viçvämitra replied, “As I have pledged my word to this king, how shall I 
make it false? A promise of heaven has been given by me. Therefore 
please let this king enjoy heavenly bliss and let the lunar mansions I 
created remain in existence.” 
Indra, out of respect for the great Viçvämitra’s request, replied, “It shall 
be so. Your planets will endure in the heavens in the southern quarter 
beyond the celestial sphere. Trishanku shall remain in their midst, as 
happy as a god and shining brightly. All those stars shall circumambulate 
him, even as all the planets circle the pole star. May you be blessed.” 
Viçvämitra became pleased, but after ending the sacrifice he considered,

478 
“Driven by my anger toward Vasiñöha, I have now placed the impious 
Trishanku in the heavens here in the southern quarter. He will certainly 
exert a malefic influence upon this region. I shall now therefore move to 
some other place.”  
Viçvämitra realized he had considerably diminished his ascetic merits, 
expending them on the task of raising Trishanku to heaven. Still 
strongly desiring to attain the full status of a Brahmin sage, he 
continued to perform severe penances, gradually building his stock of 
pious credits and increasing his power. Indra became concerned, 
believing that Viçvämitra may soon attain enough power to overthrow 
him from his post in heaven. The king of the gods desired to impede the 
sage’s penance and he sent the Apsarä Menaka to where Viçvämitra sat 
in meditation. 
Menaka entered a lake near to the sage and began to bathe. Hearing her 
anklets tinkling, and fully opening his half-closed eyes, Viçvämitra saw 
the heavenly damsel, with her translucent clothes wet and clinging to 
her divinely formed body. Struck with passion the sage said, “You are 
most welcome, O celestial lady. Indeed, please dwell here in my 
hermitage. Heavenly Apsaräs are not bound by earthly morality, so I will 
incur no sin by enjoying with you.” 
Menaka took up her residence in the sage’s abode and they sported 
together in the beautiful grassy glades in that region. One hundred years 
passed as if it were only a day. Eventually realizing that he had again 
been diverted from his purpose, Viçvämitra felt shame and he 
remonstrated himself, “Alas, I have been overcome by the ignorance 
born of lust. My mind has been completely bewildered by the beauty of 
this maiden. Surely this is the work of the gods.” 
Menaka stood before him trembling. She feared his terrible curse, but 
Viçvämitra dismissed her with kind and gentle words. Resolving then 
upon lifelong celibacy, the sage went to the bank of the Kaushiki River, 
his own sister, and continued his asceticism. 
The sage practiced the most rigid austerities, eating only air. A thousand 
years passed by and he began to emit a blazing fire from his body, born 
from the power of his asceticism. 
Again Indra became alarmed. He approached another Apsarä named 
Rambha and asked her to divert the sage from his austerity. She duly

479 
went to where he was sitting and began to dance alluringly before his 
gaze. However, Viçvämitra did not allow his mind to give way to lust. 
Becoming angry with her he uttered a curse: “O nymph, since you have 
maliciously attempted to prevent my penance, you shall remain at this 
spot as a stone for one thousand years. You may then return to heaven.” 
The sage realized that he had again diminished his piety, this time by 
becoming angry. He determined that he would never again give way to 
anger, nor even speak at all, and he resumed his austerities in that 
beautiful Himälayan region, suspending even his breathing as well as 
taking neither food nor water. 
Finally, after another thousand years had elapsed, the gods went to 
Brahmä and, seized with anxiety, implored him, “Be pleased to grant this 
Viçvämitra his desire. By his powerful penance we see the entire energy 
of the universe becoming disturbed. The earth is quaking with her 
mountains riven and her seas roaring in great turbulence. Violent winds 
are blowing and the four quarters are enveloped in darkness. If 
Viçvämitra does not cease his practice of penance, then universal 
destruction will surely ensue!” 
At this Brahmä went before Viçvämitra and said to him in a gentle 
voice, “O highly blessed sage, you have attained your desire. You now 
stand equal to Vasiñöha as a Brahmin åñi. All the Vedic knowledge will 
become manifest in your pure heart. Stop your austerities.” 
Requested by Brahmä, the sage Vasiñöha also came there and befriended 
Viçvämitra, saying, “You have surpassed all with your tremendous 
asceticism and have become a worthy Brahmin. No anger toward you 
exists in my heart. Be blessed, O great åñi!” 
Falling prostrate before Vasiñöha, Viçvämitra sought his forgiveness and, 
forming a firm friendship with that son of Brahmä, left that place with 
his purpose fulfilled. 
Appendix 3  
The Birth and History of Hanumän

480 
As told to Räma by Agastya Åñi 
 
There lived on Mount Sumeru a powerful Vanara leader named Keshari. 
His wife, Anjana, was beautiful beyond compare. One day Väyu, the 
wind god, saw her standing alone and he desired union with her. After 
uniting with her in his mystical yoga form, she conceived a child who 
was named Hanumän. He cried out in hunger and Anjana placed him 
down amid some reeds while she went to collect forest fruits. Hanumän 
looked up from where he lay and saw the sun. Thinking it to be a large 
fruit he sprang upwards with outstretched hands. Gifted with the power 
of his divine father, he soared through the heavens toward the sun. 
Väyu went with him, covering him with a cool breeze so that he would 
not be burned by the sun. The sun-god also withheld his blazing rays as 
he understood that Hanumän was a great servant of Viñëu who would 
later assist Him on earth. 
As Hanumän went swiftly upwards through the skies, a demon named 
Rähu was also approaching the sun with a view to envelop him. It was 
the day ordained for that demon to swallow the fiery sun-god, thus 
creating an eclipse, but Hanumän saw him and pushed him aside. Afraid 
of the mighty Vanara, Rähu sped away toward Indra’s abode in the 
heavens. Going before the deity he said, “O king of the gods, having 
allotted to me the sun and moon as my regular food, how is it that you 
have now given over my share to another? See how another Rähu has 
appeared in the sky, intent on consuming the sun.” 
Indra immediately left his seat and, mounting his celestial elephant, 
Airävata, he rose up into the heavens. He approached Hanumän, who 
was streaking through the sky like a blazing meteor. When the Vanara 
saw the effulgent god nearby, he considered him to be another fruit and 
he turned toward him. Indra then released his thunderbolt, which struck 
Hanumän and caused him to drop back down to earth. 
The Vanara fell onto a mountain top and lay there apparently dead. 
Seeing this Väyu became angry and he caused all creatures to begin to 
suffocate. Interrupting the flow of the vital life airs in all beings, Väyu 
created a great disturbance in the universe. 
Indra and all the other gods quickly approached Väyu, who stood by the 
fallen Hanumän, and prayed to him to desist from causing so much

481 
suffering. Brahmä also appeared there and asked Väyu what was the 
cause of his actions. Väyu replied, “It is on account of my son being 
slain. See now how that innocent child lays here motionless, struck 
down by Indra’s terrible thunderbolt.” 
Brahmä then reached out and ran his hand over Hanumän. The Vanara 
immediately sat up and looked around. The relieved Väyu again began to 
move in the bodies of living creatures, and Brahmä said, “Listen, O gods, 
as I tell you about this Vanara. He will accomplish your purpose on earth 
and become a famous servant of Viñëu. You should therefore all grant 
him boons.” 
Pleased to hear Brahmä’s words, Indra took off his garland and placed it 
around Hanumän’s neck, saying, “From this day on he shall be 
invulnerable to my thunderbolt.” 
The sun-god then said, “I shall bestow upon him a hundredth part of my 
brilliance. Also, when he begins to study the scriptures I shall enable 
him to quickly learn all aspects of knowledge. None shall exceed him in 
scriptural understanding.” 
Yamaräja granted him invulnerability to his rod and freedom from 
ailment. Kuvera also blessed him that he would remain unwearied in 
battle. Çiva said, “He shall be immune to my weapons and from death at 
my hands.” Viçvakarmä added, “This Vanara shall be invulnerable to all 
celestial weapons forged by me and he shall be long-lived.” 
Finally, Brahmä said, “O wind-god, your son shall be invincible in battle. 
He will prove the terror of his foes and the shelter of his friends. This 
jewel among monkeys shall be able to change his form at will and go 
wherever he pleases at any speed he likes. No Brahmin’s curse will be 
able to kill him. His movements shall be unimpeded and he will become 
glorious. In war he will accomplish tremendous feats which make one’s 
hair stand on end, thus causing the destruction of Rävaëa and the 
pleasure of Räma.” 
After this the gods departed and Väyu took Hanumän back to his 
mother. He began to grow up like a god. Overflowing with the 
exultation of his own power, and being possessed of the mischievous 
nature of monkeys, he started creating trouble for the åñis in the forest, 
knowing that they could not harm him. He would playfully throw about 
and break their sacrificial ladles and vessels, and tear to shreds the piles

482 
of soft bark they kept for making garments. Despite the efforts of his 
mother and father to check him, Hanumän continued with his pranks 
and went on harassing the ascetics. 
Eventually the åñis, not wanting to harm the playful young Vanara, 
found a way to stop him. Touching sacred water, their leader uttered an 
imprecation. “As this one makes trouble for us depending upon his 
celestial strength, he shall forget his own power. Only when someone 
reminds him again by reciting his glories will he recall his strength.” 
Bewildered by that curse, Hanumän forgot about his might and began 
acting like an ordinary Vanara. He formed a strong friendship with 
Sugréva, going with him into exile when he was banished by Vali. He 
finally again remembered his power when Jambavan reminded him at 
the time of searching for Sétä. 
Appendix 4 
The Benefits of Reading Rämayana 
He who listens every day to this oldest epic, composed by the sage 
Välméki, which is calculated to bestow religious merit, renown and 
longevity, and which lends support to the Vedas, is completely freed of 
sin. Kings will overcome their enemies and conquer the earth, men will 
overcome all difficulties and women will be blessed with excellent sons 
and grandsons. Those listening to this epic will receive from Çré Räma 
all the boons they desire. Through a hearing of this work all the gods are 
satisfied. One who keeps a copy in his house will find all his obstacles 
coming to an end. A man offering worship to and reading this historical 
work is completely rid of all sins and attains a long life; all the gods are 
thus pleased and one’s ancestors are gratified forever. Those transcribing 
this work with devotion are guaranteed residence in heaven, while those 
hearing it will secure the growth of their family and wealth, supreme 
happiness and the accomplishment of all their objects on earth.  
Yuddha Kanda

483 
The gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and åñis always listen with great pleasure 
to the Rämayana in heaven. This legend is the bestower of longevity, the 
enhancer of fortune and the dispeller of sins. It is the equal of the Vedas. 
A man reading even a quarter of it is freed from all sins; indeed, even if 
one sins daily he is released from the reactions if he recites just one verse 
of the Rämayana. A man gets the results of one thousand Ashvamedha 
sacrifices and ten thousand Vajpeya sacrifices merely by hearing this 
great work. He has visited all the holy shrines and bathed in all the 
sacred rivers. One who listens to the story of Çré Räma with full 
reverence roots out all sins and goes to the world of Viñëu. The 
Rämayana is the unsurpassed form of Gayatri. By hearing it with 
devotion one will undoubtedly achieve liberation, along with many 
generations of ancestors. The exploits of Çré Räma are the bestower of all 
four of life’s objects—dharma, artha, kama and moksha. Hearing even 
one line of this work with full devotion guarantees one’s attainment of 
the world of Brahmä.  
Uttarä Kanda 
 
Glossary 
 
 
Aditya Hridaya: Hymns in praise of the sun recited by Agastya Åñi to 
Räma just prior to the killing of Rävaëa. 
Agastya: A powerful åñi who is a son of the god Varuëa. said to have 
once swallowed the entire ocean and to have overpowered the terrible 
demons Ilvala and Vätäpi. Räma recited many stories about this åñi to 
Lakñman and Sétä when They were in the forest. 
Agni: The god of fire, thus also the Sanskrit word for fire. 
Apsarä: Celestial nymph. “One who, upon embracing a man, drives him 
insane.” The beauty of the Apsaräs is legendary and has made many 
great åñis fall down from their ascetic practice.  
Arghya: A milk-based drink used as a respectful offering made to a guest. 
Ashoka: A tree bearing beautiful red flowers. Sétä was held in a grove of 
ashoka trees by Rävaëa.

484 
Astra: A divine weapon, usually prefixed by the name of the particular 
god or force which presides over it; e.g. brahmästra, a weapon presided 
over by Lord Brahmä. 
Asura: Class of celestial demons. 
Brahmä: The first of all the gods and the creator of the universe. He was 
directly manifested from Viñëu and is thus sometimes called “the 
unborn.” 
Båhaspati: The preceptor of the gods. 
Chamara: Whisk made from yak-tail hairs and used for highly 
respectable persons. 
Cäraëa: A class of demigod noted for their poetic abilities. 
Daitya: A class of powerful demonic beings. 
Dandaka: The forest where Räma lived during his exile.  
Dänava: A class of powerful celestial demons and enemies of the gods. 
Dhätré: Nurse. 
Gandharva: A class of demigods noted for their martial and musical 
abilities.  
Indra: King of the gods, also known as Purandara and Çakra. 
Kinnara: A class of demigod, often having a half-human and half- 
animal form such as that of a centaur, and generally seen holding a lute.  
Kusha: Darbha grass, considered sacred by the Vedas. 
Kuvera: The god of wealth, who guards the northern quarter of the 
universe. 
Lokapälas: Gods presiding over the four quarters of the universe. 
Maya Dänava: A celestial demon who possesses great skills at 
architecture and building. 
Näga: A celestial serpent, often appearing in human form. 
Närada: A celestial sage also known as Devarshi, or the åñi among the 
gods. He is famous as a devotee of Viñëu and frequently assists him in his 
pastimes on earth. The Vedas contain innumerable references to 
Närada’s activities and teachings. 
Niñadha: Tribal people living in the forest. 
Paraçuräma: A åñi said to be an empowered incarnation of Viñëu. He is 
famous for having annihilated all the warrior kings of the world after his 
father, Jamadagni, had been killed by a king named Kartavirya.

485 
Raghava: A name for Räma, meaning the descendant of Raghu, a great 
king in Räma’s line. 
Rähu: A powerful demon appearing as a planet. Said to be responsible 
for eclipses. 
Räkñasa: Celestial demon, antagonistic to humankind. 
Räma: The seventh of the Dasavatära incarnations of Viñëu, who 
appeared as a king in the solar dynasty (i.e. descending from the sun-
god). 
Rävaëa: A powerful leader of the Räkñasa race. His birth is described in 
Rämayana as follows:  
Long ago on the slopes of Mount Meru there lived a sage named 
Pulastya, who was a mind-born son of Brahmä. He was constantly 
engaged in the practice of severe asceticism. Many celestial maidens 
would come to sport in the beautiful region where he dwelt, and they 
would often disturb his meditations. Finally becoming impatient with 
them, he said, “If any maiden should again be seen by me, she will 
immediately become pregnant.” 
The maidens then carefully avoided Pulastya’s ashrama. However, there 
was one girl, a daughter of another sage named Trinabindu, who had not 
heard about the curse. She ventured into the region where Pulastya sat 
and as soon as he saw her she found indications of pregnancy in her 
body. Astonished and fearful, she ran to her father and said, “Father, I 
cannot understand why I am suddenly appearing as if pregnant. No 
contact with any male has ever been had by me.” 
Trinabindu sat in meditation and by his mystic power he understood 
what had happened. He then went with his daughter to Pulastya and 
said to him, “O venerable sage, kindly accept my daughter as your wife. 
By your power she now carries a child. Please therefore take her hand in 
marriage. She will surely render you very pleasing service.” 
Pulastya agreed and he said to the girl, “O gentle one, you will give birth 
to a highly qualified son who shall be known as Visrava.” 
Like his father, Visrava became an ascetic and engaged himself in much 
penance and study of scripture. In due course he married a daughter of 
Bharadväja and through her begot a son named Vaishravana, who by the 
grace of his father became the powerful Kuvera, the god of wealth.  
At that time a great battle took place between the gods and the

486 
Räkñasas, who were finally put to flight by Viñëu. They sought shelter in 
the nether worlds, although one of them, Sumali, began to live on earth. 
As he wandered about he saw one day Kuvera flying overhead in the 
celestial Pushpaka chariot. The Räkñasa was astonished to see Kuvera’s 
opulence. Knowing that the god was Visrava’s son, and desiring to do 
good to the Räkñasas, he said to his young daughter Kaikasi, “It is high 
time you were wed, dear girl. Go quickly to Visrava’s ashrama and ask 
that he accept you. That powerful sage will give you sons equal to the 
lord of riches; there is no doubt at all.” 
In obedience to her father, Kaikasi went to where Visrava was seated in 
meditation. She stood bashfully before him with folded palms, looking 
downward and scratching the earth with her toe. Seeing that girl, whose 
face resembled the full moon and who shone with a celestial beauty, the 
sage said, “Who are you and why are you here? Tell me the truth, O 
beautiful one” 
The girl replied, “O sage, you should divine my purpose by your own 
mystic power, for I am too shy to tell you.” 
The sage meditated for some minutes and read her mind. He then said, 
“I have understood your purpose, O gentle one. You desire sons by me. 
Surely I am attracted to you and will accept your hand, but you have 
approached me at an inauspicious time. You will therefore have sons 
who will be cruel-minded, fierce-looking and given to evil deeds. O lady 
of shapely limbs, you will bring forth Räkñasas fond of drinking blood.” 
Kaikasi was upset. “O lordly sage, I do not desire such offspring. Kindly 
be merciful to me.” 
Feeling compassion, Visrava replied, “It cannot be any other way, dear 
girl, but I can bless you as follows. Although you will have such sons, 
your last son will be different. He will be virtuous and fully in accord 
with my family.” 
In due course Kaikasi gave birth to a hideous child with the form of a 
Räkñasa. He had ten heads, twenty hands, and was the color of coal. 
When he was born many inauspicious omens were seen. Vixens emitted 
flames from their mouths, blood fell from the sky, meteors dropped down 
and clouds thundered fiercely. The earth rocked with its load of 
mountains and the sea roared and sent up huge waves. Visrava named 
the child Dasagriva and he grew up fearful and cruel.

487 
Next Kaikasi gave birth to Kumbhakarna, then Surpanakha, and finally 
Vibhishana. When this last son was born, flowers fell from the sky and 
the gods in heaven were heard to utter, “Good! Excellent!” 
Some time after their birth Kuvera came on the Pushpaka to see his 
father. Seeing him blazing with glory and opulence, Kaikasi said to 
Dasagriva, “Son, you look here at your brother Vaisravana. Look at your 
self in comparison, so poor and lacking in power. Exert yourself so that 
you are the equal of your brother in every way.” 
Spurred on by his mother’s words, Dasagriva said, “I swear to you that I 
shall rise equal to Vaisravana and even excel him in power. Do not 
grieve.” 
In a mood of envy for his brother and greed for power, Dasagriva 
engaged himself in severe austerities for a very long time. In the end he 
won his famous boons from Brahmä, being blessed that he could not be 
slain by any creature other than a man or lesser animal, for whom he 
had no regard whatsoever. 
Along with Dasagriva, both Kumbhakarna and Vibhishana also engaged 
themselves in asceticism. When Brahmä appeared before them, 
Vibhishana asked for the boon that his mind would always remain fixed 
in righteousness, even when he was in the greatest difficulty. Brahmä 
granted his request and then turned toward Kumbhakarna to accord him 
a boon.  
At that time the gods became greatly fearful and they approached 
Brahmä, saying, “O lord, no boon at all should be granted by you to this 
one. He has already wrought havoc in the heavens, devouring seven 
Apsaräs, ten attendants of the mighty Indra, as well as numerous seers 
and human beings. What will he do if made powerful by a boon from 
yourself? On the pretext of granting a boon you should instead place him 
under a spell of delusion, thereby saving all the worlds from him.” 
Brahmä smiled and said, “Be it so.” He thought of the goddess of 
learning, Sarasvaté, and when she appeared before him he said to her, “O 
goddess, become the speech in Kumbhakarna’s mouth.” 
The goddess agreed and Brahmä then asked Kumbhakarna, “What boon 
do you desire, O Räkñasa?” 
Kumbhakarna, weary from his austerities, replied, “Let me sleep for 
many years.”

488 
“It shall be so. You will sleep for six months at a time and remain awake 
for one day.” 
Having made his reply, Brahmä vanished along with all the gods. 
After receiving his boon, Dasagriva, who became known as Rävaëa, 
considered himself invincible. He went to Lanka, where Kuvera lived, 
and challenged his brother. On the advice of Visrava, Kuvera left the 
city and it was taken over by Rävaëa and his hordes of Räkñasa 
followers. 
Åñi: A spiritually advanced Brahmin, usually inhabiting higher regions 
of the universe. 
Rudra: A name for Lord Çiva. 
Sagara: A king of the solar race who was Räma’s ancestor. The ocean is 
also called “sagara” as it was the sons of this king who first excavated it. 
Shabda: Literally “sound”—but generally used to refer to Vedic 
recitations; thus the “shabda-astra” has the power to destroy illusions. 
Çiva: A partial expansion of Lord Viñëu who acts as the universal 
destroyer at the end of a cycle of ages. 
Siddha: Literally, a perfected being. These are a class of gods possessed of 
great mystic powers. 
Sétä: The daughter of King Janaka who became Räma’s wife. How she 
was born on earth is described in a Vedic literature known as the Devi 
Bhagavata as follows: 
There was once a great åñi called Kushadvaja who had a daughter named 
Vedavati, who was said to be an incarnation of the goddess Lakñmé. 
Kushadvaja was petitioned by various celestials and demons for his 
daughter’s hand, but she had set her mind on getting Viñëu as her 
husband. 
One day a demon named Shambhu asked for Vedavati’s hand in 
marriage, but he was refused. Becoming furious, he attacked and killed 
Kushadvaja. When Vedavati saw this she looked in anger at the demon 
and he was immediately burnt to ashes. She then went to the forest and 
began to meditate in order to propitiate Viñëu and get Him as her 
husband. It was at that time that Rävaëa came there and insulted her, as 
described in the prologue of this book. 
After she immolated her body, it is said that Rävaëa took her ashes with 
him back to Lanka. He kept them in a gold box in his palace. However,

489 
soon after this he saw many inauspicious omens in Lanka. The Åñi 
Närada, on a visit to Lanka, informed Rävaëa that the cause of the ill 
omens was the presence of Vedavati’s ashes. The demon then had them 
thrown into the ocean. 
The box containing the ashes was carried by the ocean and deposited on 
the seashore near Mithila. It went into the earth and it was at that place 
that Janaka performed a sacrifice for getting a child. A part of his 
sacrifice was the furrowing of the earth and he thus found the box. 
Lakñmé had entered the ashes, and when Janaka unearthed the box he 
found a golden child inside. This child was named Sétä. 
Välméki: The Rämayana’s original author. The story of how he first 
came to compose the work is told in the Rämayana itself as follows:  
One day Välméki was visited in his ashrama by the celestial seer Närada. 
Välméki asked him who was the most virtuous person in the world. 
Wanting to know if there was a perfect person anywhere, he asked, 
“Who is possessed of all power and knows what is right? Who is always 
truthful, firm of resolve and conscious of all services rendered? Who has 
subdued his self, conquered anger, is above fault-finding and, although 
being friendly to all beings, is nevertheless feared by even the gods when 
angry? O eminent sage, I have a great curiosity to know this and you are 
surely capable of telling me.” 
Actually, by his own spiritual practices and meditations Välméki had 
been able to realise that the Supreme Lord, Viñëu, had appeared on the 
earth in a human form. He wanted Närada, whom he saw as a spiritual 
master, to tell him about the Lord’s incarnation. 
Närada replied, “There is one descended in the line of Ikñväku and 
known by men as Räma. He is powerful, radiant, resolute and has 
brought His senses under control. Intelligent, sagacious, eloquent, 
glorious and an exterminator of foes, He knows the secret of virtue, is 
true to His promise and is intent on the good of the people.” 
Närada went on at length describing Räma’s many qualities. He then 
narrated in brief the whole story of Räma’s pastimes. When he had 
finished he said, “This Räma is now ruling in Ayodhya. Indeed, you have 
already met Him when He came to your ashrama. The remaining part of 
His pastimes are yet to be manifested. O sage, all this will soon be 
described by yourself. This sacred story of Räma, known as the

490 
Rämayana, should be heard by all men. It is on a par with the Vedas and 
capable of destroying all sins. Hearing or reading this narrative a man 
will, on departing from this world, be honored in heaven along with his 
sons, grandsons, followers and attendants.” 
Närada rose to leave and was worshipped by Välméki. As the celestial 
seer rose into the sky by his mystic power, Välméki stood thinking about 
Räma. He had already sensed His divinity when he met Him some years 
back. Närada had confirmed his intuition. Feeling thrilled with 
transcendental ecstasy, Välméki made his way toward the nearby river to 
take his midday bath, followed by his disciples. 
As he went toward the riverbank, the åñi surveyed the beautiful forest 
scenery. He saw playing among the reeds by the river a pair of cranes. 
Those two birds were engaged in mating and they sported together 
making a delightful sound. 
Suddenly, as Välméki looked on, a niñäda huntsman fired an arrow and 
struck one of the birds. Mortally wounded and covered in blood, it 
thrashed about on the ground screaming in pain. Its mate also cried 
piteously and fell about in sorrow. 
Seeing this, the soft-hearted Välméki felt compassion. He saw the niñäda 
approaching with bow in hand. In grief, he said to that hunter, “As you 
have slain this poor bird while it was absorbed in pleasure, may you have 
no peace of mind for the rest of your life.” 
The curse came out in perfectly metered poetry. Astonished by this, 
Välméki said, “What have I uttered? Tormented by grief I have composed 
a stanza filled with that emotion.” 
The sage, brooding over the incident, entered the river and took his 
bath. After coming out he went back to his hermitage still thinking on 
the rhyming couplet he had spoken to the hunter. When he reached his 
ashrama he took his seat and was about to commence his lessons to his 
disciples when Brahmä suddenly appeared there. Seeing the great 
creator of the universe approaching on his swan carrier, Välméki hastily 
rose and joined his palms in humility. He offered his prostrate 
obeisances and worshipped the deity with many prayers. Brahmä then 
sat down on an exalted seat quickly brought for him by Välméki’s 
students. 
Even though Brahmä was present before him, Välméki could not stop

491 
thinking about the incident with the hunter. He again recited the verse 
he had composed. Feeling sorry that he had lost control of himself, he 
appeared dejected and sighed. 
Brahmä laughed and said, “Let this poetic utterance of yours become the 
source of your glory. Do not brood any more, O sage. It was by my 
arrangement that this speech flowed from your lips. In that same meter 
you should now describe the pastimes on earth of the all-wise Räma. Tell 
the story of that hero as you have heard it from Närada. By my mercy 
you will be able to see every detail of that story, as clearly as a fruit held 
in the palm of your hand. Therefore, render this sacred and soul-
ravishing tale into verse for the good of the world.” 
Brahmä blessed the sage that his narrative would remain extant for as 
long as the mountains stood on the face of the earth. He also told him 
that he would be able to continue living anywhere he chose within the 
universe for the same length of time. 
Having finished speaking, Brahmä disappeared. Välméki was filled with 
wonder. He and his disciples gazed in amazement at Brahmä’s seat for 
some time. Gradually regaining their presence of mind, the sage’s 
students began reciting the verse he had uttered to the hunter. They 
were overjoyed at the honor bestowed upon Välméki by Brahmä. The 
sage then began to meditate on Räma’s pastimes, gradually composing 
the Rämayana over the coming days. 
Vanara: A type of celestial monkey. 
Varuëa: God of the waters and the nether worlds. He is one of the 
universal guardians. His famous weapon is the noose. 
Vedas: Ancient Sanskrit scriptures. 
Vidhyadhara: A class of demigod. 
Viñëu: The Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Yakña: A class of gods who are servants of Kuvera. 
Yamaräja: The god who presides over death and destiny. He is 
empowered by Viñëu to award all beings the results of their actions. He 
guards over the southern quarter of the universe.

492 
Author’s Note 
My main aim in presenting the Rämayana was to share the book with 
others, having myself found it so uplifting and enjoyable. I am not a 
Sanskrit scholar and have worked from existing translations, simply 
trying to present the book in a way which is easy to read and 
understand. It is possible that students of the work will find the odd 
detail which is different from what they have read in other versions. 
There are in fact numerous versions of the original now extant and they 
all differ a little in some details here and there. But the main substance 
of the story is common to all of them. 
I have not referred to Tulsidas’s famous version, the Räma Carita 
Mänasa as I did not want to confuse Välméki’s original telling of the 
story with later interpretations. I have included a few details from 
another Vedic literature known as the Adhyatma Rämayana, a text 
spoken by Lord Çiva to his wife Parvati. In that text, from the 
Brahmanda Purana, Çiva has elucidated some of the spiritual 
understandings of Välméki’s original work. 
The book is written in the “omniscient narrator” style because this is 
how it was originally composed. The original text of the Rämayana itself 
explains how Välméki was able to compose the work. He was personally 
visited by Lord Brahmä, the creator of this universe, who told the sage 
that he should write Räma’s history. Brahmä promised Välméki that by 
divine arrangement he would be able to understand everything about 
this history. Brahmä said, “Whatever account there is of the all-wise 
Räma, as well as of Lakñman and Sétä, and indeed of all the Räkñasas and 
monkeys and any others, will all be known to you even if presently 
unknown.” 
Välméki thus sat in meditation and composed the Rämayana, consisting 
of twenty-four thousand Sanskrit verses. These original verses have been 
more or less preserved up until the present day, although as I note above, 
one will find the odd variation in some minor details. 
I pray I may not have given offense to any lovers of this work by my 
attempt to render it accessible to a modern reader. I have tried to remain

493 
as faithful as possible to the original, without adding any interpretations 
or interpolations of my own. I hope I may have succeeded in giving a 
little happiness to my readers, although the credit actually lies with 
Välméki Muni, to whom I offer my most profound and humble respects.