ivananda

wami S

Zz
O
<
Uv
a
co
=
a
O

PRACTICE OF
AYURVEDA
SWAMI SIVANANDA
Published by 
THE DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY
P.O. SHIVANANDANAGAR— 249 192 
Distt. Tehri-Garhwal, Uttaranchal, Himalayas, India
2006

First Edition: 
1958
Second Edition: 
2001
Third Edition: 
2006 
[ 2,000 Copies ]
©The Divine Life Trust Society
ISBN-81-7052-159-9 
ES 304
Published by Swami Vimalananda for 
The Divine Life Society, Shivanandanagar, and printed by him 
at the Yoga-Vedanta Forest Academy Press,
P.O. Shivanandanagar, Distt. Tehri-Garhwal, Uttaranchal, 
Himalayas, India

PUBLISHERS’ NOTE
Sri Swami Sivanandaji. Maharaj was a healer of the 
body in his Purvashram (before he entered the Holy Order 
of Sannyasa). He was a born healer, with an extraordinary 
inborn love to serve humanity; that is why he chose the 
medical profession as a career. That is why he edited and 
published a health Journal “Ambrosia”. That is why he 
went over to Malaya to serve the poor in the plantations 
there. And, strangely enough, that is why, he renounced 
the world and embraced the Holy Order of Sannyasa.
He was a healer of the body and the soul. This truth 
is reflected in the Ashram which he has established in 
Rishikesh. The huge hospital equipped with modern 
instruments was set up and the entire Ashram where all 
are welcome to get themselves healed of their heart’s sores 
and 
thoroughly 
refresh 
themselves 
in 
the 
divine 
atmosphere of the holy place.
Sri Swamiji wanted that all systems of healing should 
flourish. He had equal love and admiration for all systems 
of healing. He wanted that the best of all the systems 
should be brought out and utilised in the service of Man. 
He has written a number of books on all aspects of 
Healing—from the Naturopathic and Allopathic points of 
view. This one dealing with Ayurveda is a valuable 
addition to the healer’s armamentarium.
Ayurveda is the Veda or knowledge of Ayus or life. It 
has been classified as the Fifth Veda.
Ayurveda is a distinct Veda. It is even superior to the 
other Vedas because it gives life which is the basis of all 
enjoyments, study, meditation and Yoga Sadhana.
Ayurveda is the science of life. It shows the way to
(5)

remove diseases, to keep up sound health and attain 
longevity.
Ayurveda was in vogue in India since very early times. 
The Ayurvedic and Siddha systems have played a very 
important and vital part in the sphere of public health. 
Their popularity is due to their availability, cheapness and 
efficacy.
Here is a beautiful ideal of Charaka: “Not for self, not 
for the fulfilment of any earthly desire of gain, but solely 
for the good of suffering humanity should you treat your 
patients and so excel all. Those who sell the treatment of 
disease as merchandise gather the dust and neglect the 
gold.”
Charaka also says: “A physician who cannot enter into 
the innermost soul jof the patient with the bright light of 
the lamp of his own knowledge cannot successfully treat 
any disease.”
India has ever been evolving art after art, science after 
science, as her contribution to the common heritage of all 
the nations of the world. Her greatest gift to the world is 
the gift of the spiritual science of Self-perfection. Next to 
it we should place this Science of Life, the Ayurveda, as a 
precious gift to be carefully developed and broadcast to all 
nations. It is a national duty of every Indian.
THE DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY
(6)

CONTENTS
Chapter I
Ayurveda—Theory and P ractice...................... 
13
Chapter II
Ayurvedic Ethics 
.......................! .............................. 
33
Chapter III
Doctrine of Vatha-Pitta-Kaphas.................................. 
36
Chapter IV
Doctrine of Rasa, Veerya, Vipaka and Prabhava . . .  
50
Chapter V
Hygienic Principles in Ayurveda..................................  
56
Chapter VI
Ayurveda on D i e t ......................................................... 
68
Chapter VII
Ayurvedic Psychology.................................................. 
78
Chapter VIII
NadiVijnana 
................................................................. 
85
Chapter X
Indian Surgery 
............................................................. 
96
Chapter XI
N idana.................................................................... 
101
Chapter XII
Ayurvedic Chikitsa 
.....................................................  
107
Chapter XIII
Indian Materia M edica.................................. ... 
I ll
(7)

Chapeter XIV
Home Remedies 
......................................................... 
128
Chapter XV
Common H e rb s................... .........................................  
131
Chapter XVI
Charaka’s Classification of D r u g s ............................... 
136
Chapter XVII
Classification of Drugs — t  
..........................................  
142
Chapter XVIII
Classification of Drugs — II 
..........................................  
146
Chapter XIX
Index to Therapeutic Action of Bazaar Drugs . . . .  
148
Chapter XX
Ayurvedic Preparations 
..............................................  
156
Chapter XXI
Ayurvedic Preparations Explained............................... 
158
Chapter XXII
K ayaK alpa..................................................................... 
203
Chapter XXIII
The Rasayana T reatm ent.............................................. 
214
Chapter XXIV
Yantras.................................. .........................................  
216
Appendix
Definitions in A y u rv e d a .............................................. 
219
Rajo D h a rm a ................................................................. 
229
Nomenclature of D is e a s e s .......................................... 
239
Diseases of the E y e s .................................. ................... 
248
Index to Diseaes and T reatm ent..................................  
250
(8)

Ayurvedic Q u o ta tio n s................................................. .... 254
Ayurvedic Jottings............................................................. 256
Maharshi Chyavana and C hyavanaprash....................... 266
The Bilwa Tree: Its Properties and U s e s ....................... 268
Kuppam ani.......................................................................270
C an cer................................................. ..............................270
Lum bago................. ............................................... 
272
Saltless Diet 
................................................................... 276
Causes of Diseases 
..................................................... ....276
The Three Pillars in Ayurveda..........................................277
Ayurveda—Although Ancient It Can Be Ever New 
. 
280
(9)

<

SRI SWAMI SIVANANDA

SRI SWAMI SIVANANDA
Bom on the 8th September, 1887, in the illustrious 
family of Sage Appayya Dikshitar and several other 
renowned saints and savants, Sri Swami Sivananda had a 
natural flair for a life devoted to the study and practice of 
Vedanta. Added to this was an inborn eagerness to serve all 
and an innate feeling of unity with all mankind.
His passion for service drew him to the medical career; 
and soon he gravitated to where he thought that his service 
was most needed. Malaya claimed him. He had earlier 
been editing a health journal and wrote extensively on 
health problems. He discovered that people needed right 
knowledge most of all; dissemination of that knowledge he 
espoused as his own mission.
It was divine dispensation and the blessing of God upon 
mankind that the doctor of body and mind renounced his 
career and took to a life of renunciation to qualify for 
ministering to the soul of man. He settled down at 
Rishikesh in 1924, practised intense austerities and shone 
as a great Yogi, saint, sage and Jivanmukta.
In 1932 Swami Sivananda started the Sivanandashram. 
In 1936 was bom The Divine Life Society. In 1948 the 
Yoga-Vedanta Forest Academy was organised. 
Dissemination of spiritual knowledge and training of 
people in Yoga and Vedanta were their aim and object. In 
1950 Swamiji undertook a lightning tour of India and 
Ceylon. In 1953 Swamiji convened a ‘World Parliament of 
Religions’. Swamiji is the author of over 300 volumes and 
has disciples all over the world, belonging to all 
nationalities, religions and creeds. To read Swamiji’s 
works is to drink at the Fountain of Wisdom Supreme. On 
14th July, 1963 Swamiji entered Mahasamadhi.
About the Author:—

AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
Chapter I
Ayurveda
The Importance and Value of the 
Ancient Indian System of Medicine
The ancient intuitive India that brought to being the 
brightest and the most inspired of eternal spiritual songs on 
the struggles and problems of active life in this terrestrial 
world in relation to the highest End of Existence which 
Self-realisation is, and embodied them in the four Vedas, 
could not resist its native many-sided tendency not merely to 
subject the entire nature of man to a process of dynamic 
spiritualisation, but literally to seek the health, strength, vim, 
vitality, longevity of the third of the triune aspect of 
man,—the physical body, which is recognized as the 
indispensable and perfectible vehicle for both the enjoyment 
of temporal happiness and supreme spiritual felicity. This 
tendency of an essentially intuitive mind, towards an integral 
development of life, towards a complete blossoming of the 
whole man even while living in a physical form in this 
material world, this impassioned affirmation of positive 
living, this acceptance of the body as the best instrument for 
the realization here on earth, of the best blessings of the 
profound spiritual realms, resulted in the obtainment of the 
yet unmatched, deepest insights, the subtle determining vital 
powers and secrets in the human system that govern its 
radiant health and longevity and in the creation of a yet 
another Veda, the Ayurveda. Ayurveda is a perfect science of 
life and consists of a body of most remarkable knowledge on 
the internal mechanism of human health and longevity, on 
medicinal herbs and therapeutic roots, on the efficacious 
treatment of human ills by eradicating from the human
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
13

system the very sources of their causation. This great medical 
science and humanity’s most ancient and finest preventive 
school of practical medicine, which has been practised in 
India, century after century for over four thousand years, by 
expert Vaidyas well-versed and highly trained in its lore, 
should now receive, as a matter of immediate practical 
necessity, the increasing and the best interest of modern free 
India. To those who claim to have a knowledge of this ancient 
medicinal science enriched by the happy results of the 
researches and advancement made by eminent Vaidyas in 
succeeding ages, its superior merits over the Western systems 
of medicine, and its immense value, do not need any 
delineation. Such names of the great pioneers who added to 
the development of the science of Ayurveda, as Vagbhata, 
Madhava, Jivaka and Bhava Mishra of Banaras are 
well-known, and the almost miraculous results that the 
medicinal herbs prescribed by Ayurveda have brought into 
the systems of those who have used them, are more than 
sufficient proof of its unique value. The amazingly wide 
scope and the genuine scientific nature of Ayurveda received 
much enthusiastic appreciation by such Westerners as Sri 
William Hunter, too, and the recent researches show that the 
early Greeks owed much of their knowledge on the 
physiology of man and medicine, to Ayurveda. The interest of 
Government of India, in Ayurveda is indeed most 
encouraging, but the private bodies and the public too should 
come to an increasing recognition of its importance and 
value, and as a first step begin trying its drugs.
Origin erf Ayurveda
The Lord Himself is the first divine physician. He is the 
best among physicians.
14
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA
When the body is afflicted with senility and diseases, the

holy water of Mother Gariga is the medicine and Lord- 
Narayana, from whose holy feet Ganga emanates, is the great 
physician.
—Lord Dhanwantari.
Once upon a time some distinguished sages happened to 
meet on the Himalayan mountains, among them being 
Agastya, 
Ashvalyana, 
Asita, 
Badarayana, 
Balikhya, 
Bharadwaja, Chyavana, Devala, Dhaumya, Galaya, Garga, 
Gautama, Gobhila, Harita, Hiranyaksha, Jamadagni, Kamya, 
Kankayana, Kapinjala, Kashyapa, Katyayana, Kaundinya, 
Kushika, 
Langakshi, 
Maitreya, 
Markandeya, 
Narada, 
Parashara, 
Parikshaka, 
Pulasthya, 
Sankhya, 
Sankritya, 
Shakuneya, Shandilya, Sharaloma, Shaunaka, Vaijapeya, 
Vaikhanasa, Vamadeva, Vasishtha, Vishwamitra and many 
others. All of them were well-versed in philosophy and 
practised 
religious 
austerities. 
The 
subject of their 
conversation was the ‘ills that the flesh is heir to’. They began 
to complain: “Our body, which is the means of attaining the 
four aims of life, viz., virtue, worldly pursuits, pleasure and 
liberation, is subject to diseases which emaciate and weaken 
it, deprive the senses of their functions, and cause extreme 
pains. These diseases are great impediments to our worldly 
affairs and bring on premature death. In the face of such 
enemies, how can men be happy? It is neceesary, therefore, 
to find remedies for such diseases.” They turned to sage 
Bharadwaja, and thus addressed him:
“O Sage! Thou art the fittest person among us. Go thou 
to the thousand-eyed Indra, who has systematically studied 
the Ayurveda, and by acquiring from him the knowledge of 
that science, free us, O sage, from the scourge of diseases.”
“So be it,” said' the sage, who at once went to Indra and 
thus accosted him: “O Lord, I have been deputed by the 
parliament of sages, to learn from you the remedies for the 
direful diseases that afflict mankind; I pray you, therefore, to 
teach me the Ayurveda.”__________________ ____________
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
15

Indra was pleased with the object of his mission, and 
taught him the Ayurveda in all its parts. Bharadwaja 
recounted the precepts he had acquired to the other sages 
who had deputed him, and with the knowledge of this science 
they were able to live in health and happiness.
Indra taught the science to his pupil Atreya, who wrote 
several works. Atreya Samhita is a celebrated book. Atreya is 
one of the oldest authorities on Hindu medicine.
Brahma propounded the healing art first. He composed 
the Ayurveda consisting of one hundred chapters of one 
hundred stanzas each. It is the oldest medical book of the 
Hindus. It is divided into eight parts:
(1) Shalya: Surgery. (2) Shalaka: Treatment of disease of 
the eye, nose, mouth, ears, etc. (3) Kaya Chikitsa: Treatment 
of general diseases affecting the whole body, such as, fever, 
diabetes, etc. (4) Bhoota-vidya: Treatment of diseases caused 
by evil spirits. (5) Kumara Bhritya: Treatment of infants and 
of puerperal state. (6) Agada: Antidotes to poisons: (7) 
Rasayana: Treats of medicines which promote health and 
longevity, which preserve vigour, restore youth, improve 
memory, cure and prevent diseases in general. (8) Vajikarana 
or aphrodisiac: Describes the means of increasing the virile 
power, of giving tone to the weakened organs of generation.
Nidane Madhava Shreshthah, Sutra Sthane Tu Vagbhatah;
Sharire Sushrutah Proktah, Charakastu Chikitsake.
It means Madhava is unrivalled in Diagnosis, Vagbhata in 
principles and practice of Medicine,, Sushruta in Surgery and 
Charaka in Therapeutics. In his old age Madhava became an 
ascetic and assumed the name of Vidyaranya (forest of 
learning).
Charaka is said to have been an incarnation of 
Shesha—the Serpent God with a thousand hoods—who is
•16
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

supposed to be the depository of all sciences, especially of 
medicine.
Charaka, the son of Vishuddha, a learned Muni, 
flourished during the Vedic period. Some believe him to have 
been born at Banaras 320 years B.C. He was the greatest 
physician of his day, and his “Charaka Samhita” is still held to 
be a standard work on medicine.
Charaka Samhita and Sushruta Ayurveda are the oldest 
and most reputed treatises on Hindu medicine now extant. 
Charaka Samhita is generally believed to be the oldest work 
on. Hindu medicine.
Atreya taught the Ayurveda to sue pupils, namely 
Agnivesa, Bhela, Jatukarna, Parasara, Harita and Kharapani. 
Agnivesa first wrote a book on medicine. It was edited and 
corrected by Charaka.
Next to Charaka the authority on Hindu medicine is 
Vagbhata, who flourished about the second century before 
Christ. He was an inhabitant of Sindh. Vagbhata wrote 
Ashtanga Hridaya. This is a mere compilation from Charaka 
and Sushruta.
Dhanwantari, the surgeon of heaven descended upon 
earth in the person of Dividasa, king of Banaras for teaching 
surgery. Sushruta learnt surgery from Dhanwantari. Sushruta 
treats of anatomy, surgical diseases, surgical instruments, 
operations.
The general diseases such as fever, diarrhoea, chest 
diseases etc. are treated in the book called “Uttara-tantra”.
Madhava or Madhavacharya, who wrote several works 
embracing almost all branches of Hindu learning was born in 
Kishkindha now called Golkonda in South India.
Bhava Mishra, author of Bhava Prakasha lived in 1550 
A.D. He was considered to be the best scholar of his time in 
Madra Desha.
Madhava Kara wrote the book Nidana. This is a concise
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
17

treatise on the causes, symptoms, and prognosis of diseases. 
It is a text book on pathology.
Chakrapani Datta wrote Chakradatta Sangraha. It deals 
with the treatment of diseases.
Bhava Misra was an inhabitant of Banaras, where he is 
said to have had no less than four hundred pupils. Bhava 
Misra wrote a book called Bhavaprakasha. It is a 
comprehensive treatise compiled from the works of 
preceding authors. There is additional information on the 
properties of drugs, accounts of new drugs and of some new 
diseases like syphilis.
Then followed Sharangadhara, son of Damodara, who 
wrote a treatise bearing his name. The work is divided into 
twenty-five chapters, and is a very popular work.
There are several works in Sanskrit devoted especially to 
the description of the synonyms and properties of drugs and 
articles of diet. The oldest treatment on this subject is the 
book called Raja-nighantu.
Bhela, Jatukarna, Parasara, Kharapani and Harita wrote 
medical books.
Agnivesha’s “Nidanajnana”, a treatise on diagnosis, is still 
admired.
Harita Samhita is a standard book. This was dictated by 
Atreya in reply to Harita’s questions.
The Glory of Ayurveda
The Ayurvedic system has been demonstrated in recent 
years to be as effective against malaria as Allopathic 
treatment. In Rheumatism Ayurvedic medicines are able to 
produce a greater alleviating and curative effect than other 
systems.
The best febrifuges have been learnt by British physicians 
from the Hindus. When patients deafened and swollen by 
abuse of Quinine were slowly dying of fever under the
18
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

treatment of enlightened physicians, the bark of the Margosa 
(Neem tree) and Chiretta herb have cured them completely. 
These now occupy an honourable place among European 
drugs.
To the ascetic Gymnosophists of ancient India, no secret 
power of either plant or mineral was unknown. They, possess 
the greatest secrets in medicinal knowledge and unsurpassed 
skill in its practice.
No country in the world can boast of more medicinal 
plants than India, Burma, Siam and Sri Lanka. India’s wealth 
of medicinal plants is unsurpassed. The literature of 
indigenous medicine ascribes medicinal properties to more 
than 2000 plants. Medicinal herbs are mentioned in the 
Rig-Veda. Ayurveda treats of herbal remedies in detail on 
which the ancient medical science largely rested.
There is an entire Upanishad on the internal parts of the 
human body with an enumeration of the nerves, veins, 
arteries, a description of the heart, spleen and liver and 
various disquisitions on the formation and growth of the 
foetus.
The Rig-Veda (I, 116,15-16) speaks of an artificial limb of 
iron as having been given to a woman whose foot had been 
cut off so that she might walk. The giving of artificial eyes is 
also mentioned. 
. .
Jivaka, the personal physician of Buddha, is said to have 
practised cranial surgery with success. The Hindus were the 
first to do skin-grafting and plastic surgery, cataract 
operation, amputation, the caesarian operation, etc.
Bhoja Prabandha describes a cranial operation performed 
in 927 A.D. on King Bhoja of Dhar. Two surgeons made the 
king insensible by a drug called Sammohini, trephined the 
skull, removed a growth from the brain, closed the opening 
and stitched the wound and restored the patient to 
consciousness by another drug.
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
19

Both Charaka and Sushruta mention the ancient use of 
anesthetics.
Charaka dealt with diet, antidotes for poisons, syringes, 
emetic, purgatives and drugs for the cure of diseases. 
Sushruta was the greatest surgeon of his time. He practised 
Aseptic surgery.
Vedic literature abounds in references to surgical 
instruments, such as scalpels, lancets, forceps, catheters, 
saws, etc.
The old Sanskrit and Pali texts give details of various 
diseases and their remedies — dysentery, jaundice, diabetes, 
tuberculosis, heart-diseases, etc. They declare that surgery 
had reached a great degree of skill; and that difficult skull, 
brain and abdominal operations were successfully performed.
The Homoeopathist’s Law of similars and contraries can 
be traced to the ancient Indian classics of Charaka and 
Sushruta through Egypt, Persia, Arabia, Greece, into 
medieval Europe and down to modern times.
Here is a beautiful ideal of Charaka: “Not for self, not for 
the fulfilment of any earthly desire of gain, but solely for the 
good of suffering humanity should you treat your patients 
and so excel all. Those who sell the treatment of disease as 
merchandise gather the dust and neglect the gold.”
Ayurveda — The Fifth Veda
Ayurveda or the Science of life is an Upanga of 
Atharva-Veda. It consists of 100,000 verses in 1000 chapters. 
It was composed by Brahma, the Lord, before he created all 
beings. Ayurveda is really one aspect of the Veda as a whole.
Ayurveda is the Veda or knowledge of Ayus or life. It has 
been classified as the Fifth Veda.
Ayurveda is a distinct Veda. It is even superior to the 
other Vedas because it gives life which is the basis of all 
enjoyments, study, meditation and Yoga Sadhana.
20
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

The three main branches of Ayurveda deal with the 
causes, symptoms and treatment of diseases.
Charaka, Sushruta, Vagbhata, Madhava and Sharanga- 
dhara were the great Rishis or Fathers of Ayurvedic 
medicines. They were Yogis. They had great power of 
observation, generalisation and analysis. Their students made 
wonderful researches. India’s fertility for medicinal herbs 
and plants contributed a great deal to the prosecution of 
their study of medicine.
Ayurveda serves as the best guide for the healthy and for 
the sick.
Ayurvedic medicines are more effective and less costly.
Ayurveda treats of eight subjects: Surgery (Salya), 
treatment of diseases of the head (Shalaka), treatment of 
ordinary 
diseases 
(Kaya-chikitsa), 
the 
processes 
of 
counteracting the influences of evil spirits (Bhuta-vaidya), 
treatment of child-diseases (Kaumara-bhritya), antidotes to 
poisons (Agada tantra), science of rejuvenating body 
(Rasayana) and the science of acquiring virile strength 
(Vajikarana).
The principles of Ayurvedic treatment are in the main the 
same as that of allopathic treatment. They consist of 
removing the injurious agent, soothing injured body and 
mind and eradicating the cause. The difference lies in the 
methods of detail adopted by the different systems. In 
Ayurveda great importance is given upon the study of the 
various stages of vitiation of the three Doshas or humours of 
the body.
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
21
“Dosha Dhatu Mala Moolam hi Sareeram.” The essential 
constituents of the human body consist of Doshas, Dhatus 
and Malas. Delia Dhatus mean the supporters of the human 
body. The three Doshas, the seven Dhatus, the three

Malas — these thirteen constitute the human body according 
to Ayurveda.
Disease, according to Ayurveda, is generally defined as 
derangement of thp three Doshas. Health is an equilibrium 
of the three Doshas.
Importance of Ayurveda
Ayurveda is the science of life. It shows the way to 
remove diseases, to keep up sound health and attain 
longevity.
This wonderful science cannot be rooted out of India. It is 
deeply rooted in the hearts of the children of India, the 
offsprings of Charaka, Sushruta, Madhava, Vagbhata, 
Sharangadhara and Dhanwantari. Even if all the books on 
Ayurveda are lost today, it will surely survive.
The efficacy of Ayurvedic medicines prepared strictly in 
accordance with the methods presented by the Ayurvedic text 
is very great and their curative powers cannot be in the least 
doubted or disputed.
Ayurveda was in vogue in India since very early times. 
The Ayurvedic and Siddha systems have played a very 
important and vital part in the sphere of public health. Their 
popularity is due to their availability, cheapness and efficacy, 
but their thorough knowledge was confined to a few 
specialists only. There was paucity of standardisation of the 
drugs and therefore the Ayurvedic system did not keep pace 
with the Allopathic system.
An Ayurvedic physician is very accurate and scientific in 
determining the causes, symptoms and treatment of diseases. 
He accurately diagnoses the diseases by feeling the pulse or 
looking at the eyes and face. He brings about harmony of the 
three Doshas—Vatha (wind), Pitta (bile) and Kapha 
(phlegm) by administering the suitable Rasas in correct 
proportions and combinations.
Ayurveda is based on ten fundamental considerations —
22
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

1. Dusyam, 2. Desam, 3. Balam, 4. Kalam, 5. Analam, 
6. Prakriti, 7. Vayaha, 8. Satvam, 9. Satmyam, 10. Aharam.
Ayurveda can cure certain diseases for which the 
Allopathic Pharmacopoeia has no remedy. There are great 
many indigenous drugs of extreme utility but little known to 
the students of Allopathy. The Allopaths are just emerging 
from the slough of empiricism. Many of the empirical 
methods of treatment adopted by many Ayurvedic physicians 
are. of the greatest value. Whatever the ancient Ayurvedic 
physicians of yore knew are nowadays being brought to light 
as new discovery by the Allopaths. If people follow the 
treatment according to the methods of Charaka, there will be 
few chronic invalids in the world.
The Ayurveda or the Science of Life
The Ayurveda is by itself an almost perfect science 
treating of Surgery, Medicine, Therapeutics, etc., in as 
efficient a light as possible. Those antiquated sages and 
Rishis 
had been men 
of miraculous powers. The 
root-medicines, the medicated leaves with which they cured 
the disease were all powerful and unique. They were, as it 
were, God-sent medicines. Dr. Wise remarks, “Asia can 
munificently give, but it does not need to borrow.” This 
Ayurvedic system of medicine was promulgated early in the 
Vedic age. The Hindu Medical system called Ayurveda or the 
Science of Life is regarded by the Hindus as the fifth Veda. A 
portion of the Atharvana Veda was devoted to medicine. It is 
stated that this knowledge of medicine was revealed by 
Brahma who instructed for the first time the patriarch 
Daksha. Punarvasu, the son of Atri, Bharadwaja, Indra and 
the two Aswins practised this system of medicine. A time 
came for the Rishis and sages to take their long leave and 
their disciples practised Ayurveda, who in their turn went the 
way of all flesh and blood and their followers practised it. In 
course of events, Ayurveda became a monopoly and exclusive 
right of certain families only and it has become more or less
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
23

an occult science. There were no well trained masters to give 
clear instructions, no schools and colleges to receive 
education and practical training. Selfishness played a most 
conspicuous part. Self-denial and self-sacrifice were quite 
novel things. Controversies and contests arose in the arena of 
Ayurvedic field. An Ayurvedic father was jealous to make 
even his son well-versed in Ayurvedic Science, Exclusivism, 
and not the spirit of inclusivism, aristocracy and not 
liberalism and plebianism were the most pondering 
elements. The books written by the Rishis and sages were in 
the hands of certain unsympathetic audacious men who cared 
not the well being of the suffering humanity at large. The 
books were in their hands, the sole means to acquire wealth. 
So, in the field of Ayurveda, there were no well-trained 
sympathetic captains to guide. The Science, the exclusive 
Science, which the exclusive men hid for themselves and thus 
prevented its sunshine to glow over far off climes, and which 
would have become an eternal blessing, sank into partial 
oblivion.
It is our sincere and heart-felt longing to see this 
venerable and ancient system of medicine, the system of our 
ancestors, sages and Rishis come to the front and occupy the 
same prominent position, it held in days of yore. It is highly 
gratifying to note that some generous hearted and liberal 
minded noble men of the Aryan land are straining their every 
nerve in the resuscitation of our ancient system of medicine, 
which, but for their munificence would have been swept away 
altogether from practice at the present day.
Ayurveda Is Scientific
Western scholars who have studied the Ayurveda are of 
the opinion that the Hindus developed their Medical science 
without any extraneous aid. That the Arabs at one time 
celebrated for their cultivation of Medical Science, had 
borrowed Medicine from the Hindus, is of course admitted. 
But whether the Greeks were ever indebted for their medical
24
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

lore to the people of India, is not so clear. There are scholars 
whose enthusiasm of Greece is so great that they do not 
hesitate to advance the extraordinary proposition that except 
the blind forces of Nature nothing moves in the world that is 
not Greek in origin. We have nothing to do with scholars that 
have in even their historical speculations taken leave of 
sobriety. The accepted opinion is that, as in the case of their 
Astronomy and philosophy, the Greeks derived considerable 
help as regards their Medicine also, from their knowledge of 
India.
The Hindu Medical System called Ayurveda or the 
Science of Life is exceedingly voluminous. It is commonly 
supposed that a portion of the Atharvana Veda was devoted 
to Health and Medicine. The Vedas are eternal and the 
Science of Life therefore, as included in it is also eternal. The 
other opinion is that the Science of Life was evolved by 
Brahma, the Grandsire of all the worlds. The Vedas are 
unquestionably the most ancient books in the world in spite 
of all the care taken to preserve them in their entirety, there 
can be no question that in course of many long centuries they 
have suffered mutilation. The destroying influence of Time is 
irresistible. No trace accordingly,' can be found of the 
Ayurveda as it formed a part of the Atharvana. The earliest 
treatises extant on the Science of Life are those of Agnivesa, 
Bhela, Jatukarana, Parasara, Harita and Kharapani. They 
were the six disciples of Punarvasu, the son of Atri, who got 
the science from his preceptor, Bharadwaja, who had again 
got it from Indra, according to the ancient belief. The chief of 
the celestials, it is said, had got it, through the Aswins from 
the Grandsire. Among the works of the six disciples of 
Punarvasu, that of Agnivesa comes to be better known. It 
was, some centuries after, revised and arranged by Charaka. 
Of Charaka the Xarch of the Arabian writers, nothing is 
known beyond the fact than he was a Rishi who belonged to 
Panchanada or the country of the Five Waters (Punjab). As a
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
25

treatise on Hygiene and the treatment of diseases, Charaka’s 
great work is certainly a very valuable contribution to the 
Hindu medical literature. The other great medical work of 
ancient India is Sushruta. It deals largely with Surgery.
The Rishis forbade the sale of knowledge. There were, 
therefore, no public schools or colleges in which students 
could acquire knowledge of any branch of learning. Hindu 
physicians, as soon as any of them succeeded in acquiring 
celebrity, attracted pupils from the surrounding country. 
They had not only to teach but also to feed the pupils thus 
attracted towards them. Besides lecturing on the subject, they 
had to take more advanced ones among their pupils with 
them in their daily round of practice. For use in the 
lecture-hall, almost every physician of fame had to compile 
an abridgment condensing not only the contents of the more 
famous works known at the time but often supplementing 
them with the results of his own experience. Some of those 
abridgments in process of time, became standard works, and 
were commented upon by succeeding physicians of note. In 
this way, a very large and voluminous body of medical 
literature has grown up in India. If collected with care that 
literature is capable of fairly filling a large library.
The charge has frequently been preferred against Hindu 
Medicine that instead of being scientific, it is purely 
empirical. No charge could be more absurd.
The charge proceeds from erroneous conviction that as a 
system of Therapeutics, Hindu medicine is inferior to the 
Western system of diagnosis and treatment.
Depending largely as Hindu medicine does on herbs and 
plants, the medical treatises of India contain the most 
elaborate instructions regarding the methods or manner of 
gathering these. Annual plants are to be collected before the 
ripening of their seeds, biennials in the spring, and perennials 
in autumn; twigs are to be of present year’s growth; roots are 
to be taken up in winter; leaves in the hot season; and the
26
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

barks and pith in the rainy season. Minute descriptions occur 
regarding the manner also of preparing medicines. Not less 
than six and twenty forms of medicines are mentioned, such 
as powders, extracts, boluses, decoctions, and infusions in 
water and milk and ghee, syrups, expressions, distillation, 
fermentation, medicated oils, etc. The very fuel that is to be 
used in view of particular preparations, has been described.
It goes without saying that as Botany was never cultivated 
by the Hindu physicians on a scientific basis, the difficulty 
experienced in the identification of herbs and plants is often 
very great. Fortunately, the profession of medicine in India, 
like most other professions, has been hereditary. This has 
ensured the descent of knowledge from generation to 
generation. The son, discerning an aptitude for the 
profession of the sire, acts as his sire’s assistant from his 
earliest years. This circumstance enables him to acquire a full 
knowledge not only of the medicinal herbs and plants 
mentioned in the Hindu medical treatises, but also of the 
processes of preparing every medicine with care. By the time, 
therefore, he begins to practise as a physician, after, of 
course, having completely mastered the principles of Science 
by a thorough study of the standard works, his proficiency as 
an apothecary becomes unquestionable. The instruction laid 
down in medical treatises for the preparation of medicines 
are not, in every case, complete. Even when complete, mere 
theoretical knowledge can never go far. No man can become 
a good cook by only reading even the most excellent treatises 
on cookery. Without practice, such knowledge cannot be 
much useful. The hereditary character of the medical 
profession, therefore, in India, and the circumstance of the 
younger members of the family being the helpmates of the 
practicing physician in the subsidiary branches of his science 
and art, always ensure a high degree of skill, both in 
treatment and the apothecary’s art in every physician.
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
27

Renaissance of Ayurveda
Ayurveda is an exact science. It is the Indian medical 
science practised by ancient Rishis and seers of India. It is a 
portion of the Vedas. It is a very effective System of treatment 
of diseases. It had long period of development in its various 
branches including surgery. It was very much advanced in 
ancient India.
Ayurveda has a significant name. It is the knowledge of 
the science which ensures health and longevity. It is in no way 
inferior to other systems. The Ayurvedic doctors had very 
great influence in the field of medicine. Charaka, Sushruta, 
Vagbhata, Madhava Nidhan are the well-known scientific 
books on Indian Medicine.
The Allopathic doctors are perhaps intolerant towards 
Ayurveda. They have not understood and recognised the 
value and importance of the Indian System of Medicine. If 
they combine Allopathy and Ayurveda, they will be more 
useful to the suffering humanity and will do wonders in the 
field of Medicine.
The Ayurvedic system, on the other hand, laid the 
foundation to Allopathy. It has been proved beyond a shadow 
of doubt that the system of Ayurveda travelled from India to 
Egypt, Arabia, Rome and other places.
This glorious system of medicine fell into disuse owing to 
lack of State support and facilities for proper study, training 
and research.
Rasayana treatment which confers Kaya Kalpa comes 
under Ayurveda.
Nadi-pariksha or examination of the condition of the 
patient through feeling the pulse is a noteworthy feature in 
this system of treatment. No other system in the world has 
this feature. An Ayurvedic doctor or Vaidya feels the pulse of 
the patient and diagnoses the disease at once. He gives a 
vivid description of the state of the patient. Allopathy speaks
28
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

of volume, tension, etc., of the pulse. The allopathic doctor 
says only “The pulse is wiry, small, feeble, etc.,” but the 
Ayurvedic doctor dives deep and speaks volumes on the 
subject.
Herbs and Bhasmas (metallic oxides) play a prominent 
part in this system. Herbs and oxides possess infinite 
potencies or Saktis. A small herb dissolves stones in the 
bladder, kidneys and gall-bladder in a minute or the 
twinkling of an eye.
The various potent Ayurvedic preparations are Asavas 
(infusions), Arishtas (decoctions), Tailas (various medicated 
oils), double Kashayams or Kvathas, Churna (powder), Lepa 
(ointment), Gutika or Gulikai (pills), Ghritams (medicated 
ghees), Bhasmas or metallic oxides, Sindoor (oxides), Rasa, 
Rasayanas, Lehyam (confections), Dravakam.
The preventive aspects of the Ayurveda have been 
incorporated in the religious and social observances of the 
Hindus. If they are prescribed in a modern way, rationally, in 
terms of modern science, they will appeal nicely to the 
people. They will take them with a pleasant frame of mind as 
prescriptions for the maintenance of good health and proper 
hygienic conditions.
Ayurvedic system is still alive even after centuries of 
vicissitudes and non-recognition by the State. This points out 
definitely that the system has a vigour, vitality and power. It 
has a natural deep root in India. It can never die or become 
extinct.
India or Bharatavarsha is rich in medical plants and 
herbs. In the Gandhamadana hills of the Himalayas and in 
the vicinity of Nahang near Simla, rare medical herbs are 
found in abundance. All these herbs can be utilised to great 
advantage.
There should be Ayurvedic Universities in different parts 
of India. Training should be imparted to the students on
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
29

modern 
lines. 
Ayurveda 
and 
Allopathy 
should 
be 
harmoniously combined. Then the doctors will do more good 
in the suffering humanity.
There should be more rural dispensaries. People in the 
villages should be. benefited. The cheap and equally 
efficacious indigenous medicines should be used.
Intense research in the Ayurveda is a need of the hour. 
Treasures lie hidden in Indian herbs and medicinal plants. 
They must be brought to light. Then the whole world will be 
immensely benefited.
India is free now. It is Svatantra Bharat. The Government 
and the people should endeavour to resuscitate this 
indigenous system.
The present Ayurvedic institutions should be put on a 
very sound basis. Many more institutions should be started in 
various parts of India, Europe and America.
It is gratifying to note that the Indian Government has 
already taken up the work of promoting Ayurveda. It is 
hoped that the Government will leave no stone unturned in 
unearthing the treasures which are hidden in this glorious 
system 
of 
medicine 
and 
in 
establishing 
Ayurvedic 
laboratories, Research Institutes in various centres and 
Ayurvedic Dispensaries in every village.
Many Ayurvedic Pharmacies in India are already doing 
great research work in the promotion of Ayurveda. If the 
public take interest and if the Government gives proper aid 
and help now, Ayurveda will once again come into 
prominence and prove to be of incalculable benefit to India 
and the world at large.
All-India Ayurvedic University
Ayurveda is closely associated with the ancient Aryan or 
Bharateeya culture.
Treasures lie hidden in Indian or Bharateeya herbs and 
medicinal plants. Research can do a lot by unearthing those
30
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

treasures, not only for the sake of India, but for the sake of 
the whole universe at large.
Ayurveda has immense potentialities. Even today it is 
used by 80 per cent of the population in India. Ayurvedic 
drugs are cheap, easy to obtain and administer and are more 
effective, too.
Look at the marvels of Ayurveda!
Bhasmas even in the smallest quantity work wonders and 
cure incurable diseases.
Kaya Kalpa is another marvel of Ayurvedic science.
Nadi Vijnana is a third wonder.
Diagnosis of diseases through facial and eye expressions, 
odours, sounds, etc., is astounding. Finding of incurability or 
otherwise of diseases through Til oil examination is also 
wonderful.
Doctrines of Tridoshas, Mahabhutas, Rasa, Vipaka, 
Veerya, Prabhava, etc., are thought provoking.
The Ayurvedic system is still alive after centuries of 
vicissitudes. Even now there are institutions, doing wonderful 
work; this clearly indicates that it has a vitality and natural 
root in India. All that is required is proper encouragement.
What is necessary for the growth of Ayurveda at the 
present moment is standardisation of quality, methods of 
administration, ways of manufacturing and the degree of 
potency.
The establishment of an All-India Ayurvedic University is 
an important constructive work in India. It should be taken 
up by the State at once.
The Ayurvedic Pandits, all workers in the science, 
sympathisers and lovers of Ayurveda must co-operate, 
collaborate, co-ordinate to organise themselves and help in 
the establishment of this University.
This will bring about uniformity in Ayurvedic education
AYURVEDA-THEORY AND PRACTICE
31

and practice. It will purely produce capable and efficient 
Ayurvedic graduates in vast numbers and bring forth 
specialists and research scholars in different branches of this 
wonderful and remarkable science in a very short time.
Now India is free. It should have immediately an 
All-India Ayurvedic University for the growth and uplift of 
the wonderful medical science of Rishis—the Ayurveda or 
the Science of Life.
The best place for starting the All-India Ayurvedic 
University is Delhi. Herbs can be easily secured from 
Himalayas. Delhi is the capital of India, too. The University 
will adorn the capital.
Wake up now at least. Open your eyes. The wealth of 
India is being drained by the import of sulphonamides, 
Iodides, tinctures, etc. Tap the inexhaustible herbal wealth of 
the Himalayas. Make your own Asavas, Arishtas, Avalehas 
and Ghritas. Enrich India and bring good health to the 
people. This is your very onerous duty. Kindly fulfil it now. 
Please discharge your duties well, and obtain the grace of the 
Lord. Here is a great field for your selfless service, 
purification of heart and salvation.
Glory to Ayurveda, the fifth Veda! Glory to Ayurvedic 
Rishis, Charaka, Sushruta, Vagbhata and Madhava!
Glory to righteous 
and self-sacrificing Ayurvedic 
physicians! Glory, Glory! All glory to Dhanvantari Bhagavan, 
the Lord, the original father and supporter of the Ayurvedic 
medicine!
32
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chapter II
AYURVEDIC ETHICS
According to Charaka the fruits of extremely wicked 
deeds cannot be checked by the normal efforts of good 
conduct. The fruits of all ordinary actions can be checked by 
good conduct, the administration of proper medicines and 
the like.
You may have fallen ill according to the effects of your 
ordinary Karma; but if you take due care, you may avoid such 
effects and may still be in good health.
Charaka does not speak of the immutability of ripe 
Karmas. He says that the effects of all Karmas excepting 
those which are extremely strong, can be modified or 
combated by good conduct, efforts and' the observance of the 
ordinary daily duties of life.
He says that a man must carefully judge and anticipate 
the utility of his actions before he begins to do it. He must 
judge whether the action will be good for him or not. If the 
effects are beneficial for him, he ought to do it. If they are 
harmful, he should not do it.
Our ultimate standard of good actions lies in seeking our 
own good. To achieve this, the mind and the senses should be 
disciplined properly and kept under proper control.
He further adds that the proper means of keeping the 
mind in the virtuous path consists in avoiding too much 
thinking, in not thinking of revolting objects and keeping the 
mind ever busy or active.
“Atma Hita” or “Self-good” which is the end of all our 
actions is that which bestows us pleasure, comfort, peace of 
mind and longevity. Right conduct leads to the health and
AYURVEDIC ETHICS
33

well being of body and mind, and secures sense control or 
conquest over the turbulent Indriyas.
Rebirth is entirely admitted by Charaka. He says that the 
fruits of our actions determine our birth, our experiences and 
many intellectual gifts but they do not determine the nature 
of our will or affect its strength of application in particular 
directions.
According to Charaka the nature of transmigration is 
controlled by the virtuous or vicious deeds of a man. The 
productivity of nature, its purity or pollution etc., are also 
determined by good and evil actions.
Charaka refers to the collective evil effects of the evil 
actions of people living in a particular locality which leads to 
the outbreak of epidemics.
As a result of the evil actions of the people of a locality, 
the gods abandon that place. There is no proper rain. The air, 
water and the country as a whole become polluted. 
Epidemics break out.
He says that when a country is ruined by civil war, this 
also is due to the sins of the people who are inflated with too 
much greed, anger, pride and ignorance.
Charaka says that the truth of rebirth can be 
demonstrated by all possible proofs. Apart from the 
testimony of the Vedas and of the sages, even perception also 
proves the truth of rebirth. It is seen that children are often 
very different from their parents and even from the same 
parents the children born are often very different in colour, 
voice, frame of body, mental disposition, intelligence and 
luck. The natural influences to be based on these data 
directly experienced is that no one can avoid the effects of 
the actions he has performed and that therefore what was 
performed in a past birth is indestructible and always follows 
a' man in his present birth as his Karmas, the fruits of which 
manifest in his present life. There cannot be shoots without
34
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

seeds. So also fruits can only be reaped when the actions 
have been performed and not if they are not performed.
From the present fruits of pleasurable or painful 
experiences their past seeds as past Karma, are inferred. 
From the present deeds as seeds, their future effects as 
pleasurable or painful experiences in another birth are also 
inferred.
Infants know how to cry, suck, smile or fear without any 
previous instruction or experience. There are some who 
remember their past lives. A child does not owe its 
intelligence to the father or to the mother. Intellectual gifts 
belong to the soul of the child. There is, therefore, no reason 
to suppose that the son of an intellectually deficient person 
will on that account, be necessarily dull.
AYURVEDIC ETHICS
35

DOCTRINE OF VATHA-PITTA-KAPHAS
Chapter III
In short, the three Doshas or bodily humours of the body 
are Vatha (wind), Pitta (bile) and Sleshma or Kapha 
(phlegm). They exist in a definite proportion. If there is any 
variation in the proportion, health declines and even life is 
jeopardized. If the fixed proportion is maintained, they build 
up the different tissues of the body and tone the system. 
TTiough Vatha, Pitta and Kapha pervade throughout the body 
and are in a state of diffusion, yet there are special centres 
for them.
Seat for Vatha is below heart and navel or umbilicus. The 
centre for bile is located between heart and navel. Seat for 
phlegm is situated in the chest above heart and naval. Agni is 
intensified or loses its intensity if the definite proportion is 
upset.
The body is sustained by the three constituents or Dhatus, 
viz., Vayu (wind), Pitta (bile) and Sleshma or Kapha (mucus). 
The body decays through their decay.
Vatha, Pitta and Kapha form the Tridoshas. The theory of 
Tridoshas forms the pivot on which the whole system of 
Ayurveda revolves. It is the fundamental basis of all 
Ayurvedic physiology, pathology and methods of treatment. 
Therefore study of Tridoshas is important, vital and 
interesting.
These three humours are very likely to be deranged easily
36
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

by unsuitable food, climate or other environments, thereby 
causing ill-health or disease. Therefore they are often called 
the Tridoshas. When they serve as nutriments or supporters 
of the body they are called Tridhatus. When they are 
responsible for causing disease, they are called Tridoshas.
Bile and phlegm are primary principles as well as fluids 
which are representative of these principles.
Tridoshas are also called Tridhatus. They are called 
Tridhatus when they are in a state of equilibrium and when 
they support the body by supplying the necessary nutrition 
and energy. When their equilibrium is upset they cause 
disease. In the state of non-equilibrium or disharmony they 
are called the Tridoshas. The Tridhatus are daily supplied by 
the food.
The most important dictum of Ayurveda is “Dosha Dhatu 
Mala Moolam hi Sareeram,” i.e., the essential constituents of 
the human body consist of Doshas, Dhatus, and Malas. 
“Deha Dhatu” means supporters of the body. Out of the 
three groups Dhatus mean tissues. The third group means 
excretion such as sweat, urine, excreta, etc.
Tridoshas are made up of the five ingredients, the five 
Mahabhutas. They have different colours. They are 
secretions of the body. They occur in gross forms in the 
abdomen and in the subtle form throughout the body. They 
have different colours.
They circulate throughout the body after absorption, and 
nourish the seven tissues. They act on food. During digestion 
the three Doshas are poured into the intestines as secretions.
Correct diet, exercise, Asanas, Pranayama, bodily 
activities keep the Doshas healthy and in proper proportion.
There are 80 ounces of Kapha, 70 ounces of Pitta in the 
body of an adult.
During the rainy season there is collection of Pitta. In the 
autumn there is disturbance of Pitta. In the harvesting season
DOCTRINE OF VATHA-PITTA-KAPHAS
37

there is lowering of Pitta and collection of Kapha. In the 
summer there is collection of Vatha.
Vatha, Pitta and Kapha are independent agents. They 
work in unison with a man’s Karma and also in unison with a 
man’s mind.
Health and Diseases
Doshas are the forces which regulate and control the 
Dhatus and Malas.
When the Tridoshas are in a state of equilibrium, 
harmony or equipoise, you enjoy health. When the 
equilibrium is disturbed, you get diseases. Diseases are 
generated through the disturbance of one Dosha or two or 
three.
Faulty, unwholesome food produces disharmony or loss 
of equilibrium in the Doshas.
Increase of vitiated Doshas is the beginning of disease. It 
brings on Prakopa of Doshas.
In the next stage, Doshas are circulated. They get located 
in certain parts of the body. Organic changes take place in 
the tissues. Swelling occurs due to local infiltration. Swelling 
turns into abscess.
Regulated, balanced and wholesome food, exercise and 
physical activities bring back the Doshas into a state of 
equilibrium or harmony. Fasting also helps in bringing back 
the lost equilibrium. Enema gives relief to Vatha symptoms. 
Purgatives relieve affections of Pitta. Emetics throw out 
Kapha and bring relief.
Different conditions need different treatment as Pancha 
Karma, Basti, restorative medicines, etc.
So long as the waste products are not in deficiency or 
excess, they help the functioning of the system. They are 
regarded as Dhatus or supporters of the body. When there is 
excess or deficiency of one or more of them, they oppose in
38
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

various ways the general process of the working of the 
system. Then they are considered as Doshas or polluting 
agents.
When Vatha, Pitta and Kapha are in their natural state of 
equilibrium, they contribute to the efficiency of all the 
sense-organs, the strength, colour and health of the body and 
endow a man with long life. But when they are disturbed, 
they produce contrary results and eventually break the whole 
balance of the system and destroy it.
Characteristics
The characteristics of Vatha are Rooksha (dryness), 
Laghu (lightness), Seetha (coolness), Khara (roughness), 
Sookshma (subtlety) and Chala (mobility). Rajas predomi­
nates in Vatha. The taste is astringent and the colour is light 
red.
Pitta is hot (Ushna), light (Laghu), quickly penetrating 
(Saram), liquid (Dravam), slightly viscid (Sneha), active 
(Teekshna), slightly foul smelling (Visrum). Its colour is 
yellow. Sattva predominates in Pitta.
Kapha is viscid (Snigdha), cold (Seetha), heavy (Guru), 
slow (Manda), soft (Slakshna), slimy (Mritsnah) and 
motionless (Sthira). The taste is sweet. It is saltish in an 
immature state. Colour is white. Tamas predominates.
Seat
The seat of Kledaka is mouth and stomach. The seat of 
Avalambaka is thorax. The seat of Bodhaka is mouth. The 
seat of Tarpaka is head. The seat of Sleshaka is mouth.
The seat of Paachaka is between stomach and small 
intestines (Amasaya) and Pakvaasaya. The seat of Ranjaka is 
heart. The seat of Aalochaka is inside the pupil of the 
eye — retina. The seat of Bhraajaka is skin.
The seat of Prana is head, neck and chest. The seat of 
Udana is chest, neck and upper abdomen. The seat of
DOCTRINE OF VATHA-PITTA-KAPHAS
39

Samana is umbilical region. The seat of Vyana is heart and 
whole body. The seat of Apana is pelvis and below.
The chest is the seat for Kapha, the upper part of the 
abdomen is the seat for Pitta, the lower abdomen is the seat 
of Vatha.
Functions
The whole human activities are controlled by these 
principles or important forces. The physical and mental 
functions are performed by Vatha. Pitta does all metabolic 
•activities. Kapha maintains equilibrium in the human system.
Movement and feeling are the chief functions of Vayu or 
Vatha. The functions of the nervous system are the functions 
of Vatha. Vatha is the force which gives all kinds of 
movements or the dynamic activity and sensation to each and 
every part of the body inside and outside.
Vatha is a Dravya matter of which the force is a quality.
Vatha causes muscular activity. It regulates the functions 
of the mind and the will, feeling and understanding. It 
contributes ejective forces. It invigorates and vitalises all the 
senses. It causes cohesion of the different systems. It builds 
up cells to fill up a breach. It sustains the body. It contributes 
energy (Utsaha). It causes inspiration and expiration. It 
causes bodily and mental movement.
Vatha is the source of all inspiration, energy, voluntary 
movement, speech, circulation of blood and internal 
purification of the system.
Pitta is the source of all internal heat including digestion, 
hunger, thirst, intelligence, imagination, understanding, 
memory, glow in the complexion, function of sight, etc. It 
contributes courage, softness of the body.
Kapha is responsible for the smoothness of body, general 
strength, potency, forbearance, steadiness, etc.
40
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Vatha
Vatha is the most important of the three Doshas as it 
performs the most useful functions. It is the first of the three 
primal constituents of the living body. It upholds the 
constituents of the body, such as blood, flesh, marrow, fat, 
etc. Mind is checked from all undesirable objects. All the 
parts of the body are pierced by Vatha. The foetus in the 
womb is affected by Vatha.
Vatha is that secretion of the alimentary canal which 
converts food into assimilable materials.
Pitta
Pitta is that secretion which turns all fatty matter into 
fatty acids.
The chief function of Pitta is production of heat. Pitta is 
that force which as Jatharagni or the digestive fire, breaks 
down the particles of foodstuffs in the form of Rasadhatu. 
The metabolic activities are carried on by Pitta. The five 
kinds of Pitta are Panchakam, Ranchakam, Soohakam, 
Alochakam and Prajakam.
Kapha
Kapha or Sleshma is that force which unites, supports and 
lubricates all the parts of the body, especially the moving 
parts of the body. The chief function of Kapha is lubrication 
(Sechanam). The Kapha represents the body-water and 
watery materials of the body. The stamina of .the body 
depends upon the Kapha.
Kapha converts the starch into sugar. Saliva is Kapha.
The five kinds of Kapha are: (1) Avalambaka Kapha 
found in the chest, which controls the deficiencies relating to 
the Kapha in general in the body; (2) Kledaka Kapha is 
found in the Amasayam (stomach), which emulsifies the 
food; (3) Tarpaka Kapha which invigorates the heart; (4) 
Sleshaka Kapha which keeps intact the joints and other
DOCTRINE OF VATHA-PITTA-KAPHAS
41

similar structures; and (5) Bodhaka Kapha which renders the 
tongue to perceive taste.
Vasti, Vireka and Vamana are the brief methods of 
treatment for Vatha, Pitta and Kapha respectively.
Symptoms When There Is Predominance
When Vatha is predominant, body is light; there are pain 
in the joints, flatulence, constipation, weakness, emaciation, 
tremor, giddiness, exhaustion, darkness of complexion, 
sleeplessness.
When there is a burning sensation in the body and the 
eyes, the stool, urine and skin become yellowish, when there 
are 
intense 
hunger, 
thirst 
and 
sleeplessness, 
Pitta 
predominates.
When one feels heaviness of body or head, when there 
are excretion of mucus, loss of appetite, pallor of body, 
cough, excess of sleep, heaviness in breathing, lack of 
memory, low temperature, weakness of joints, Kapha 
predominates.
Sapta Dhatus
Sapta Dhatus are the seven basic elements of the human 
body, viz., Rasa (chyle), Rakta (blood), Mamsa (flesh), 
Medas (fat), Asthi (bone), Majja (marrow) and Shukla 
(sperm).
Rasa
Rasa is the juice that is derived from the digested food. It 
is chyle. It nourishes the whole body, maintains and supports 
it.
Rasa is transformed into Rakta or blood at the end of five 
days. It requires a month in order to become sperm or semen 
or in the case of women, ovum. It becomes pungent or sour 
and produces many diseases owing to weakness of digestion.
Blood (Rakta) originates from Rasa or chyle, when it
42
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

readies the liver and spleen. It becomes red by the heating 
effect of Pitta. Its colour is compared with that of ruby.
Blood circulation was known to Indians already before 
Harvey (1619 A.D.).
Blood is rendered impure by the Doshas. It becomes 
thick or thin, frothy, black, blue, yellow, green, bad smelling. 
Swelling of the body, abscess, inflammation in the mouth, 
nose, eyes, erysipelas, haematuria, skin diseases, nettle rash, 
indigestion, anaemia are caused by impure'blood.
Mamsa
Mamsa is flesh. It is produced from blood. Mamsa is 
blood digested by the natural fire which is condensed by the 
wind.
Medas
Medas is fat. Fat is flesh digested by the natural fire. It has 
its chief place in the abdomen or belly.
Asthi (Bone)
Bone is fat digested by the natural fire and dried by the 
wind. It is the support or skeleton of the body.
Majja (Marrow)
It is a tough juice of bones digested by the natural fire.
Shukla (Semen)
This is the vital, generative fluid that originates from the 
marrow. It is stored in the seminal bags. It is also present all 
over the body.
Deteriorating changes take place in the body on account 
of decrease and increase of the basic elements or Dhatus of 
the body. Thirst, heart diseases, tremor occur on account of 
decrease of Rasa. Nausea, salivation take place on account of 
increase of Rasa.
There are pain in the penis and the testicles, impotency 
or slowness in the emission of semen on account of decrease
DOCTRINE OF VATHA-PITTA-KAPHAS
43

of Shukla. Sperm stone and excessive discharge of semen 
take place on account of over-abundance of Shukla.
The quintessence of all the semen elements is called 
Ojas, vitality or Bala. It pervades the whole body. It is only, 
white, cold and dense. It has motion. It is very fine and 
subtle. It is delicate. It is a tonic. It nourishes the tissues. It is 
the vital energy. There is no life without it. It has a volume. It 
has its place in the heart as a centre.
Ojas is heat. Ojas is energy. Sex-harmony constitutes 
Ojas. Health is maintained by the equilibrium of Ojas.
Just as the ghee is to the milk, so is the Ojas to the tissues. 
It is circulated to all parts of the body by vessels to supply 
nutrition and energy to the tissues.
It gets deteriorated by grief, exhaustion, bleeding, wasting 
diseases, anger, fear, hunger, etc. Great derangement of Ojas 
leads to death.
The practice of Sarvangasana, Sirshasana restores the 
equilibrium of Ojas and perfect health.
Health and Diseases
Disease is the disturbance of the equilibrium of the 
Dhatus, Rasas and Karmas. The Dhatus are the constituents, 
i.e., the 
elements that uphold the body. The body is a 
Samudaya or collection of the modification of five Bhutas or 
elements: Prithvi, Apas, Tejas, Vayu and Akasa. The body 
works properly only when these elements are in proper 
proportion (Samayogavahin). The modifications of the five 
elements which cooperate together to uphold the body are 
called Dhatus. When one or more of the Dhatus become less 
in quantity or become more to the extent of making the 
cooperation between them impossible, there is Dhatu 
Vaishamya or the disturbance of the equilibrium of the 
Dhatus. Thus a sick man is in a state of Dhatu Vaishamya. On 
the contrary, a healthy man is in a state of Dhatu Samya. 
There are external symptoms of Dhatu Vaishamya. They are
44
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

called Vikaras. It is by noticing these Vikaras that treatment 
is started.
Just as Dhatus are elements that uphold the body, there 
are Rasa and Rakta. The Rasa is usually translated as ‘chyle,’ 
i.e., the white milky fluid formed by the action of pancreatic 
juice and bile on chyme. Chyme is the food converted into 
acid pulp by gastric secretion. This juice coming from the 
stomach is a thin, clear acid almost colourless. It converts the 
food (that gets into the stomach) into a pulp. Then two juices 
come from the Pancreas and liver respectively known as 
pancreatic juice and bile. Thus these three juices act upon the 
food and reduce it into a white milky fluid, known as the 
chyle. This is spoken of as the Rasa. It is produced as a result 
of the digestive process. But besides this Rasa which is 
produced from time to time, when food enters the stomach, 
there is the permanent Rasa in the body. It is called 
Dhatu-rupa-rasa. It is a body constituent.
One part of the chyle (the Rasa that is produced in the 
stomach) increases the permanently existing Rasa (the 
Dhatu-rupa-rasa) to a certain extent. Another part of the 
chyle (Rasa) gets the same colour and smell of blood and 
increases the blood (Rakta). Still another part goes to the 
flesh and increases it, and yet another increases the fat.
When the chyle has entered into the Dhatu-rupa-rasa, the 
whole circulation begins, and because the chyle enters into 
every constituent of the body, to add to its strength, it is clear 
that it greatly determines the nature of the constituents of the 
body. The chyle is primarily food, modified by juices. If the 
food is such as to produce harmful results, there will be harm 
done to the body. If, on the other hand, the food is such as to 
produce beneficial results, good will be done to the body. 
That is the reason why scriptures lay emphasis upon what is 
called Sattvic food.
The qualities of the body are of two kinds: those which
DOCTRINE OF VATHA-PITTA-KAPHAS
45

make the system foul, the Mala, and those which purify the 
body and sustain it. They are the Prasada.
It is Vayu, Pitta and Kapha that are primarily responsible 
for all kinds of morbidities of the body. For that reason they 
are called Doshas. But these three (Vayu, Pitta and Kapha) 
are also body constituents, i.e., Dhatus so long as they do not 
exceed their proper measure. They are called Mala-dhatus. 
Now Mala-dhatus and Prasada-dhatus must cooperate with 
one another in sustaining the body. The Mala-dhatus must 
function properly for sending out the waste products of the 
body. The Prasada-dhatus must function for building up the 
tissues etc., of the body. Thus Vayu, Pitta and Kapha are very 
valuable. It is Vayu that contributes energy (Utsaha), 
inhalation and exhalation (Uchvasa and Nishvasa), bodily 
and mental movements (Cheshta) and ejective forces (Vega- 
pravartana). Pitta helps the body by bringing about digestion, 
giving the necessary amount of heat, helping the function of 
sight, 
developing 
imagination 
(Medha), 
power 
of 
understanding (Dhee), courage (Sourya) and giving softness 
to the body. Kapha gives steadiness and smoothness and is 
helpful for uniting the joints etc. Balhana, the commentator 
on Sushruta, one of the classical authorities on Ayurveda, 
says that Vayu is to be identified with Rajoguna, Pitta with 
Sattva Guna and Kapha with Tamoguna. Of all these, it is the 
Pitta which corresponds to the Sattva Guna that is most 
powerful. Susruta says that Pitta is the fire in the body and 
that there is no other fire than Pitta. It is situated between 
the 
stomach 
(Amasaya) 
and 
the 
smaller 
intestines 
(Pakvasaya) and it cooks all food and drink; it separates the 
chyle on the one hand, the excreta and urine on the other. 
Though it is situated in one place, it gets up proper activities 
in other parts of the body. It does many functions and so has 
many names—it cooks and so is Pachaka. It gives redness to 
the blood and is, therefore, called Ranjaka. It serves 
intellectual purposes in the heart and so is called Sadhaka; it
46
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

helps the eyes to see and so it is called Lochaka. It gives a 
glossy appearances to the skin and so it is called Bhrajaka. It 
is hot; it is a liquid having blue or yellow colour. It possesses 
a bad smell, and in the unhealthy state of body, it is sour.
Likewise Kapha is located in the stomach. It is watery. It 
flows downwards and neutralises the bile, heat, which 
otherwise will destroy the whole body with its excessive heat. 
From the stomach it works in other centres viz., the heart, the 
tongue, the throat, the head and in all joints of the body.
Vayu is located in the region of the pelvis and the rectum. 
It is described as (Ruksha) dry, (Seetha) cold, (Laghu) light, 
(Sukshma) subtle, (Chala) moving, (Visada) scattering 
everything else in different directions and (Khara) rough. 
(This is the description of Charaka). Its functions are 
(1) sustaining the machinery of the body, (2) the functions of 
Prana, Apana, Udana and Samana, (3) as the controller 
(Niyanta) of the mind from all undesirables and as the 
director (Praneta) towards all the desirables, (4) as the cause 
of the employment of the sense-organs, (5) as the carrier of 
the stimulation of sense-objects, (6) as the mover of speech, 
(7) as being the cause of touch and sounds, (8) as being the 
root of joy and mental energy.
It is Vayu in its undue proportions that brings about all 
sorts of troubles, weakens the system, takes away the colour 
of a person, makes him feel unhappy and sad, weakens the 
sense-organs and is responsible for fear, grief, delirium, etc.
The above account of the functions of Vayu and also of 
the disorders which are associated with Vayu, enables us to 
realise the importance of Pranayama. It is clear that most of 
the human disorders which have a Vayu origin can be 
removed by Pranayama. That is why Hatha Yoga emphasises 
it.
Temperament is defined in the Quain’s dictionary of 
medicine as “correlations of grouped differences existing 
among 
men, 
in 
respect 
of physical 
structure 
and
DOCTRINE OF VATHA-PITTA-KAPHAS
47

conformation, with differences of functional activity, of 
mental endowment and disposition and of affection by 
external circumstances.” Temperaments are either innate or 
physiological or unnatural influences and are liable to partial 
or complete alteration by disease, age, environments, 
hardship and other extraneous circumstances. Temperament 
is essentially a quality having a hereditary origin.
We distinguish four principal physiological forms of 
temperament, 
viz., 
the 
sanguineous, 
lymphatic 
or 
phlegmonous, bilious and nervous. The intermediate forms 
such as the nervo-sanguineous, the lymphatic-bilious etc., 
arise from a combination of the individual peculiarities of 
constitution. Each temperament signifies that the individual 
is susceptible to certain peculiar diseases. Persons of bilious 
temperament generally suffer from bilious and digestive 
troubles. The sanguineous temperament predisposes to 
severe 
fevers, 
bleeding 
(Haemorrhage) 
and 
acute 
inflammation, while the lymphatic to dropsy and certain 
other disturbances of a constitutional character.
Vatha answers to air, Pitta (bile) to the element Agni, 
Kapha to water. Of the three Vatha, Pitta, Kapha, the foetus 
in the womb is influenced by that which predominates at the 
time of impregnation i.e., when the spermatozoa of the 
sperm come in contact with the ova, when the sperm mingles 
with the ovum. If the bile is preponderating, the child 
acquires a bilious temperament and so on.
The lymphatic temperament is characterised by a slow 
and feeble pulse, dull intellect, apathy, sluggishness of mind 
and body, frequent yawning, costive state of the bowels, 
feeble appetite, low sexual power, cold and flabby state of the 
body, diminution of ovum and black complexion. Increase in 
air is indicated by a reduction of temperature in the body and 
sour taste. Persons having a rheumatic tendency are generally 
under 40 years of age. Vatha holds its regime in the morning 
hours.
48
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

The pulse of a person in whom bile is predominant is 
rapid and strong. He suffers from bilious complaints. He has 
a fine physique and an enduring frame. His body is hot. The 
hairs turn prematurely grey. Sexual desire is great. Bitter 
taste and the rise of temperature of the body denote an 
increase in bile. Bile exerts its influence in midday hours. 
Patients suffering from bile are generally over 30 years of age 
and under 60.
The patient suffering from phlegm has a feeble pulse. His 
body always sweats. He is generally pious, God-fearing and 
moral. He has a fair skin. Sweating of the body and sweet 
taste indicate an increase in phlegm. Phlegm holds its regime 
in the evening hours. Persons between 60 and 90 are 
phlegmatic in temperament.
DOCTRINE OF VATHA-PITTA-KAPHAS
49

Chapter IV
DOCTRINE OF RASA, VEERYA, VIPAKA AND 
PRABHAVA
Rasa
The entire knowledge of the preparation and application 
of drugs in the treatment of the sick, the selection and proper 
use of the different dietetics, depend entirely on the Rasa, 
Guna, Veerya, Vipaka and Prabhava of the drugs and the 
dietetics.
The Ayurvedic physician should have a very good 
knowledge of this doctrine and the preparation of medicines 
and their uses. He who begins to practise Ayurveda and to 
treat patients without this basic knowledge is like a blind 
man. He does immense harm to the patients and brings their 
ruin.
An able Ayurvedic physician estimates the correct 
proportions of the combinations of the Doshas and Tridhatus, 
plans the combinations of Rasas and administers to the 
patients the suitable Rasas and brings about the harmony or 
equilibrium of the Doshas. He finds out the correct causes 
and the correct symptoms of diseases and very successfully 
and wonderfully treats his patients.
Many diseases are caused by eating together things which 
are opposed to each other in Rasa, Vipaka, or Veerya.
The theory of Rasas or tastes plays a vital part in 
Ayurveda in the selection of medicines and diet and in 
diagnosing diseases and arranging their cures.
There are six tastes (Shad-rasas) in all the eatable 
substances. The six Rasas are (1) Madhura (sweet), (2) Amla 
(sour), (3) Lavana (salt), (4) Tikta (bitter), (5) Katu 
(pungent) and (6) Kashaya (astringent).
50
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

if the objects which contain these Rasas are properly 
used, they nourish the body well and keep it in good health. If 
they are improperly used, they vitiate the Doshas or humours 
and cause various diseases.
The source of all these Rasas is water. All Rasas exist in 
an unmanifested state in water. Pleasantness (Svadu) or 
unpleasantness (Asvadu) of taste depends on liking or 
disliking. All the five elements are present in all Rasas, but in 
some Rasa some of the elements predominate and in 
accordance with these there are differences among the 
various Rasas. With the predominance of Soma there is 
sweet taste; with the predominance of earth and fire an acid 
taste; with water and fire a saline taste; with air and fire, hot 
and pungent; with air and Akasa, bitter; with air and earth, 
astringent.
One Rasa is predominantly developed in one Ritu or 
season. Madhura Rasa generally develops to its best in 
Hemanta Ritu, Amla Rasa in Varsha Ritu, Lavana Rasa in 
Sarad Ritu, Tikta Rasa in Sisira Ritu, Katu Rasa in Greeshma 
Ritu and Kashaya Rasa in Vasanta Ritu.
The sweet Rasa increases blood, flesh, fat, marrow, 
semen, life, does good to the senses, produces strength and 
colour of the body; does good to the skin and throat, checks 
Pitta and Vatha, and destroys poison, morbidity of air, and 
produces moistening cold and heaviness etc. It stimulates ihe 
mind.
Sweet Rasa gives longevity. It pleases and clarifies the 
five senses and the mind. It relieves thirst. It is soothing to 
the skin. It promotes the growth of hair. It improves voice. It 
is exhilarating. It is cooling, lubricating and rejuvenating.
Excess of sweetness produces stoutness, excess of sleep, 
cough, diabetes, laziness, hard breathing, enlargement of the 
glands.
The acid (Amla) invigorates and energises digestion,
DOCTRINE OF RASA, VEERYA, VIPAKA AND PRABHAVA
51

promotes appetite, develops the body and removes Vatha. It 
is light, warm, moist, oily, etc.
Excess of Amlarasa increases the Pitta, vitiates blood, 
causes burning sensation of throat, chest and heart.
The saline taste is digestive. It promotes appetite. It 
removes Vatha, secretes Kapha. It is moist, warm, etc. It is 
oily. It is very acute and penetrating. It causes softness to the 
limbs.
Excess of Lavana Rasa vitiates Pitta, causes thirst and 
burning sensation. It increases the action of poisons. It 
diminishes vitality and causes looseness of teeth. It causes 
grey hairs, alopecia or baldness, bleeding, eruptions on the 
sljin, shrivelling of the skin.
Substances which have bitter taste like Chirata, Guduchi 
or Neem have the property of reducing fever (Jwara Hara). 
This is direct clinical experience of Ayurvedic doctors.
Katu Rasa (pungent taste) makes the appetite keen. It 
kills worms. It purifies the mouth and stimulates the senses. 
It counteracts the oiliness of the Kapha.
Excess of Katu Rasa destroys the virile fluid, causes 
burning in the throat and body, thirst and weakness, vertigo 
and Vatha diseases.
Bitter taste (Tikta Rasa) reduces toxins and poisons, 
checks fever, worms, allays itching of the skin. It is digestive. 
It possesses valuable properties. It dries up sweat, pus.
Excess of Tikta Rasa dries up Rasa, Rakta, flesh, fat, 
marrow and semen. It causes fatigue and weakness. It 
promotes Vatha diseases.
Kashaya Rasa (astringent taste) dries up the mouth and 
arrests secretions, allays vitiated Kapha, Rakta and Pitta.
Excess of this Rasa dries up the mouth, reduces the virile 
fluid and causes Vatha diseases like one side paralysis, 
distention of the abdomen and pain in the heart.
52
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Substances which have a sweet taste are more nutritious 
than sour and saltish substances.
Substances with bitter, pungent and astringent tastes are 
less nutritious. Substances which have astringent taste are the 
least nutritious.
The taste (Rasa) of some substances changes altogether 
after digestion. In such cases the taste which changes after 
digestion (Paka) will be operative. The force of taste 
produced by the final operation of the digestive process is 
naturally strong. 
Madhura, Amla and Lavana Rasas control Vatha.
Kashaya, Tikta and Madhura check Pitta.
Katu, Tikta and Kashaya check Kapha.
If the six Rasas are used properly they nourish the body 
and bestow good health; if they are used improperly, they 
vitiate the Doshas and cause various diseases.
Milk, ghee, wheat, Draksha, mango, dates, coconut 
possess Madhura Rasa.
Lemon, 
sour 
curd, 
tamarind, 
Amalaka 
(Indian 
gooseberry) are endowed with Amla Rasa.
Common salt, Saindhava Lavana possess Lavana Rasa.
Chillies, asafoetida, dried ginger, long pepper, Tulasi, 
garlic, possess Katu Rasa.
Chirata, Neem, Gudoochi, Haridra, Karilla possess Tikta 
Rasa or pungent taste.
Myrobalam, catechu, arecanut are endowed with Kashaya 
Rasa or astringent taste.
There are many drugs or Dravyas which contain many 
Rasas in different proportions. Myrobalam and Amalaka are 
endowed with all Rasas except Lavana. But Kashaya Rasa in 
Myrobalam and Amla Rasa in Amalaki are most prominent. 
In green gram Kashaya and Madhura exist but the former is 
more prominent in it._________________________________
DOCTRINE OF RASA, VEERYA, VIPAKA AND PRABHAVA 
53

The effect of substances which contain several Rasas on 
the system is a complex one.
Veerya
Veerya is Sakti or potency. It is the capacity of a substance 
to render the system heat or cold. There are two kinds of 
Veerya, viz., Ushna Veerya and Seeta Veerya. This Veerya 
accounts for the effects of the drug from the time of ingestion 
and as long as it lasts in the body.
A substance contributes its properties to the body by 
Rasa to some extent, by Veerya to some extent, by Vipaka to 
some extent and by Prabhava to some extent.
The potency (Veerya) of things is of eight kinds viz., hot 
(Ushna), cold (Seeta), moist (Snigdha), dry (Ruksha), 
moving (Visada), slippery (Picchila), soft (Mridu) and sharp 
(Tikshna).
Sometimes potency overcomes Rasa by its power and 
makes its own tendencies felt. For example sugarcane must 
remove Vatha owing to its sweetness; but it really increases it 
on account of its being Seeta Veerya (of cold potency).
Dravya (substance), Rasa (taste), Veerya (potency) and 
Vipaka are all important, because a medicine produces 
effects in all these four ways according to its own nature.
Vipaka
When you eat a substance or when you drink something, 
it comes in contact with the Jatharagni or digestive fire 
(Pachaka Pitta); Paka or digestion takes place. During 
digestion the food or substance undergoes many changes. 
The Rasas are changed. This changing of the Rasa of the 
substance into a certain similar or dissimilar Rasas is called 
Vipaka.
There are three Vipakas for all Dravyas or substances 
viz., Madhura Vipaka, Amla Vipaka and Katu Vipaka. 
Madhura Vipaka increases Kapha, Amla Vipaka increases 
Pitta and Katu Vipaka increases Vatha.
54
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Rasa is directly known by the tongue but Vipaka is 
inferred from its effects.
Vipaka is more powerful than Rasa. Veerya is more 
powerful than Vipaka. Prabhava is more powerful than 
Veerya. Prabhava is more powerful than Vipaka. Prabhava is 
the most powerful of all.
All these produce their effects in their own time. They 
are not inimical towards each other.
The Rasa, Veerya, Vipaka and Prabhava of all substances 
have been codified in Ayurveda.
Prabhava
A Dravya operates by itself in an unthinkable way 
(Achintya), which is called Dravya-Prabhava or a specific 
Sakti. Prabhava means the mysterious operation of a 
medicine acting in an unaccountable way. Allopaths call this 
alterative.
DOCTRINE OF RASA, VEERYA, VIPAKA AND PRABHAVA 
55
55

HYGIENIC PRINCIPLES IN AYURVEDA
Chapter V
The Six Seasons
India has the advantage of enjoying the six seasons, each 
with a regular duration of two months. They are Sisira Ritu, 
the dry season (roughly January and February), Vasanta Ritu, 
spring (March and April), Greeshma Ritu, the hot season 
(May and June), Varsha Ritu, the rainy season (July and 
August), Sarad Ritu, the sultry season (September and 
October) and Hemanta Ritu, the winter season (November 
and December).
A knowledge of the climates is indispensable for the 
Ayurvedic physician.
In Sisira the morning meal should never be neglected. 
Pungent, acid and salt things should be particularly taken. 
Wheat, rice, jaggery, new grain, sesamum and massage are 
very agreeable. The body should be smeared with oil. The 
clothing should be warm. Physical exercise before bath is 
particularly recommended in this season.
Vasanta promotes phlegmatic diseases. Emetics are 
beneficial in this season. Bodily exercise is also beneficial. 
Avoid sleep in the day time. Dry, pungent, light, heating 
substances can be taken with much advantage. Avoid heavy, 
sour, oily and sweet food, sleep in the day time. Take barley, 
wheat. This season is generally unhealthy. Tepid baths are 
beneficial. Wheat and rice should be. a year old.
In Greeshma, sweet, oily, cooling, light and liquid things 
are beneficial. Sugar, curds, soup and milk may be freely 
taken. Avoid pungent, salt and acid things. Moonlight is 
healthy. A nap in the noon is beneficial. Massage is 
condemned.
56
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

In Varsha sweet, sour and saline things, wheat, rice, 
Masha should be taken. Curds should not be taken without 
being mixed with black pepper. Massage is beneficial. Varsha 
gives rise to wind complaints. Give up sleeping by day, 
cohabitation. Have massage.
In summer and in rainy season man is very weak.
In Sarad^ghee, milk, wheat, barley, kidney bean, rice, 
white, sugarcane, sweet, astringent and bitter things may be 
taken. Curds, sour, pungent, hot and acid substances are 
injurious. This is the most unhealthy season in India. Sarad 
gives rise to bilious disorders. Avoid bitter drinks, ghee, 
purgatives, fats and oils.
In Hemanta the rules of conduct to be observed are 
similar to those prescribed for Sisira. Fat, milk preparations, 
sweets, oil, new rice and hot water should be taken.
Divisions of Land
The division of land is threefold according to climatic 
conditions namely Anupa, Jangala and Sadharana or Mishra.
Anupa is a moist and marshy country with numerous 
rivers, lakes and mountains, thick forest, mild and cooling 
winds. There are various fruits and vegetables. There are 
paddy, sugarcane, plantain tree.
There are swans, cranes, geese, hares, pigs, buffaloes; 
deer and other wild animal. In such a country phlegmatic 
diseases (Kapha) are very common. The people have a soft, 
tender and fleshy body.
Jangala is a dry and even country. There is little rainfall. 
There are thorny trees and bushes. The water-supply is from 
wells. Water is scarce. Shami, Kareera, Arka, Peela and 
Jujube trees are abundant. The fruits are very sweet. Beasts 
like donkeys, bears and spotted deer are found in great 
number. There are hot and bad winds. There are detached 
and scanty hills. There is little grass. It is rich in corn and the
HYGIENIC PRINCIPLES IN AYURVEDA
57

like. The inhabitants have a strong but thin body. They suffer 
from diseases of bile and Vatha.
Mishra is a country which has all the advantages of Anupa 
and Jangala without their disadvantage. It is neither too 
moist nor too hot. Such a country is naturally the best, 
because it promotes health and long life.
In this country cold, heat and wind are proportionate. The 
three basic principles (Tridoshas) are held in equilibrium. 
Elephantiasis of the swampy land is not present here.
A man suffering from a phlegmatic disorder may with 
advantage go to a Jangala country. One suffering from biliary 
complaints will be benefited by resorting to an Anupa 
country.
Use of Oil
Use Brahmi-Amla oil. This will prevent the falling of grey 
hair and produce good sleep. Take cold bath.
Oil the ears with sesamum oil. This will prevent deafness, 
difficulty in hearing and will remove ear-diseases, stiffness of 
throat etc.
Rub the feet with oil. This will remove roughness, 
dryness, heat, fatigue, numbness of feet, fissures of the feet, 
sciatic pain, etc. This will produce good sleep.
Massage the body with gingily oil or Narayana Tailam. 
This will remove Kapha and fat and make the limbs strong.
Food
Take two meals a day, in the morning between 9 and 12 
O’clock and in the evening between 7 and 10.
Take a little rock salt and fresh ginger before taking food. 
This will clear the throat and sharpen the appetite.
Food taken in silver plate promotes functions of the liver. 
Food served in brass utensils cures phlegmatic disorders and 
expels worms. The use of glass vessels cures chlorosis, 
jaundice.
58
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

When you take food a tumbler of water should be placed 
on the right side.
Charaka says that one should not sit for taking food facing 
the north. But Manu says that one desiring longevity should 
face the east when he takes his food; one desirous of fame 
must face the south; of wealth towards the west; and one 
desirous of true knowledge should sit looking towards the 
north.
If one passes wind when he takes his food he must leave 
off eating. He must not take any food during the day.
Remember Agastya, Agni, Mangala, Surya and Aswini 
Kumaras when you take your food. This will give you the 
power of helping the digestive organs. This will give you good 
digestion.
Remember Hanuman, son of Anjana when you take your 
meals. This will avert the influence of evil eyes.
Sweet things should be taken first, salt and acid 
substances next; and pungent, bitter and astringent things at 
the end.
Pomegranates, sugarcane and similar things should be 
eaten first and never at the end of dinner.
Take hard substances in the beginning, soft things in the 
middle and the liquids towards the end of the meal.
Finish your midday meal with a tumbler of Takra or 
buttermilk.
Do not run soon after taking a meal.
Walking after dinner promotes life. It gives good health.
After food, lie down on the left side for a short time. This 
helps digestion. Surya Nadi works when you lie on the left 
side.
Immediately after taking food, it is highly injurious to 
bask in the sun, swim, ride or run, sing, sit by the fireside,
HYGIENIC PRINCIPLES IN AYURVEDA
59

fight, practise physical exercise or Asana, Pranayama or 
study.
Night meals should always be light.
Do not take curd at night. Curd should never be taken 
without the addition of some salt.
Food, cohabitation, sleep, studying and walking in the 
street should not be indulged in at sunset.
Food, evacuation of the bowels, cohabitation, sleep, 
taking medicine, interview with great persons should be done 
when the breath is passing through the right nostril.
Sleep
Do not sleep with the head towards the north. Sleeping 
with one’s head towards the south prolongs life.
You will pass a dreamy night by keeping your head 
towards the west.
You will get wealth by keeping your head towards the 
east.
Recite the names of the five happy sleepers namely 
Agastya, Astika, Kapila, Madhava and Muchukunda, when 
you retire to bed. You will get sound sleep.
Sexual Health
Sexual intercourse is prohibited for the first four days 
after the appearance of the menses, as well as on the 8th, 
14th, and 15th days of fortnights (light and dark), on the 
anniversary days of dead parents, Sankranti, in the daytime, 
at midnight and during an eclipse. Morning cohabitation is 
injurious. Sushruta is of opinion that the carnal desires may 
be gratified at the interval of a fortnight.
He who has eaten a heavy meal, who is hungry, thirsty, 
who is pressed with the calls of nature, should not indulge in 
sexual intercourse.
Have sexual intercourse when the breath is flowing
60
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

through your right nostril. After intercourse wash the hands, 
feet and other parts, and drink milk.
Exercise after sexual intercourse is injurious.
Sexual intercourse in the daytime shortens life.
General Rules of Hygiene
The hair in the nose should not be pulled out. It will 
impair the eyesight.
Get up before sunrise. Answer the calls of nature first. 
Cleanse with water and earth. Cleanse the teeth twice daily. 
Do not use toothbrush. Do not hurt the gums. Scrape the 
tongue with a tongue scraper. Rinse the mouth with cold 
water and wash the face.
Practise Asanas, Pranayama, Vyayama. This will reduce 
fat, give strength and give good digestion.
Do not suppress natural tendencies like stool, urine, 
sneezing, sleep, phlegm. Do not sleep in the daytime.
Bathing after a meal is injurious.
Hot water should be added to cold water. Cold water 
should never be added to hot water for bathing purpose.
Never bathe in a nude state either at home or in public.
Drink cold water every morning at sunrise. You will be 
free from the effects of old age and such diseases as piles, 
headache, shooting pain, bilious diseases, inflammations, 
constipation. You will live for a hundred years.
Drink a small quantity of water through the nose. Your 
eyesight will improve. Your hair will not turn grey.
Recite the names of Aswatthama, Bali, Vyasa, Hanuman, 
Vibhishana, Kripa, Parasurama and Markandeya, who are 
Chiranjeevis. You will attain long life.
Gently stroke the eyes with the wet hands. This will 
improve your vision.
During the British Rule in India, we were hypnotised by
HYGIENIC PRINCIPLES IN AYURVEDA
61

the glamour of the western civilisation. We have imbibed a 
few of their good but many of their bad habits. Some habits, 
perfectly suitable for a cold country like England, become 
meaningless or even harmful when adopted thoughtlessly in a 
tropical country like ours.
With the regaining of the political independence, we 
should also shake off the mental slavishness and turn once 
more with pride to our ancient customs, based on an accurate 
and intimate knowledge of the country and the people for 
whom they were framed.
In this article I shall take up only such customs that have a 
direct bearing on the health of an individual. Ancient India 
realised that soil is more important than seed and hence laid 
a good deal of stress on positive health. Ayurveda, in an 
elementary form was one of the compulsory subjects taught 
in the schools. Therefore these rules of hygiene were known 
to everyone and the more important ones actually attained 
the status of religious customs and were regularly and 
universally practised. Sushruta, Charaka and Vagbhata, some 
of the most famous Ayurvedacharyas have laid down, in no 
uncertain terms, rules to regulate every aspect of one’s daily 
routine, taking into account the seasonal variations and 
individual idiosyncrasies. But here are only a few rules 
applicable to everyone.
“Even at the risk of giving up everything else, you should 
protect your body: for if your body does not exist everything 
that exists is non-existent to you.”
“For the protection of health and life, wake up at 
‘Brahmamuhurta’ i.e., at about 48 minutes before sunrise.”
From this, we may infer that people started their work at 
sunrise or immediately after, and one is asked to rise up early 
so as to go through the necessary ablutions carefully and 
leisurely. They, no doubt, retired for rest during the hot 
midday. We would do well to go back to this routine in all 
schools and as many offices as possible.
62
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

“Morning and evening, the teeth must be cleaned without 
hurting the gum with an astringent, pungent or a bitter twig 
which is chewed at one end into a tuft.”
No wonder, the Indians were once famed for their 
excellent teeth. But now the toothbrushes have helped to 
bring pyorrhoea and caries to almost to every house in India. 
Good deal of attention has to be paid to keep a toothbrush 
free of germs and probably not 10% of the users do this. 
Toothpastes may be good substitutes for the natural 
medicinal juices present in the twigs but a toothbrush, 
however well-fashioned can never clean each individual 
tooth and interspace as thoroughly and gently as a toothstick 
can. If fresh twigs are not available, dry ones may be used 
after soaking it in water for at least 12 hours. Ayurveda also 
provides excellent powders for polishing teeth.
“The tongue should be scraped with a silver or a gold 
scraper or a fine soft twig split longitudinally and about 10 
inches long.”
“The man who cleanses his mouth with (seasame or til) 
will be free of tooth ache. He will relish even very sour 
things, can bite any food be it ever so hard. His throat will 
never be parched nor is there any fear of the lips getting 
chapped. His teeth will not be affected by caries and the 
gums will be strong.” This is something altogether new to 
most of us and the application of oil to mouth sounds rather 
unpleasant but the benefit it promises is so good that the 
whole treatment seems well worth a trial.
“The mouth should be cleaned by gargling with cold 
water four, eight, twelve, or sixteen times after urination, 
defecation, eating and brushing the teeth respectively.”
It is because they recognised the value of gargling as a 
preventive against infections that this custom was observed 
with scrupulous regularity. But alas, the present day table 
manners and the present day bustle of life, have almost 
banished this good habit.
HYGIENIC PRINCIPLES IN AYURVEDA
63

“You should apply the cool and pleasant ‘Surma’ 
(collyrium) to both eyes daily. Once in five days or at least in 
eight days ‘Rasanjan’ must be applied in order to induce free 
watering of the eyes. It must however be applied only at night 
as the eyes must not be exposed to the rays of the sun 
immediately afterwards.”
The Surma is still in vogue among both sexes of the older 
generations and among the rural people of India. Their eyes 
have a beautiful lustre and their eyesight too is better than 
that of non-users.
Physical Culture
“Strength is the foundation of health: hence promote it by 
all the means at your command.”
“Just as a lion is not approached by minor animals, so also 
a gymnast is not approached by disease.”
“Enemies are afraid of approaching one who practises 
physical culture regularly. Old age does not encroach on such 
a man easily.”
“If a man performs physical exercises regularly even 
unwholesome, overcooked or undercooked food gets 
digested.”
What a correct estimate of the value of physical culture! 
And yet it was not practised indiscriminately as is done now 
in the schools in the form of drill at all times of the day. They 
knew that —
“Age, strength, constitution, county, time, season, diet 
must determine the amount of physical culture or else the 
result will be disease.”
There can be no better system of physical culture than the 
Asanas and Pranayama once practised universally in India.
After the exercise the whole body must be massaged 
firmly and yet smoothly.
64
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Abhyangam i.e., a bath preceded by a massage with oil 
was a daily ritual: —
“It checks old age, removes fatigue and body-aches. The 
sight improves and the body gains weight. Sound sleep is 
induced and the complexion improves. The body gains in 
strength and in short the life is prolonged.”
“You must apply oil more profusely to the head, ears and 
feet. And yet the modem people not only shun jail, but even 
remove the nature protective oils by soaps. In olden days, 
they used gentle cleaners such as fine powders of pulses, 
special earths, or the leaves or fruit which contain a frothy 
alkaloid when a stronger cleaner was required. All this is 
because we aped the Westerner whose moist climate did not 
require the use of oils. Besides improving the complexion 
and circulation of the blood in the skin the daily massage has 
a definite beneficial effect on the body metabolism. It is 
certain that this simple process of putting a few drops of oil 
in the ear regularly, will reduce the number of cases of ear 
aches, as it helps the elimination of wax and at the same time 
prevents infections. Here is a common Tamil proverb:
“Pay your oilman and save your doctor’s bills.”
Bath
“A bath in a river is the best, a bath in a lake is middling, a 
bath in a well (a small pond) is ordinary while a bath in a 
limited amount of water as by pouring water with a lota 
useless.”
An immersion of the whole body in cold water for any 
length of time is no doubt invaluable in a tropical country 
like ours. Hence for the sake of those who were unable to 
bathe in rivers regularly, certain sacred days were fixed when 
it was obligatory for everyone to bathe in rivers and sea. 
Bathing tanks and ponds were a prominent feature of many a 
private dwelling.
“Very dirty is the body with its nine outlets which throw
HYGIENIC PRINCIPLES IN AYURVEDA
65

out waste products throughout night and day; it must be 
cleansed by a morning bath daily.”
This rule was so rigorously enforced that even a child 
would never dream of having its first meal of the day without 
having a bath. The manual labourers were however allowed 
to have their bath at the end of the day, when their day’s toils 
were over.
“Bathing the head with hot water is not good for the eyes. 
Cold water on the head is good for eyes.” Let our people 
take note of this.
Food
The use of suitable food is the only means of promotion 
of health; use of unsuitable food causes disease.
Everyone of the articles of diet is described carefully in 
Ayurvedic books and classified under one or other of the 
following headings, according to its effect on the body tissues 
as augmenter of Vatha, Pitta or Kapha or according to its 
effect on oiie’s character as Sattvic, Rajasic or Tamasic.
It is interesting to note that they knew the special value of 
meat as a tissue-builder and energy-sustainer and that the 
flesh of chicken and some other birds was prescribed for 
increasing fertility. This explains why only Kshatriyas and 
Shudras, the two castes where a man-power is all important 
were allowed to be non-vegetarians. Here is the model diet 
prescribed for all.
“Grain that ripens in 60 days, red rice, green gram, rock 
salt, Amla (emblic myrobalan), barley, pure rain water, milk, 
ghee, meat of animals that live in forests, honey and green 
vegetables.”
Milk, Amalaka and ghee were given a very high place in 
diet. The first two were classed among Jivaneeyas or 
life-giving substances. In modern language we acknowledge 
them as being rich in vitamins.
Interesting to note too is the fact that milk known to be
66
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

the best of foods was eschewed like poison in acute fevers, 
though permissible in chronic fevers.
“Time, season, mode of preparation, country, in relation 
to where it is grown and where it is used, constitution, state 
of health at the moment, must determine the suitability or 
not of an article of diet.”
Full details are given regarding diet to be taken in case of 
the six Ritus or seasons of India.
“Never take food within one Yaama (3 hours) of the last 
meal. This produces indigestion. Do not allow an interval of 
more than two Yaamas.”
“Eat suitable food, eat moderately, and eat at proper 
time. Always control your Indriyas.”
The dej)th of the knowledge of diets both in health and in 
disease possessed by the older generations even to this day is 
truly astounding. Equally deplorable is the ignorance of the 
modern people. The remedy lies not in broadcasting dietetics 
worked by Westerners for their country but in reviving 
Ayurveda, the medical science of our country. Thi§ article 
touches the barest outlines and is intended just to whet the 
curiosity of the modern doctors and stimulate thought. Even 
a cursory study of the ancient science will dispel their 
prejudice and shall give useful information.
The public health officers, the custodians of nation’s 
health, would do well to bear in mind that old customs must 
be proved to be harmful before they are given up for new 
ones. In fact research may be instituted into Hygiene 
according to Ayurveda and in consultation with the famous 
Ayurvedacharyas it may be possible to publish text books, 
suitable for use in schools.
HYGIENIC PRINCIPLES IN AYURVEDA
67

Chapter VI
AYURVEDA ON DIET
Ancient Indian Dietetics
I would not be convinced at first. Yes, it sounded 
incredible when the Ayurvedic Pandit claimed that the 
principle of Balanced Diet was known to Ayurveda. He 
confronted me with a question from Charaka Samhita, the 
great work of Ayurveda, written in 100 A.D.
This is the verse:
Shastiken sali mudgamcha, syndhavamalakey yavan 
Antariksham payassarpirjangalam, madu chabhyaset.
“Include these in your daily diet,” says Acharya Charaka, 
the great Ayurvedist who compiled the work. These are: (1) 
grain, (2) green gram, (3) salt, (4) the Amla fruit, (5) barley, 
(6) rain water, (7) milk, (8) butter and (9) honey. Let us study 
the list in the light of modern research.
Balanced and mixed diet, says modern science, consists in 
balanced proportions of energy-giving and heat-producing 
carbohydrates and fats, body-building proteins, health- 
promoting vitamins, salt and Water. Now grain, barley and 
honey supply carbohydrates; butter and milk are rich in fats; 
protein exists in abundance in milk; Amla and milk have 
plenty of vitamins; salt and water complete the list.
What is claimed as important modern discovery was 
known to ancient India at least two thousand years ago. 
Charaka mentions predecessors, specially Atreya and 
Agnivesa. In fact, he only re-edited the work of Agnivesa. 
One authority has it that the latter lived in 600 B.C. Charaka 
was at the court of the Kushan emperor Kanishka in 100 A.D. 
at Peshawar. Hippocrates, father of Western medicine 
(460-375 B.C.), is said to have borrowed much from Indian
68
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Materia Medica. The advanced nature of Indian medicine 
centuries before Christ is undisputed. In fact, Ayurveda knew 
many facts of modern medicine and dietetics.
The comprehensive food-list includes various kinds of 
vegetables, grain, pulses, milk and honey. Their effects on the 
body are also mentioned in detail. Milk and its products are 
given special attention. Milk preserves youth and protects the 
body from many a disease. Its vitalising qualities are highly 
praised. Milk of the goat, horse, camel, mule, donkey and 
even the elephant is described.
Of fruits, Amla gets the top rank. It is said tp contain all 
tastes except salt. If taken properly, it will give everlasting 
youth. Besides recommending for the daily menu, it is 
included in many Ayurvedic medicinal preparations. The 
Nutrition Research Laboratories at Coonoor discovered that 
Amla is the world’s richest fruit in Vitamin C.
Charaka exhibits a surprising degree of liberalism. It does 
not insist on nourishing our tissues with similar animal 
tissues. Alternate foodstuffs with similar qualities should be 
taken. The sperm deficiency in the human system can, for 
instance, be made up by taking milk and ghee.
How unlike the Westernised Indian Physician of today 
who insists on even grey-haired vegetarians consuming egg 
and meat juice! Ayurveda is not rigid at all.
Charaka says: “Let your diet be anything, but this is the 
acid test. It should protect health and prevent onset of 
disease.”
Advice of utmost liberalism regarding the individual’s 
likes and dislikes for whatever he consumes is given at 
length. It is plainly said food should be to the individual’s 
taste and colour sense and increase his appetite at the very 
sight of it. Also, “We have studied but one country. Foods 
differ from land to land. All of them should be tasted, and if 
found beneficial, included in the diet.” At another place, it is
AYURVEDA ON DIET
69

said: “There is no limit to this vast field—Ayurveda. It grows 
with time.”
The need for inclusion of new discoveries, further study 
and research is thus clearly envisaged. There are orthodox 
families in this country which eschew the tomato and the 
cabbage on the ground that they are foreign in origin.
Ayurveda recommends special diet for each season and to 
suit the physical taste of the individual. Winter demands rich 
and nourishing dishes. Milk, cane juice, honey and new grain 
are recommended. In contrast, summer requires a light diet, 
preferably in liquid form, cooling and soothing. Old grain, 
malt, pulse soup and vegetables are the best. Curds and 
buttermilk are preferable to milk. Drink is taboo. The rainy 
season demands caution. The weather is cloudy, the heat 
comes out of the earth due to the rains and the water in the 
rivers and the lakes is impure. Honey is good. Great care 
should be taken regarding the bowels and the diet regulated.
About individuals, special attention is paid to the 
expectant mother, the mother and the child. The pregnant 
woman’s diet has to be carefully attended to. Mother’s milk is 
the best for the child. In its absence, milk of another woman 
is the best alternative. Rules are laid down for choosing such 
women.
A science which could enunciate such sound principles of 
diet, comparing very favourably with modern dietetic 
principles, even thousands of years ago, deserves attention 
and patronage in free India. It is a tragedy that these great 
truths exist in a confused and ill-understood form only in the 
rural areas. Yet, a good slice of the orthodox population still 
practises the laws of India’s ancient dietetics to a very 
appreciable extent. Further research is bound to throw more 
light on the authenticity of several of the claims in this 
branch of Ayurveda.
70
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Diet
One should take food when he is hungry. He should not 
be guided by the stroke of the clock for taking his food. 
Generally the rule is that one should take food in the 
morning and in the evening. He should not take anything in 
between the two meals. Just as Agnihotra is performed 
morning and evening, so also food should be taken in the 
morning and in the evening. Hunger is Jatharagni. Food is 
the Ahuti for the Jatharagni.
Sweet things should be taken first; then saltish and sour 
things. In the end one should take bitter things. Sweet things 
are destructive of wind, and so they are to be taken first. 
Saltish and sour things increase the digestive power and so 
should be taken in the middle. Bitter taste reduces phlegm 
and so it should be taken last. Ghee should be taken first. 
This reduces wind. The last item of food should be light.
Water should not be taken profusely before food. It 
makes the digestive fire weak. Water taken during meals 
makes the digestive fire bright and water taken at the close of 
the food makes one fat.
Half the stomach should be filled with food, one quarter 
with water and the last quarter should be left free for air. A 
hungry man should not drink water and a thirsty man should 
not eat food. A thirsty man if he eats food will develop 
Gulmarog and a hungry man taking water will develop 
Jalodar. Taking large quantity of water during food is 
harmful. One should take a small quantity of water during 
meals. His digestion will be affected if he drinks large 
quantity of water during food. A glutton is short-lived. He 
loses his health, strength and vitality. People dislike him. It is 
a sin to take food bellyful when there is no hunger.
A sage takes 8 gras of diet, a Vanaprastha takes 16 gras 
and a householder takes 32 gras. For a Brahmachari the 
quantity is undetermined. That means he has to take just
AYURVEDA ON DIET
71

what is indispensable. A gras is equal to the size of an egg of 
a hen.
It is beneficial to take a small quantity of curd with salt.
Food should be taken in a calm and quiet place, free from 
anxiety and sorrow, observing silence. This has very great 
effect on the health of the person. Food taken when one is 
weighed down by great care, in hurry, in a sorrowful mood 
affects the health and he contracts some disease or other in 
the long run.
At the end of the meals one should sip a little water 
(Achaman) and then get up. He should clean his mouth well 
with water and remove all particles of food sticking to the 
mouth and teeth. Wash both the hands with cold water. Rub 
the hands together a few times and apply them on the eyes. 
You will be cured of Timira of the eyes if you do so.
Diet (Pathya)
Food exercises a tremendous influence on the mind and 
temperament of the individual.
Ayurveda attaches very great importance to Pathya (diet) 
in the treatment of diseases. At the end of every disease 
elaborate directions for the observance of Pathya are given. 
Without Pathya diseases cannot be cured even with 
thousands of medicines.
You will not succumb to any disease if you strictly observe 
the laws of diet (Pathya) and the laws of nature.
Diet varies with the place, climate, the soil, the 
environment and Prakriti of man.
The interval between two meals is four hours. Do not 
remain without food for more than eight hours, because the 
tissues will waste. Do not take food at a time when the 
previous meal has not yet been digested.
A man of Pitta Prakriti should take bitter things such as 
Patola, Karabella, etc.
72
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Takra (buttermilk) is useful in Grahani and Arsha. Goat’s 
milk is beneficial in Raja Yakshma (T.B.). Cow’s Ghee is 
useful in Epilepsy, Jimmi Khand in Arsha.
Honey keeps down Kapha and Pitta. Ghee pacifies Vatha 
and Pitta. Goat’s milk prevents gradual wastage and 
emaciation of body. Sugarcandy is a good diuretic.
Milk and fish are incompatibles. Milk has Seetaveerya 
(cold). Fish has Ushna-veerya (hot).
Meat should not be taken with honey, milk, sesamum, 
molasses, Maasha (Black gram). If the rule is violated one 
will get deafness, dumbness, blindness.
Do not take milk after taking radish, garlic, Tulasi. Never 
take hot honey. Never take honey with hot milk. Never take 
equal quantity of honey and ghee. Do not take ghee kept in 
bronze vessels. Do not take alcohol with Khichadi or 
Paayasa.
Tamarind, chillies, pumpkin, sour things, oils, jaggery are 
all anti-pathya. Lauki (bottle gourd), Parval, beans (Chemi in 
Hindi, Avarakai in Tamil), snakegourd, moong-ki-dal (green 
gram), brinjal, cow’s ghee are all Pathya.
Diet in Diseases 
Albuminuria
In albuminuria or Bright’s disease (disease of the 
kidneys) give mung dal water, barley water, green vegetables, 
salads, cauliflower, turnip, whey, sago, rice, bread of wheat, 
bajra, joar.
Do not give salt, meat, proteins, sugar, sweets, spicy 
articles, pickles, potatoes, peas, cheese, alcohol.
Anaemia
In anaemia give tomatoes, mung dal, wheat, bajra, joar, 
barley, vegetables, mangoes, grapes, amalaka, banana, milk, 
whev. cream, butter.
AYURVEDA ON DIET
73

Constipation
In constipation give barley, wheat, cabbage, salads, plenty 
of vegetables, spinach, apples, figs, prunes, dates, oranges, 
grapes, bananas, milk. Give up tea, pastry, cheese.
Diabetes
In diabetes take cream, butter, milk, cheese, nuts of all 
kinds, lemons and oranges in'moderation; take mung, green 
vegetables, cabbages, cauliflower, tomatoes, bread made of 
Bengal gram and wheat or barley (misre rottie), cucumber.
Do not take sugar and starch in any form, rice, sago, 
vermicelli, arrowroot, com flower, barley, potatoes, peas, 
pastry and puddings of all kinds.
Diarrhoea
In diarrhoea take barley water, whey, rice water, mung 
water, buttermilk, rice and buttermilk.
Do not take pulses, green vegetables, potatoes and fruits, 
all solid foods, sweetmeats.
Dyspepsia
In dyspepsia take mung, barley bread, rice, sago, potatoes, 
green vegetables and fruits in small quantities, milk, butter, 
ghee in moderation, oranges, prunes, whey, barley water, 
buttermilk.
Do not take pastry, sweetmeats, thick pulses, icecream, all 
starchy and sugary foods, unripe fruits, uncooked vegetables, 
acid fruits, etc.
Fevers
Give orange juice, mung water, conjee in fevers. Milk 
should not be given for 7 days. Do not give ghee, pulses, 
sweets, heavy foods, solids.
Gout
Take all fresh vegetables, rice, sago, fresh ripe fruits, 
wheat, bajra, joar, potatoes, salads, milk, milk puddings, lime
74
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

juice freely diluted. In small quantities take tomatoes, beans, 
peas and other pulses, butter, ghee, cheese.
Do not take rich foods, animal foods, pastries, jellies, 
confection, all acid fruits, all liquors.
Obesity
Take wheat, 
bajra, joar, mung water, butter in 
moderation, milk, grapes, oranges, green vegetables such as 
cabbages, spinach (palak), tomatoes.
Do not take ghee, pastry, sweets, too much rice, too 
much sugar, thick pulses.
Phthisis
Take mung, wheat, rice, chana, cream, milk, all fruits, 
all vegetables.
Rheumatism
During the stage of fever and joint inflammation take 
fluids only such as diluted milk, mung water, fruit jellies.
When the febrile stage is over, take milk, mung water and 
vegetables.
Fifteen days after the temperature has returned to 
normal, take bread, rice, green vegetables, milk, mung water.
Do not take pastry, sweets, pumpkin, black gram, alcohol.
Typhoid Fever
During the febrile stage, fluids only—glucose water, 
barley water or rice water, pure water— should be given.
. Do not give solid food for some days even when the 
temperature has become normal.
The Digestive Fire
Let us see what the Ayurvedic science has to say 
regarding digestion.
The food is digested by the internal fire which assumes 
four forms:
AYURVEDA ON DIET
75

I. The regular working digestive fire where Vatha, Pitta 
and Kapha exist in a definite proportion to maintain a state 
of equilibrium and which is not influenced by any of the 
humours.
II. The irregular working digestive fire is caused by 
vitiation of the Vatha. If the proportion in the Vatha is 
upset, vitiation of Vatha results.
III. The intense working digestive fire is caused by 
vitiation of Pitta.
IV. The dull working digestive fire is due to vitiation of 
Kapha.
The regular working digestive fire digests the food 
properly a;t the proper time. Here, wind, bile and phlegm 
maintain a state of equilibrium.
The irregular working digestive fire only occasionally 
digests the food satisfactorily at the proper time but at 
other times it causes distention Of the abdomen, gripping 
pains in the bowels, Atisaram, a sensation of heaviness in 
the stomach, gurgling sounds in the bowels and ultimately 
digests the food.
The intense working digestive fire digests quickly any 
amount of food, even if it is taken at very short intervals. 
After digestion is completed, it causes dryness, heat, 
redness, pain, swelling and alteration of the functions in the 
throat, palate and lips.
The dull working digestive fire causes heaviness of the 
belly and head, bronchitis, asthma, salivary discharge, 
vomiting, a feeling of weariness of the limbs and digests 
even a small quantity of food slowly after a very long time.
The period of life, complexion, strength, health, 
exertion, growth, lustre, Ojas,, energy, animal and other 
kinds of heat, and the life breaths have all been the result 
of the digestive 
fire within the human frame or
76
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

constitution. When this fire becomes extinguished, the 
person dies. When it burns within the body, one lives long 
without diseases of any kind. When it becomes vitiated one 
becomes afflicted with disease. For these reasons the Agni 
is the root. Pitta is the only fire present in the system, as 
all acts from the digestion of food to the disintegration of 
tissues are performed with the help of Pitta.
AYURVEDA ON DIET
77

Chapter VII 
AYURVEDIC PSYCHOLOGY
Ayurvedic psychology is vast and profound. Ayurveda 
follows the Yogic psychology.
Ayurveda separates Manas (mind) from the ordinary 
senses, as it has many functions which are not possessed by 
any of the other senses.
According to Charaka, the Self is active. The mind moves 
by its activity.- The senses move by the operation of mind. The 
Self is conscious (Chetana). But this consciousness does not 
belong to the Self in itself. It is attained Only by its 
connection with the senses through mind or Manas.
According to Charaka, there is another transcendental 
Self (Paramatma) apart from this Self. This is different from 
the Self which participates in the union of the body and the 
senses.
The subtler or transcendental Self is unchangeable 
(Nirvikara). The unchangeableness of the Self consists in its 
being able to unite with itself its past and future states. If the 
Self were not permanent, it could not unite with itself all its 
past experience.
The pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, the sufferings and 
enjoyment that affect you should not be attributed to the Self 
but to mind or Manas.
Knowledge implies a process and a change. This Self 
manifests consciousness only in those parts where it becomes 
associated with the mind and the senses.
Charaka says that the mind, the Self and the body are 
linked together like a tripod, on which life rests. If any one of 
the components is missing, the unity is broken.
Just as the tree is involved in the seed, so also this entire
78
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

universe is involved in the Mulaprakriti. Prakriti is 
homogeneous. It is made up of three Gunas —Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas. When the three Gunas are in a state of 
equilibrium or equipoise, there is no manifestation of 
Prakriti. A disturbance in the equilibrium takes place in the 
Prakriti and this world is projected. The three Gunas 
manifest.
Sattva is white. White colour is symbolic of peace, Santi. 
Sattva is light, peace or harmony.
Rajas is red. Red colour is symbolic of excitement. Rajas 
is passion, struggle, motion.
Tamas is black. Black colour is symbolic of Moha 
(ignorance, infatuation, delusion). Tamas is inertia, darkness, 
sloth.
Mind is the direct cause of pleasure and pain. It is the 
superintendent of all the ten senses (Adhishthayaka).
The mind comes in contact with its objects and 
experiences pleasure and pain.
It thinks of the objects of thought and moves the 
sense-organs. The senses, guided by the mind, grasp their 
respective objects and produce their knowledge.
When the Self or Atman is associated with the mind, it 
has the following qualities: desire, hatred, effort, pleasure, 
pain, Prana (the upward current of breath), Apana (the 
downward force acting in the direction of the rectum), the 
opening and closing of the eyelids, imagination, thought, 
decision of intellect, energy, sense-cognitions.
Kindness, 
mercy, 
truthfulness, 
virtue, 
faith, 
Self- 
knowledge, retentive power (Medha), intelligence, self- 
control (Dhriti), sense of duty are all Sattvic qualities of the 
mind.
Pride, untruthfulness, cruelty, conceit, passion, anger, 
impatience, restlessness, suffering, boastfulness, are the 
Rajasic qualities of the mind.
AYURVEDIC PSYCHOLOGY
79

Dullness, idleness, sleepiness, sloth, inertia, darkness, 
viciousness, lack of retentive power are all Tamasic qualities 
of the mind.
Prayatna is that particular quality by the rise of which in 
the soul the mind is moved to activity.
The one mind appears as diverse owing to various objects 
of thought. It may sometimes have religious thoughts and 
appear religious. At other times it entertains lustful thoughts 
and appears lustful.
The mind grasps colour, smell, sound, taste and touch.
It imagines in diverse ways. “This will do good to me” or 
“This will do me harm.”
Iq the same man the mind sometimes appears as angry, 
virtuous, ignorant, lustful. But in reality the mind is one and 
the same for each person. All these differences do not appear 
at the same time with the same person as might have been 
the case if there were many minds for one and the same 
person.
The mind is atomic, for otherwise many different 
functions could not be performed by one and the same mind 
at the same time.
A man is called Sattvic, Rajasic or Tamasic according as 
predominance of one or other of these Gunas is observed in 
that man.
The connection of the body, the senses, the mind and the 
Self is called life (Jivita).
The five sense-cognitions are caused through the 
contiguity of the senses, the sense objects, mind and the soul.
Though all the senses are made up of the five elements, 
yet those senses which contain any element in a 
preponderating degree were regarded as made up of that 
element. The sense which has a particular element in a
80
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

preponderating degree is considered as having by virtue of 
that a special capacity for grasping that particular element.
A Sound Mind Ensures Sound Health
The mind has very intimate connection with the body. 
When the body suffers, the mind also suffers. When the mind 
suffers, there is reaction in the body as well. Therefore one 
who knows the secret of keeping the mind in a healthy state 
can keep his body also in a sound condition.
A doubting man always suffers from some disease or 
other. He suspects everybody. His own mind is the cause for 
his suffering. He has no self-confidence. He thinks always 
that others are trying to harm him. He feels that others are 
viewing him with suspicion and that they think very low of 
him. This is his own creation. The more he thinks thus, the 
more is he worried.
Faith in the doctor from whom he takes medicine is very 
essential for cure. A man who has no confidence in the other 
goes on changing the doctor and medicine every day. This is 
the reason why a patient gets no relief even after protracted 
treatment with different doctors. They say: “I have tried all 
medicines and all doctors. But there is no relief at all.”
It is very difficult for a rich man to have faith in any one 
doctor. He is proud of his wealth. He expects a cure for his 
ailment in a few hours or a few days. He is very impatient. He 
takes medicine from two or three doctors at a time. This is 
the height of his folly. A poor man has faith and he is able to 
get a cure even from an ordinary doctor without much 
qualifications.
Faith is very essential in curing mental diseases. In the 
case of a physical ailment sometimes the patient is able to get 
a cure even without much faith. The cause of the disease is 
evident and the cure is easy. In cases where diseases of the 
mind are concerned, faith is very essential. Then the cure is
AYURVEDIC PSYCHOLOGY
81

very easy. The patient confesses fully and expresses himself 
fully. He becomes light at heart. Confession is half cure.
There are two kinds of patients suffering from mental 
diseases. One is he in whom desires are not fulfilled. One 
suppresses this by his ego. Such a patient suffers from 
hysteria in the long run. Sometimes he expresses himself fully 
under the influence of the disease. In the ordinary course he 
is unable to express his ideas on account of shyness. For 
example one has intense desire to earn money and become 
rich. He has no means of doing it for he has no suitable 
qualification. In the state of hysteria he says, “I shall get a 
lakh of rupees tomorrow. The State Bank is sending me a 
cheque through a friend of mine. I shall get the first prize in 
the cross-word puzzle competition,” and so on.
The second type of man has connection with his 
character. Take for example a certain individual committed 
adultery with another’s wife, or say he committed theft. The 
guilty conscience pricks him always. He feels that everyone is 
speaking about his theft or adultery privately. His own mind, 
his guilty conscience is harassing him now. Such a man 
develops in course of time ulcer in his stomach, palpitation of 
heart, consumption, leucoderma and such other diseases.
Fear in seclusion, shame to face others are all due to 
wrongs suppressed. But the moment he admits them in 
public or before the Lord, he is free from all worries. He has 
a light heart. He feels relief.
A grown-up man does not confess his mistakes, because 
the ego is strong in him and he suppresses the guilt. He feels 
he is a very big man and he should not confess his crime 
before his juniors. Such a man has no faith even in God.
Out of fear of punishment some take to devotional 
practices. They think that by such practices they can escape 
the Yamaraj’s rod of punishment. Such people are always 
afraid. They do not derive the full benefit of devotion. The
82
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

moment some calamity overcomes them, they give up all 
devotional practices.
A great psychologist of the West has said, “I have not 
seen in my forty years’ experience as a psychologist, even one 
man who has faith in God and who had suffered from mental 
ailments. I have also not seen anyone free from his mental 
disease without having faith in God. Thus it is clear that 
those who have faith in the Lord do not suffer from any 
mental ailment.”
Mental ailment has very close connection with want of 
faith in God. One who works always for the good of others 
never suffers from mental diseases.
Feel, “The Lord is all-merciful. He attends to the good of 
all. He makes all happy. All are His children.” With this faith, 
work for the good of all. You will not suffer from any mental 
ailment at any time. You will become more and more healthy 
both mentally and physically.
Disease is the name for the feeble state of the mind. 
There is very close connection with one’s internal as well as 
external world. When you are having something bad at heart, 
the Lord who is the Antaryamin gives you punishment from 
within and as a result of that your mind always remains 
diseased. Therefore ever exert to remain mentally pure. Do 
nothing which will affect your mental peace.
One who has faith in rebirth and the law of cause and 
effect, is seen to be more religious and God-fearing than one 
who has no such faith. The latter has no fear of anything. He 
does not believe in rebirth. He thinks he can do any evil and 
yet go unharmed. He becomes an atheist as he has no fear of 
punishment by any superior authority. He thinks that he can 
escape punishment if he is not detected by those responsible 
for the peace of the land, i.e., the police or other 
Government officials. One who has fear of God will never 
indulge in adultery, black-marketing, etc.
AYURVEDIC PSYCHOLOGY
83

Man gets the worst of mental diseases when he acts 
against the dictates of his own conscience, and against the 
dictates of Dharma and religion.
Have faith in your own Self. Have faith in God. Do the 
right thing. Always fear sin. Help others. Work for the good 
of others. You will be free from all diseases. You will be ever 
healthy and happy. This is the key to success, health and 
happiness!
Worry, anger, hatred and fear generate many diseases. 
Worry and fear intensify every disease. Worry, anxiety and 
fear turn a little ordinary fever into typhoid, a little diarrhoea 
into cholera, a little cough into phthisis or pneumonia, a 
slight increase of urine into diabetes, a little blood-pressure 
into very high blood-pressure.
If the patient has no peace of mind, all kinds of medical 
treatment will fail. Peace of mind alone will cure every 
disease without any drug-treatment.
Practise Japa, meditation. Pray. Fast. Study religious 
books. Have Satsanga. Discipline the mind. You can have 
peace of mind.
Right mental culture is the right and sure remedy for any 
disease.
84
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chapter VIII
NADI VIJNANA
(Science of Pulse)
Introduction
The Indian Science of Pulse is a very important and vital 
branch of the Indian system of Medicine or Ayurveda.
An accurate knowledge of the science of pulse will 
certainly have much of the unnecessary waste of time and 
money. He who has knowledge of this sublime science of 
pulse will be able to foretell the appearance of a disease with 
its progress long before it has taken a strong hold in the 
constitution of the patient.
The ancient Ayurvedic Physicians of India had attained 
great mastery and excellence in the science of feeling the 
pulse. They depended on the pulse for diagnosing a disease. 
They had no apparatuses and appliances for the examination 
of blood, urine, stool and sputum. They had no microscope or 
sphygmometer. And yet they were highly successful without 
the aid of appliances in finding out the exact nature of the 
diseases. What a great marvel! What a great wonder! How 
intelligent they were!
What Is Pulse
The heart-muscle contracts. A wave of increased pressure 
is transmitted by Vayu along the arteries. This wave is called 
Pulse. The pulse indicates the normal and abnormal 
conditions of the body.
Where to Feel Pulse
Generally the pulse is felt in the radial artery, because it 
rests on the bone radius and it is easily accessible too.
The pulse is felt in the tibial and temporal arteries also. It
NADI VIJNANA
85

can be felt in the arteries in the neck, nose, eye, ear, tongue 
and penis as the Prana Vayu is predominant in them.
The radial pulse is felt at the wrist on the radial artery by 
three fingers along two inches. The three digits commence 
from the root of the thumb. The first, second and third digits 
represent Vatha, Pitta and Kapha respectively. They are 
examined by the index, middle and ring fingers respectively.
The pulse is prominent on the left side in women and on 
the right side in men on account of the alternate disposition 
of the transverse Kurma Nadi at the navel.
Science of Pulse
There are 72,000 arteries in the body. They all form their 
centres in the navel or umbilicus.
Fourteen arteries are important. They are Ida, Pingala, 
Sushumna, Saraswati, Varuni, Pusa, Hastijihva, Yasasvini, 
Visvodari, Kuhu, 
Sankhini, Payaswini, Alambusa and 
Gandhari. Of these fourteen the first three are most 
important.
Pulse reveals the Doshas arising from the combination of 
the two Doshas or three Doshas.
Himstra, Snayu, Vasa Nadi, Dhamani, Dhara, Tantuki, 
Jivitgna and Sira are the designations of the pulse.
By feeling the pulse the three kinds of Doshas are 
ascertained by the three kinds of movement of the pulse, viz., 
slow, middle and swift.
The pulse indicates whether the disease is due to Vatha or 
Pitta or Kapha or due to the influence of two Doshas 
combined or three Doshas combined or whether the disease 
is curable or incurable.
Nature of Pulse
Pulse in a healthy person is slow and strong. The 
movement of the pulse is like that of an earthworm.
86
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

The pulse beats mildly in the morning, quickly at noon 
and moderately at night.
Benefits of Feeling Pulse
The examination of the pulse will reveal the knowledge of 
the impending disease, the three Doshas individually and in 
combination and the curability and the incurability of 
diseases.
Just as face is index of the mind, just as eye is the index of 
the state of heart, so also pulse is an index of condition of the 
heart, blood-circulation and the entire system of a man. The 
examination of the pulse gives convincing facts.
Just as the strings of violin or Veena or Sitar express the 
musical notes, the pulse expresses the symptoms of the 
diseases".
It is very difficult to attain the knowledge of the pulse. 
Much experience, much clinical observation and study are 
necessary. A keen intelligence is also necessary.
How to Examine the Pulse
You will have to learn the pulse under the guidance of an 
experienced and able Ayurvedic physician. The grace of God 
and one’s own virtue are also necessary. Knowledge of the 
pulse is attained through long practice.
The student should at first feel the pulse of healthy 
persons.
The pulse of a sick person takes different attitudes in 
connection with the patient’s age, time and the peculiar 
character of the disease.
Examine the pulse in the morning after sunrise in the 
radial artery above the thumb ^on an empty stomach. The 
patient should sit comfortably. Feel the pulse with your three 
fingers —index, middle and ring fingers.
The examiner of the pulse also should sit comfortably. He
NADI VUNANA
87

should have a calm mind. He should have perfect 
concentration. He should be free from anger and lust.
You cannot feel the pulse clearly and distinctly after 
sexual intercourse, when one has just taken his meal or bath, 
when he is hungry, thirsty or heated owing to exposure to 
sun, when he is fatigued due to exercise, when he has 
checked his calls of nature, when the mind is disturbed by 
emotion. The pulse is not normal and hence unfit for 
examination in such cases.
Place the hand to be examined in a curved state. Examine 
the pulse with your left hand. Feel the pulse three times by 
holding and letting loose the hand.
Indication of Pulse
The pulse at the wrist indicates digestion, onset of fever 
and derangement of the Vatha, Pitta and Kapha.
The pulse in the neck indicates fear, anger, sexual union, 
thirst, fatigue, bereavement, the nature of accidental fear.
The pulse in the nose indicates sexual desire, the life and 
death of the patient, diseases of the throat, head, ear, face 
and mouth, passion, headache.
Pulse Rate
The pulse-rate of a new born infant is 130 per minute. In 
an adult it is 72 per minute; in an old man of 80 it is 60. In 
young women the pulse-rate is faster than in men by 5 beats 
per minute.
The pulse-rate is increased in emotional excitement, long 
walk, during menstruation, and absence of menstruation.
The pulse is slow in convalescents, depressed conditions, 
grief, fear, starvation, excessive copulation, dyspepsia, 
emaciation, wasting diseases like consumption, diarrhoea, 
diabetes, anaemia, general debility.
Exercise, 
emotion, 
etc., 
modify 
the 
pulse-rate
88
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

temporarily. If rest is given, normal condition will manifest 
again. This is not pathological.
The pulse which is too rapid, too slow, too crooked, too 
feeble is of pathological importance.
Pulse in Disease
The science of pulse is inseparably associated with the 
Tridosha theory of Ayurveda. A perfect knowledge of the 
Tridosha theory, the knowledge of Vatha (air), Pitta (heat) 
and Kapha (phlegm), the three vital principles in the 
composition of the human body is, therefore, absolutely 
essential for a proper understanding of sphygmology or the 
nature of the pulse in Ayurveda.
The single Nadi is divided into three parts and possesses 
the characteristics of Vatha, Pitta and Kapha. The Vayu Nadi 
lies beneath the first finger, the Pitta Nadi beneath the 
second and the Kapha Nadi beneath the third.
Brahma, Siva and Vishnu —these are the respective 
presiding deities of Vayu Nadi, Pitta Nadi and Kapha Nadi.
The predominance of Vatha is felt in the rainy season and 
winter; the predominance of Pitta is felt in the autumn and 
summer; the predominance of Kapha is felt in the spring.
The predominance of Kapha is felt after taking food, that 
of Pitta during digestion and that of Vatha after the food is 
digested.
The predominance of Kapha is felt in the first part of the 
day and the night, that of Pitta in the second part and that of 
the Vatha in the third part.
Colours of Vatha Nadi, Pitta Nadi and Kapha Nadi are 
respectively blue, pale and white.
The touch of Pitta Nadi is warm, that of Kapha Nadi is 
cold, and that of Vatha Nadi is neither warm nor cold.
The movement of the pulse under the fore-finger is that
NADI VIJNANA
89

of Vatha, under the middle-finger is that of Pitta and under 
the ring-finger is that of Kapha.
Vatha Nadi is crooked, Pitta Nadi is flickering and Kapha 
Nadi is steady.
In fever the pulse is quick and flickering. It is called 
Chanchala pulse. The pulse in chronic fever and diarrhoea is 
called Durbala (weak). The pulse in a more deteriorated 
state of body is called Ksheera. The pulse in very 
long-standing diseases is called Deerghagaamini. The state in 
an oncoming fever and Vatha pulse is called Tejapunja.
Movement of the Nadi
The movement of Vatha Nadi is like that of serpents and 
leeches.
The movement of Pitta Nadi is like that of Kulinga, crows 
and frogs.
The movement of Kapha Nadi is like that of pigeons, 
peacocks, swans and cocks.
The movement of the pulse becomes crooked in the case 
of excess of Vatha; rapid in the case of excess of Pitta; heavy 
in the case of excess of Kapha; and mixed in the case of 
mixed Doshas.
The movement of the pulse becomes crooked like that of 
snake, leech and scorpion in the case of excess of Vatha. The 
movement is like that of the crow, the Lava and the frog in 
the case of excess of Pitta. The movement of the pulse is like 
that of gander, the peacock, the pigeon, the dove and the 
cock in the case of excess of Kapha.
In the case of excess of both Vatha and Pitta the 
movement of the pulse is like that of the snake and that of 
the frog at frequent intervals.
The movement of the pulse is like that of the movement 
of the snake and the gander in the case of excess of Vatha and 
Kapha.
90
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

The movement of the pulse is like that of the movement 
of the frog and the peacock in the case of excess of Pitta and 
Kapha.
The pulse due to the excess of the three Doshas moves 
just like the snake, the Lava and the gander.
Low Pulse
In serious Sannipata the pulse sometimes beats slowly, 
sometimes loosely, sometimes beats and sometimes does not, 
sometimes becomes throaty. A pulse of this type cannot be 
restored to its normal condition.
When the pulse is cold but the body is warm, again when 
the pulse is warm but the body cold, and when the pulse has 
various movements, the patient must die.
Sometimes the pulse stops on account of swoon, fear, 
sorrow, the carrying of heavy loads, a fall from a high place, 
purgation, and loss of semen due to excessive copulation. 
This does not indicate death, because the pulse beats again 
after some time.
If anyone fasts, if a healthy man has sexual intercourse, 
his pulse becomes weak and rapid.
In pregnancy the pulse becomes weak and moves slowly.
Pulse and Diet
The pulse of a man who has taken sweet things moves like 
a peacock or frog, that of the man who has taken bitter things 
moves like an earth-worm, that of the man who has taken 
sour things becomes hot and jumps like a frog, that of the 
man who has taken pungent things moves like a Vringa bird, 
that of the man who has taken astringent things becomes 
hard and dejected, that of the man who has taken saline 
things becomes straight and rapid.
The taking of white pumpkin (Kushmanda or Petha) and 
Munakka makes the pulse heavy; milk makes it cool and 
steady; meat makes it slow and rigid; greens and plantains
NADI VIJNANA
91

make it full; jaggery and oils make it slow and strong; roots 
make it slow; dried things make it slow and heavy; bitter 
things make it dull; saline things make it straight and light; 
hot things make it hard and dry; sour things make it cool; 
solid things make it tender; liquid things make it hard.
Pulse in Allopathy
Allopathy also recognises the theory of pulse and its 
efficacy in determining the nature of the disease and its cure. 
Allopathy, too, has realised its usefulness and nowadays 
examination of the pulse is given the proper place in the 
treatment of diseases.
Definition
At each heart-beat four to six ounces of blood are sent 
into the aorta. A fluid wave distends the arteries as it passes 
and is transmitted along the arteries all over the body. This 
fluid wave is called pulse. The physician has in the wave a 
valuable means of studying both the state of the artery as 
regards elasticity and the heart action.
Pulse is the expansion and contraction of the artery 
caused by the blood which is being pumped into it by the 
heart.
Pulse-Rate
The pulse-rate is usually about 72 per minute but it may 
vary in health from 50 to 100. It is quicker in children and 
slower in old age than in middle life.
In a newborn infant the pulse-rate is 140 per minute, and, 
twelve months old 120, and in a child about 100. In old age, 
the pulse becomes slower than 60.
In childhood and youth, the wall of the artery is very thin. 
In old age and in some degenerative process, the vessel wall 
becomes so thick that it may be felt like a piece of whip cord 
rolling beneath the finger. This gives the valuable 
information to the physician as to the existence of Bright’s 
diseases, the liability to apoplexy, etc.
92
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

The size of the column felt also gives information. After 
great muscular exertion or when the heart is beating strongly, 
the vessels of the limbs are full and the pulse is large. In the 
case of internal inflammation the vessels of the limbs are 
empty. The pulse is thin and wiry.
Pulse and Diseases
Different types of heart diseases have special features of 
the pulse. In auricular fibrillation the general character is 
irregularity.
In cases where the aortic valve is incompetent, the pulse 
has the peculiarity of rising very quickly and collapsing 
suddenly (water-hammer pulse).
In fevers a dicrotic pulse indicates considerable nervous 
prostration in which the heart continues to beat violently, 
while the small blood vessels have lost their tone. Dicrotic 
pulse is one in which two impulses are felt by the finger at 
each heart-beat.
Examination of Pulse
The examination of-the pulse gives you direct information 
regarding the condition of the walls of the arteries and the 
amount and variation of pressure of the contained blood. By 
careful and intelligent observation you can obtain very 
valuable information regarding the state of the heart and 
circulation, as well as the general state of the patient.
The patient should not make any effort or strain before 
the examination of the pulse.
Feel the rate of the pulse, its rhythm of puke 
(irregularity, inequality), size of the artery (calibre), 
condition of the vessel wall, volume, amount of movement 
during a pulse-wave, the blood pressure in the artery during 
the systolic beat, the blood-pressure between the beats 
(tension), the form of the individual pulse wave (rise, 
maintenance and fall of pressure).
The successive beats of the pulse may recur at equal or
NADI VIJNANA
93

unequal intervals giving a regular or irregular rhythm. There 
may be an occasional intermission in the pulse. The 
intermission may recur, as in pulses bigeminus after two 
beats. The individual beats may be irregular in their 
time-relation to each other. They may be unequal in volume 
too.
A small instrument known as “sphygmograph” has been 
devised to register the waves.
Abnormal Pulses
A rapid pulse is one over 100. A running pulse is very 
quick. The beats are difficult to distinguish. They appear to 
run into each other. The pulse cannot be counted (as in 
Tachycardia).
A slow pulse is one below 60 (as in Bradycardia). 
Napoleon had Bradycardia.
A low volume, low tension, thready pulse - denotes a low 
blood-pressure. It may be due to loss of blood as in 
bleeding.
In failure of heart the pulse is small and easily 
compressible.
Abounding pulse is of full volume; difficult to compress. 
It is seen in cases of high blood-pressure and apoplexy.
A high tension pulse occurs in some cases of high 
blood-pressure, 
when 
the 
arteries 
have 
undergone 
calcareous degeneration, as in arterio-sclerosis.
An irregular pulse is one in which the intervals between 
the pulse beats vary in length. Sometimes the beats seem 
to run together quickly; at other' times the intervals are 
long and the pulse appears slow.
An intermittent pulse is one in which some of the. beats 
are missed.
A dicrotic pulse is one in which two expansions of the
94
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

artery can be felt instead of one. The second is like an 
echo of the first true wave of expansion. Every heart beat 
is counted twice. The true pulse wave is easily recognisable. 
The second wave is of smaller volume than the first.
Corrigan’s 
pulse 
is 
one 
which 
characterises 
incompetence of the aortic valve. The pulse is felt but it 
immediately recedes as the blood regurgitates into the left 
ventricle. It is also described as a collapsing pulse and a 
water-hammer pulse.
NADI VIJNANA
95

Chapter X
INDIAN SURGERY
That our ancients had a thorough knowledge of the body 
and its functions, called Sareera Sastra, is revealed by the 
various references in the Vedas. There is a detailed account 
in the Atharvana Veda of Asthipanjara (osteology). Chapter 7 
of Charaka and chapters 4 to 6, 7 and 9 of Sushruta deal in 
detail 
with 
Sareera-sthana 
and 
Sareera-astharanam 
(Anatou\y and Physiology). In the Vedic age the physician is 
distinguished from the surgeon. The latter belongs to the 
Dhanvantari school. Surgeons again were of two classes. 
Shalya Tantrajnas (major surgeons) and — Salakya Tantrajnas 
(minor surgeons) and they deal respectively with surgery 
above the neck, and surgery in other parts of the body, cavity, 
etc. What Dhanvantari taught was brought to perfection by 
Sushruta. Reference to operation in the abdomen to set right 
deceased intestines are not wanting. An army of skilled 
doctors and surgeons with necessary appliances were at hand 
in the Mahabharata Yuddha. Mahavarga tells us that 
Jeevaka, the personal physician of Buddha practised cranio 
surgery with success. Bhojaprabandha tells us of a cranio 
operation on Bhoja under anaesthetics. Rigveda mentions 
Yajna Sirassandhana (attaching a severed head to the trunk 
by surgery): and replacement of vispola’s by an iron one (by 
means of amputation and artificial limb); and the substitution 
of an eye-ball with that of an animal. As late as 9th century
A.D. Westerners learnt intricate surgery from the Ayurvedic 
surgeons.
There are several chapters in Sushruta which will be 
revelation to those who little realised the surgical side ol 
Ayurveda.
Sushruta has been translated into Latin by Hustler. There
96
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

is a German version of it by Mueller. These clearly indicate 
that Ayurveda commanded a very high respect in the West.
Pythagorus, the Greek physician was indebted to 
Sushruta for his knowledge of surgery.
Shalya or surgery is one of the eight sections of Ayurveda. 
It occupies the first place in the work of Sushruta.
Charaka, Atreya, Harita, Agnivesha were more physicians 
than 
surgeons. 
Dhanvantari, 
Sushruta, 
Aupadihenava, 
Aurabhra, 
Pushkalavata 
were 
rather 
surgeons 
than 
physicians.
Indian surgeons of yore used one hundred and twenty- 
five surgical instruments for ophthalmic, obstetric and other 
operations.
They were doing Rhinoplasty. They were experts in 
forming new ears and noses. In cases of broken legs the 
surgeons used to substitute ‘iron legs’, Ayasa-Jangha (Vide 
Rig-Veda 1-116, 153) and to furnish artificial eyes in places of 
those plucked out (Rig-Veda 1-115-16).
Arrows lodged in the bodies of the warriors were 
dexterously extracted, and their wounds promptly dressed by 
the army surgeons.
The Ashwins have given new teeth to Poosha, new eyes to 
Bhagdeva. The Indian surgeons did skin grafting and cataract 
operations also. They were also experts in performing 
amputations and abdominal section. They could set fractures 
and dislocations in men and beasts, reduce hernia and extract 
foreign-bodies.
Inoculation for small-pox was also done by them.
They used to practise the dissection of the human body 
and taught it to their disciples. They knew human anatomy 
and physiology.
Sushruta gives very minute directions to be observed in 
the performance of surgical operations. He clearly describes
INDIAN SURGERY
97

the method of opening abscesses, treating inflammations, 
tumour, fistulae, and of applying blisters, cautery, etc.
He classifies surgical operations into Aharya (extracting 
solid bodies), Bhedya (excising), Chhedya (incising), Eshya 
(probing), Lekhya Vedhya (puncturing) and Visravaniya 
(evacuating fluids).
There are 105 Yantras (appliances) and 20 Shastras 
(instruments).
The Yantras are divided into 6 kinds: Svastikas (pincers 
or forceps) 24 forms, Sandashas (tongs of two kinds), Talas of 
two kinds; Nadis (tubulas) instruments like catheters of 20 
varieties; Shalakas (bougies) of 30 sorts; Upayantras 
(dressings Sutures, 26 in number). Hand also is the most 
indispensable implement.
The Shastras are Ardhadhara, Atimukha, Ara, Badisha, 
Dantasanku, 
Eshni, 
Karapatra, 
Kartirika, 
Kritharika, 
Kushpatra, Mandalagra, Mudrika, Nakhasashtra, Sharari- 
mukha, Suchi, Trikurchaka, Utpalapatraka, Vriddhipatra, 
Vrihimukha and Vetaspatra.
The names of the Yantras are Anguli Yantra, Bhasti 
Yantra (syringe), Jalodara Yantra, Kakamukha Yantra, 
Garbha Sankhi Yantra, Simhamukha Yantra, Vyaghramukha 
Yantra, Shanku Yantra, Tala Yantra, etc.
The surgical operations are performed on auspicious 
days. The patient sits with his face to the east. The surgeon 
offers a prayer to the Lord for the speedy recovery of the 
patient as soon as the operation is over.
In serious surgical operations patients were made 
insensible by administration of anaesthetics.
Indian surgeons used caustic cautery.
The students practised incision on fruits. They practised 
vivisection on the vessels of dead animals. They did 
catheterisation.
98
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Turning to midwifery every stage of the felns, from the 
formozan and ovary gland is described in detail in 
Bholasamhita with an extraordinary treatise on possibility 
of changing the sex of the child in the womb, etc.
The precautions for the delivery, the expedients and 
surgical skill in cases of hard labour, still birth, and cranio 
operation are all well described. Bhagavatam recites the 
instances of Vasishtha cutting the womb of a pregnant 
woman with Kusa Sastra to save the child and mother from 
a 
collapse. 
Chanakya’s 
Artha 
Sastra 
deals 
with 
post-mortem. The circulatory system and function of the 
heart are there in Charaka (i.e., even before 5th century 
B.C.). The Chola kings opened many maternity centres.
Yajurveda deals with the four cavities of the heart; and 
Dr. Constan’s ancient medical science refers to Jeevaka’s 
diagnosis of the internal organs, and bone fractures with 
the aid of herbs in place of the modern X-ray. 
Garbhopanishad deals with respiration. The practice of 
surgery and incisions with the aid of a Pushpapala, etc., 
objects in the first instance was in vogue.
As for surgical instruments the exhibits in the museums 
in Naples and Athens are there in proof of their existence 
in Ayurveda.
“They (the ancient surgeons) performed abdominal 
section, practised cranial surgery successfully, and no region 
of the body was thought sacred to the knife. Field surgery 
was thoroughly understood... They were acquainted with 
the circulation of the blood, the distinction between the 
artery and vein, the use of anaesthetics, the means of 
arresting haemorrhage and the proper treatment of surgical 
wounds.”
Dissection by medical students was insisted upon and 
practiced during this time. Nagarjuna, Buddhist priest
INDIAN SURGERY
99

belonging to a much later date is not only known to have 
‘improved upon and supplemented’ Sushruta’s great work 
on surgery, but he is also reputed to have been a great 
surgeon of his time.
The founding of hospitals all over the country was a 
unique 
feature 
of the 
Buddhist 
period 
and 
these 
institutions were also known to have provided for surgical 
treatments. Vagbhata, who is considered to have been a 
Buddhist, included surgery and surgical instruments in his 
famous work—Ashtanga Hridaya.
100
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chapter XI
NIDANA
(Diagnosis)
The literature of Indian Medicine is vast and copious. 
This science is admitted by all to be of great antiquity. It 
contains a mine of information. It discloses the gems of many 
marvellous discoveries in the realm of medicine.
In Ayurveda, diagnosis and treatment are based upon the 
Tridhatu (Tridosha) theory. The Tridosha theory is closely 
related to that of the Panchabhutas which are the causes for 
the universe.
Nidana is diagnosis. Chikitsa is treatment. Madhava has 
investigated at length the causes and symptoms of the largest 
number of diseases in all their varieties. Sushruta has 
devoted sixteen chapters treating the classification, causation 
and symptoms of diseases such as piles, erysipelas, abdominal 
tumours, abortion, urinary calculi, fistula, carbuncles, 
tumours, fractures, diseases of the mouth, male generative 
organ, etc.
Sarangadhara enumerates 80 principal diseases caused by 
wind, 40 by derangements by bile, 20 by abnormalities of 
phlegm and 10 by faulty conditions of blood.
Sushruta traces all diseases to one or other of the 
following seven causes: 1. Corrupt semen or ovum of the 
father and mother, respectively, causing leprosy, etc.; 
2. Indulgence in forbidden food by the mother during 
pregnancy, or the non-fulfilment of any of her desires during 
that condition causing blindness, etc., to the child; 3. The 
derangement of humours in the body causing fever, etc.; 4. 
Accidents by fall, snake-bite, etc., 5. Variations in the climate,
NIDANA
101

causing cold, etc.; 6. Superhuman agencies and 7. Natural 
such as hunger, etc.
Harita reduces the number to three and says that diseases 
are caused by Karma or by the derangement of the humours, 
or by both.
Karma is the unavoidable consequence of good or evil 
acts done in this or in a past existence. Misery and happiness 
in this life are the inevitable results of our conduct in a past 
life, and our actions here will determine our happiness or 
misery in the life to come. When any creature dies, he is born 
again in some higher or lower state of existence, according to 
his merit or demerit. So there are certain diseases which are 
supposed to be the fruits of evil deeds done in a former state 
of existence. Harita declares that a murderer of a Brahmin 
will suffer from anaemia, a cow-killer from leprosy, a regicide 
from consumption, and a murderer in general from 
diarrhoea. One committing adultery with his master’s wife 
will suffer from gonorrhoea, and the violator of his 
preceptor’s couch from retention of urine. A back-biter will 
suffer from asthma, a misleader from giddiness, a cheat from 
epilepsy, one who occasions or procures abortion from liver 
complaint, a drunkard from skin diseases, an incendiary from 
erysipelas, and one prying into another’s secrets will lose the 
sight of one eye. Diseases caused by Karma may be cured by 
propitiatory rites, expiating ceremonies, and tranquillising 
efforts. If the rites do not cure the diseases, the patients have 
the assurance that they will at least check the further 
progress of the maladies in the life to come.
The art of diagnosis is the most difficult task. It is most 
important too. According to Ayurveda various factors such as 
the face of the patient, his temperament, his eye, tongue, 
skin, pulse, voice, urine and faeces, etc., should be 
considered.
In diagnosing a disease, the Hindu physicians have been
102
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

guided by physical signs afforded by inspection, palpation, 
percussion, auscultation, defaction and degustation.
Palpation, percussion and auscultation are not altogether 
modern. They are referred to in the works of Charaka. 
Atreya, in his interesting dialogue with his favourite disciple 
Harita, speaks with even more precision on the subject.
The examination of the pulse is considered the most 
important of all. It furnishes the best criterion of the 
phenomena and progress of disease and it is the one usually 
depended upon by the Ayurvedic physicians.
In order to know the precise character of the pulse, the 
radial artery at the wrist is usually chosen. In case of a male 
patient, his right pulse is generally felt and in the case of a 
female, the left. In feeling the pulse the physician is to note 
its compressibility, frequency, regularity, size and the 
different impressions it produces on the fingers. If it feels 
like the creeping of a serpent or a leech, wind is supposed to 
be predominant. If it be jumping like a frog, or similar to the 
flight of a crow or sparrow, it indicates the predominance of 
bile. When it strikes the finger slowly and resembles the 
strutting of peacock, it shows that the phlegm is in excess. 
The pulse that suggests the running of a partridge is called 
delirium pulse. An irregular pulse indicates delirium 
tremens, and a pulse which is almost imperceptible, 
depressed, irregular and extremely languid, is a precursor of 
death. Pulsations in one suffering from fever or amorous 
passions are quick, and in a healthy man they are of a 
medium and perfectly regular. The capriciousness of the 
pulse produces other modifications very curiously described. 
It is interesting to note the similarity between this description 
of the pulse as found in the ancient Sanskrit treatises, and the 
doctrine of the pulse taught by the famous physician Galen, 
“who is the greatest and the best authority in Europe on the 
subject. For all subsequent writers have simply transferred 
his teaching on this subject boldly to their own works.” Galen
NIDANA
103

speaks of the pulsus myurus (sharp-tailed pulse, so called as it 
sinks progressively and becomes smaller and smaller, like a 
mouse’s tail); pulse dorecatisans (goat-leap pulse, as it seems 
to leap like a goat); pulsus fluctuscus (undulating), etc. This 
would suggest that Galen derived his knowledge on the 
subject from the works of Indian writers.
The methods prescribed for the examination of a patient 
in Ayurveda are: l: Darshana (seeing), 2. Sparshana (touch) 
and 3. Prashna (questioning).
Sushruta stresses upon the thorough examination with the 
aid of the physician’s five organs and questioning i.e., seeing, 
hearing, 
touching, 
tasting, 
smelling 
and 
detailed 
interrogations.
The Pancha Nidana in its broad sense implies fivefold 
means of diagnosis. They are (1) Nidana, (2) Purva Rupa, (3) 
Rupa, (4) Upashaya and (5) Sampraapti.
Etiology (cause) is Nidana. Purva Rupa is premonitory 
symptoms such as headache, pain, indisposition which 
manifest before the derangement of the system. Rupa is 
disease in its full stage (symptomatology). Upashaya is 
therapeutic test. It is deducing the nature of the disease from 
therapeutical measures. Pathological change is Sampraapti. 
The disease is studied logically. Pathology is Sampraapti.
Nidana
The investigation of the root-cause of diseases (whether it 
is bad food, bad water, indulgence, excesses, etc.) is Nidana. 
This will give you the clue to diagnosis and prognosis. One 
Nidana may possibly be to the root of more than one disease. 
Nidana alone cannot help you to diagnose diseases.
Nidana is divided into four kinds, viz., (1) Sannikrishta 
Nidana (immediate cause), (2) Viprakrishta (the remote 
cause), (3) Vyabhichari and (4) Pradhana. Vyabhichari may 
or may not cause a disease according to the circumstances 
but Pradhana will certainly cause the disease. Vague
104
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

symptoms become very prominent while the disease actually 
manifests in full force. This stage enables the physician to nip 
the malady in its bud or shorten its course or mitigate its 
virulence. Purva Rupa consists of the premonitory symptoms 
or the prodromata.
The vague symptoms consist of dull aching pain, general 
malaises, heaviness in the head, loss of appetite, lassitude, 
etc. These are seen in the incubation period of various 
diseases and in diseases which have a slow and gradual onset.
Purva Rupa gives the physician some clue to prognosis. It 
helps him to correlate particular derangement of the Doshas 
with particular group of prodromata.
Rupas
(Symptomatology)
This includes the signs and symptoms of the disease. It 
provides the means for clinical diagnosis. The physician will 
be able to find out whether he has to deal with morbidity of 
one Dosha, two Doshas or all the three Doshas. He will also 
be able to find out whether the disease is an effection of 
Rasa, Rakta, Mamsa, Asthi or any other Dhatus.
Upashaya 
(Therapeutic test)
This is diagnosis by experimental treatment. A doubt 
arises whether a particular disease is due to the derangement 
of Vatha or not. The physician prescribes a diet, exercise or 
any other remedial measure known to cure this suspected 
derangement. If the disease is ameliorated, then the 
hypothetical proposition is confirmed. If not, it is rejected. If 
the fever yields to Antimony it is Kala Azar; if it does not it is 
not so.
Upashaya is a trial treatment in any confounding disease. 
It is a guess work. This treatment is conveyed through 
(1) medicines (Bheshaja), (2) food (Anna) and (3) Vihaara 
(air, sleep, cold, sun, etc., general care).
NIDANA
105

Sampraapti
(Pathology)
Sampraapti is that which reveals the internal action of the 
Doshas when they are in the act of producing a disease.
Diseases caused by intrinsic causes show the effects at 
once. Doshas get vitiated and produce the diseases. These 
are judged under the following heads (1) stagnation of the 
Doshas (Sanchayam), (2) exciting of the stagnated Doshas 
(Prakopa), (3) migration of the excited Doshas to the seat of 
disease (Prasaram), (4) location of these Doshas there 
(Punarupam), (5) specific feature of the affection is noted 
(Vyakti) and (6) the final stage of the disease, either causing 
death or becoming chronic or Bhedam.
The Ashtasthana Pariksha comes under the examination 
of the Rupam combined with Sampraapti, Nadi (pulse), 
Mootra (urine), Sabda (voice), Sparsha (touch), Roopa (face 
and body), and Netra (eyes) are the eight Sthanams to be 
examined.
The Til oil test will help the physician in deciding the 
curability or the incurability of the disease. The figures that 
are formed when a drop of oil is placed in the urine and the 
direction in which the drop of oil extends first are the guiding 
factors for this test.
The diseases can be very minutely examined and 
diagnosed with the help of all these methods individually and 
collectively.
There are some important symptoms specially termed as 
Upadrava and Arishta to ascertain the curability, incurability 
and the dangerous nature of a disease. With the help of these 
the Ayurvedic physician draws definite and positive 
conclusions.
106
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chapter XII
AYURVEDIC CHIKITSA
(Treatment)
The treatment of diseases caused by humours or Doshas 
forms part of Chikitsa or the therapeutic branch of Hindu 
Medical Science.
The principles of Ayurvedic treatment consist in 
removing the injurious agent, soothing the injured body and 
mind and eradicating the cause.
Treatment is twofold: (1) Dravyakritam, (2) Adravya- 
kritam. The former is done with the aid of materials, i.e., 
drugs, food, etc. Adravyakritam is that which is done without 
the aid of these. Vihaara, Upavasa (fasting) are the agents 
here. Naturopathy comes under this.
In Ayurveda great importance is given upon the study of 
the various stages of vitiation of Doshas.
Daiva Vyapaasraya, Yukti Vyapaasraya, Sattwa Vyapa- 
asraya are the three divisions of treatment. Daiva Vyapa­
asraya is the method of treating diseases through worship of 
gods, through offerings to God, chanting hymns and Mantras. 
This relates to the spiritual branch of science.
Yukti Vyapaasraya
This depends upon reasoning out the causes of diseases 
and on devising suitable ways and means for its cure. It deals 
with appropriate administration of food and medicines and 
other combinations.
The various treatments administered for the various 
diseases result in either improving the flesh and bone or 
decreasing the fat and the undigested and unuseful 
substances. They come under Brimhanam or Langhanam.
aYu r v e d ic  ch ik itsa
107

Langhanam is 
divided 
into 
(1) 
Shodhanam and 
(2) Shamanam. They are divided into five and seven varieties 
respectively.
Shodhanam is the process of elimination of foreign 
matters and accumulations which are dangerous to the body 
through the mouth, anus, nose, etc.
Shamanam (soothing process) is to absorb and bring the 
disturbances into a calm condition without their expulsion.
Sattwa Vyapaasraya means control of mind. It is the 
psychological branch of treatment.
Pancha Karmas
In Shodhanam the five Karmas are (1) Vamanam, 
(2) Virechanam, (3) Vasti, (4) Anuvaasana and (5) Nasya.
Shamanam
The seven factors of Shamanam are (1) Deepanam,
(2) Paachanam, (3) Kshut, (4) Trishna, (5) Vyaayaama, 
(6) Aatapa (sun bath) and (7) Maaruta (air bath).
Shodhanam is intended where the disease is superfluous 
and the patient is able to withstand the strain of the same.
Before proceeding to Shodhanam, Sneha (lubrication and 
massage) and Sweda (sweating) should be practised. These 
regulate the circulation of blood and produce a healthy 
recuperation of the tissues of the body. The Malas 
(impurities) come into a position easy to be eliminated. '
Vamanam (vomiting) must be practised in the aggravated 
state of Kapha, Virechanam (purgation) in that of Pitta and 
Vasti (enema) in that of Vatha.
Vomiting, 
purging, 
enema, 
Nasya 
(nasal 
purge), 
Siro-virechana blood-letting (Rakta Mokshana) are the 
Pancha Karmas or operations.
Nasya is the method of administering medicated oils, 
powders, etc., through the nose. This is very beneficial in
108
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

diseases of the ear, nose, eyes, brain, etc. In Tetanus, Nasya 
Karma is highly recommended.
The Six Upakarmas
They are 1. Brimhanam (promoting growth), 2. Langha- 
nam (fasting, effecting reduction), 3. Snehanam (lubrication)
4. Rookshanam (removing fat or drying), 5. Swedanam 
(promoting sweating) and 6. Sthambhanam (promoting 
contraction of all channels).
Shamana Karmas
They are soothing processes. They are eight in number: 
1. Restraining thirst (Trishna Nigraha), 2. Exposure to air 
(Maruta or air bath), 3. Exposure to sun (Aatapa or 
sun-bath), 
4. 
Administering 
carminatives 
(Deepana),
5. Administering digestives 
(Paachana), 6. 
Starvation 
(Upavasa), 
7. 
Physical 
exercise 
(Vyaayaama) 
and
8. Unmardanam (hard massage).
Gargling 
(Gandusha), 
fumigation 
and 
smoking 
(Dhumrapana), 
collyrium (Anjana), 
caustics 
(Kshara), 
scorching (Agni Karma) are aids to these methods.
Treatment by Drugs
Brahmi is the best drug in epilepsy (Apasmara), goat’s 
milk is highly beneficial in consumption, fresh ginger is 
very useful in slow digestion, Goksheera is very useful in 
Mootra Krischhra (painful urination). Shilajit is the best 
medicine in diseases of the bladder, iron oxide is best in 
anaemia (Pandu), Triphala is the best drug in diseases of 
the eye, buttermilk is the best medicine in chronic 
diarrhoea (Grahani), Pippali is the best drug in diseases of 
the spleen, Guggulu is the best drug in rheumatism and 
lumbago, Vidanga is the best drug for worms.
Poisons and Their Antidotes
The treatment of poisons and their antidotes come 
under the head of Kalpa.
AYURVEDIC CHIKITSA
109

Datura, arsenic, etc., are Sthavara poisons. They are 
cured by emetics, 
purgatives, 
errhines, 
collyria and 
antiphilogistic treatment.
Jangama poisons include venoms of insects, scorpions, 
spiders, lizards, serpents, etc.
Ayurveda did not ignore that blood also is a chief agent 
in causing diseases. In such cases special care to treat the 
condition of blood is chiefly recommended.
110
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chapter XIII
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
The ancient Hindus made tremendous progress in the 
science of Materia Medica. The Materia Medica of India is 
very voluminous.
India is a vast and fertile country. It contains abundant 
herbs or medicinal plants. The ancient Ayurvedic physicians 
examined and studied all the herbs that came under their 
observation and classified them into groups or Ganas. 
Charaka gives 50 groups of ten herbs each. Sushruta has 
arranged 760 herbs in 37 sets according to some common 
properties. They have also described the proper seasons for 
gathering the herbs, the period of their growth, when they 
possess their distinctive properties, the localities from where 
they should be collected and the way of treating them, 
extracting their active principles and preserving them.
Agnivesha, a disciple of Charaka enumerates 500 classes 
of medicinal agents. They are arranged according to their 
virtues in curing diseases. The chief notable feature in 
connection with the nomenclature of the Indian plants is that 
their names are descriptive either of their character or 
property.
Charaka Samhita and Sushruta’s Ayurveda are the oldest 
and most reputed books on Hindu medicine. Charaka is 
older than Sushruta.
Atreya, son of Atri Rishi, taught the holy Ayurveda to six 
students, namely, Agnivesa, Bhela, Jatukarna, Parasara, 
Harita and Kharapani. Agnivesa first wrote a treatise on 
medicine. It was edited and corrected by Charaka. Vagbhata 
wrote Ashtanga Hridaya. Sushruta was written in Banaras.
Ashtanga Hridaya Samhita was compiled by Simha Gupta
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
111

Sena Vagbhata. It is a mere compilation from Charaka and 
Sushruta methodically arranged.
The Materia Medica of the Hindus is a marvel to the 
modern investigator. The properties of drugs belonging to 
the animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms and of the 
articles of food essential to the maintenance of health, 
strength and vitality are fully described here. .The theory 
which forms the basis of the investigation is that every 
substance, whether animal, vegetable or mineral, possesses 
five properties namely Rasa, Guna, Veerya, Vipaka and 
Prabhava.
Charakacharya says, “the best medicine is one which 
cures a disease and the best physician is one who relieves the 
suffering of a patient. The best medicine for people living in 
any particular country is the one that grows in that country.”
Though Ayurvedic system of medicine is slow in giving 
relief to the patients, it is ultimately sure in its results. It 
never produces 
those 
after 
disturbances which 
the 
administration of violent, foreign drugs effects in the 
debilitated system of patients.
Bhava Misra, son of Lataka Misra, has written a book on 
medicinal herbs.
Sushruta says that the physician should go to the jungles 
and gather the herbs when they are in flowers. They should 
avoid those injured by insects.
Dhanvantari Nighantu is much the same as followed by 
Charaka. It is an old treatise. Some ascribe the authorship to 
Dhanvantari, the father of Indian Medicine
Raja Madanapala wrote, “Madana-Vinoda”. He increased 
the list of Indian herbs such as pellitory, gambier, etc.
Narahari, a learned physician of Kashmere wrote an 
excellent work called “Raja Nighantu”.
Shodhala who came after Narahari wrote a book on 
Materia Medica. He was a Gujarati Brahmin. His work is
112
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

chiefly based on Dhanvantari Nighantu. He has added 80 
drugs.
All parts of medicinal plants may be used. Root, as of 
Chitraka; underground stem as of Surana; leaves as of 
Vasaka; fruits as the three Myrobalams; flowers as of 
Dhataki; extract, as catechu, opium; bark as of Kurchi, 
Ashoka; wood as of sandal; gum as Myrrh, Asafoetida. 
Sometimes the entire plant is used as Rantakari.
The Nighantu adopts the following classification: 
1. Strongly scented substances, 2. Moderately scented 
substances, 3. Weak scented substances, 4. Extracts, 5. Sweet 
plants, 6. Acid plants, 7. Bitter herbs, 8. Flower plants,
9. Fruit bearing creepers, 10. Small shrubs, 11. Creepers, etc.
Material objects have six tastes, 20 sorts of qualities, and 
two forces. The six tastes are sweet, acid, salt, bitter, pungent 
and astringent. The twenty qualities of objects are: Heavy, 
light, soft, dull, oily, consistent, watery, hot, fixed, sharp, 
tremulous, delicate, demulcent, smooth, harsh, transparent, 
hard, pungent, coarse and cold. The two forces are heating 
and cooling.
The virtues of the Indian medicinal plants were known in 
other countries also. Hippocrates in his Materia Medica 
recommends several Indian plants such as Jatamansi, 
Kunduru, ginger, black pepper etc. Dioskorides, a Greek 
physician investigated the medicinal virtues of many Indian 
plants which were then taken to the market of Europe and 
incorporated them in his book on Materia Medica.
The Indian Medicinal Herbs
The central fact of Indian Culture is its conception of the 
spiritual Ideal. Its core and essence is the fundamental belief 
that the attainment of perfection is the sole purpose of man’s 
life. Thus the worth and value of all the other parts and 
aspects of our life is estimated and equated in terms of their 
utility in serving this central. Ideal. The value of human birth
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
113

and body was accepted because man’s body was recognised 
as the supreme instrument through which to strive for 
reaching life’s great consummation. The ancient seers, the 
Rishis of wisdom, therefore, spared no pains in carefully 
evolving a great system of Medicine to help to keep this 
precious instrument, i.e., the human body, in perfect trim. 
The maintenance of the body in proper disease-free 
condition and perfect health was a sacred duty of man, for it 
constituted the primary means of all attainments because, 
“Health is the supreme Good of attainment of the Good 
Life, of all wealth, fulfilment of cherished desires and 
ultimate Liberation”. The intuitive sages of India were in full 
awareness of this important fact, for, notwithstanding their 
lofty idealism, they had the admirable faculty to be intensely 
practical and thorough.
The Indian seers in the past have devoted special 
attention to the study of health, disease and therapeutics. 
They have looked upon Ayurveda or the Science of Life as 
another Veda.
Ayurveda believes in treatment by herbs, which form its 
mainstay. rrhe greater part of the treatment of Ayurvedic 
practitioner is by medicinal herbs. How very minute and how 
thoroughly scientific their study of the herbs and their 
characteristics are amply evidenced by the scholarly treatises 
of these ancient scientists in which subjects they have given 
us the results of their admirable researches.
Besides this evidence, the very fact of these herbal 
medicines continuing to be widely used with remarkable 
success, even up to this day, by quite modern Ayurvedic 
medicinal practitioners all over India, is a patent proof 
beyond any doubt about the high and enduring merits of this 
system of therapeutics.
The high development and specialisation of herbal 
medication in this country has been a direct outcome of the 
fact that due to her vastness and fertility India has the unique
114
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

advantage of possessing a wide 
range 
of climatic 
geographical and geological conditions wherein came to 
flourish an infinite variety of numerous, rare and precious 
herbs. The ancient seer-scientists were ardent lovers of scope 
for close observation of the rich herbal wealth of the 
vegetable kingdom. Theirs has been a critical examination 
and study of almost all the important medicinal herbs. Thus a 
good deal of literature, deeply interesting and greatly 
informative, came into being on this branch of knowledge. 
One of the greatest authorities upon this subject is the 
illustrious author Charaka whose invaluable work, the 
“Charaka-Samhita” is still accepted as the standard classical 
work on Medicine. It forms by far the most exhaustive 
treatise, and in it Maharshi Charaka gives nearly fifty 
different groups of medicinal herbs; naming ten herbs under 
each group. These fifty groups or Ganas, he considers as 
being quite sufficient for the purpose of the average medical 
practitioner. Another great authority, the able author 
Sushruta, who is ranked equal with Charaka, has mentioned 
about 760 herbs which he has divided into thirty-seven Ganas 
or groups in accordance with certain common characteristics. 
His masterly work was translated into Arabic as early as 
twenty centuries ago somewhere about 800 A.D. Later, 
translations into Latin and German also appeared. Charaka’s 
works too were translated into Arabic and references are 
made in several Latin works of eminent Western physicians.
The grouping of these medicines by these writers reveal 
an astonishing knowledge, of pathology and disease 
therapeutics, of the savants of so ancient a period. In the 
wide range of these grouping are included Anaesthetic, 
Anecbolic, Anthelmintic, Anemetic, Anodyne, Antibromic, 
Anti-colic, 
Anti-fat, 
Antasthmatic, 
Anticholeric, 
Anti­
scorbutic, Antihypnotic, Anuretic, Antipyretic, Antipsoric, 
Anti-Phlegmagogue, Antispasmodic, Astringent, Aphro­
disiac, 
Antitoxic, 
Cathartic, 
Calmative, 
Cholagoue,
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
115

Carminative, 
Constringent, 
Cosmetic, 
Demulcent, 
Diaphoretic, Diuretic, Emetic, Drastic, Emmenagogue, 
Epispastic, Expectorant, Epulotic, Frigorific, Fat-producer, 
Flatus-Producer, Fat-former, Galactagogue, Haemostatic, 
Hypnotic, Hydragogue, Inerbrient, Liquefacient, Lithonlytic, 
Laxative, Parturifacient, Phlegmagogue, Purgative, Reju- 
venascent, Refrigerant, Rubifacient, Restorative, Sialagogue, 
Sedative, Semen-improver, Styptic, Tonic, Vermiparous, 
Stomachic, Spermatopoietic, Voice-improver, etc. A disciple 
of the great Charaka, Agnivesha by name enumerates many 
more classes of medicines besides those mentioned above. 
The “Bhava-Prakasha” of Bhava Misra (another important 
writer on medicinal herbs) further adds certain valuable 
medicines. New light is thrown upon a number of these 
medicines in the “Aatankatimirabhaskara” a comparatively 
recent work of considerable size by some Ayurveda Acharya 
belonging to the eighteenth century. An even most recent 
author Pandit Godbole has published in the later half of last 
century his “Nighanturatnakara” epitomising all the previous 
works on Materia Medica with nearly fifty new herbs added, 
as the result of fresh research.
The high potency and curative value of the Indian 
medicinal herbs have, for long been well-recognised in 
countries outside India. Even so, far back as previous to the 
Christian Era, ancients like Hippocrates recommended 
Indian herbs in their medical treatises. The Greek physician 
Dioskorides, (100 A.D.) speaks well of the numerous Indian 
plants, the medicinal virtues of which he had thoroughly 
investigated before incorporating them into his famous 
Materia Medica. Later on, the physicians who came in the 
train of the Mohammedan conquerors were quick to perceive 
the great potency and worth of the Indian medicines, and 
began to make use of them without hesitation. Mohammed 
Akbar Arzani, the Court Physician of Emperor Aurangazeb, 
and Nuruddin Mohammed Abdulla Shirazee, the personal
116
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Hakeem to the great Shah Jehan have both included 
numerous efficacious medicines from the Ayurveda Materia 
Medica into their famous works on medicine. And a glance at 
•the Allopathy’s Pharmacopoeia’ today will be enough proof 
that the Indian herb has fully lived up to its reputation as 
potent healers.
There is a special reason why medicinal herbs constitute 
the most invaluable sovereign remedy for every ailment. It is 
because they contain in them the ‘curative element’ in its 
most vital, potent, and withal, easiest state. This is brdught 
about by the following factors: The herbs are God-sent 
apparatuses endowed with the unique capacity of converting 
valuable inorganic earth-salts, chemicals and minerals into 
organic 
substances 
eminently 
suitable 
for 
complete 
absorption into the human system. The cells in the human 
body are vital tissues. Chemical drugs are inert matter. They 
are never fully absorbed into the human system and fail to go 
to the root of the trouble and effect a radical cure. In herbs 
we have vital substances that actually get absorbed into the 
very core of our tissues. The essence of herb is the vital 
substance. These remedies go to the very root of the disease 
and remove it in toto as they are assimilated into the cell of 
the human system. They are also, in a way, of a predigested 
form because they come from the soil, specially energised by 
potent rays of the sun and the gases of the atmosphere. Thus, 
these herbal essences get purified and irradiated during the 
hours of daylight and, in addition, store up the healing 
potencies of the lunar rays. Further more the herb forms the 
medicine par excellence: it is informed by a life-principle 
drawn out of the power of the Panchabhutas or the five 
fundamental elements, i.e., earth, water, fire, air and ether. 
The physical frame of man is a combination of these five, and 
hence, the herbal extract is the nearest approach to the most 
ideal combination for administration. The secret of the 
marvellous and almost miraculous curative potencies of the
INDIAN MATERIA MEDIGA
117

herb, is the presence in them of a supra-terrestrial force, i.e., 
the solar energy. The Sun is the source of cosmic energy. It is 
the source of the mightiest healing power known to mankind. 
Hindu seers have regarded the Sun as Divine in nature. And 
the only substance known in nature that possesses the 
capacity of stock-piling solar energy in the form of a usable 
essence is the plant chlorophyll. Precisely, therefore, herbs 
are said to possess divine potency termed by Hindus as Divya 
Shakti.
The study of herbs is of absorbing interest. Their 
administration is also simple compared to the elaborate and 
complicated process of other pharmacopoeias. It is now an 
established fact that the science of herbal cure is not 
experimental. Its high merits and practical utility have long 
been put to severe tests by the Rishis and practitioners of the 
past whose researches and practical therapeutical findings 
have been minutely recorded for us in their illuminating 
treatises. Therein we find their minute study of the herbs, 
their characteristics, habitat, conditions for their healthy 
growth, their appearance, the time of highest, potency, etc. 
The proper season for gathering the herbs, the localities from 
which they should be collected and the right method of 
processing them, isolating the active principle and preserving 
it, are all accurately and scientifically detailed.
One noteworthy point in the naming of these Indian 
medicinal herbs is that in great many cases their very names 
are descriptive of the specific character of prominent 
appearance of the plant. This becomes an effective means for 
the easy identification of the particular herb. Thus, for 
instance, Acorus Calamus has the name Ugra-gandha 
(strong-odour); for it is characterised by a very pungent 
smell. The name Vatsa-nabhi (calf’s navel) describes the 
plant Aconitum Ferox because its root resembles the 
umbilical cord of a calf. Tribulus Terrestris is referred to by 
the significant name Trikantaka (three-horned) as its fruit
118
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

contains three prickles. Ricinus Communis goes by the naniv. 
Chitrabija (spotted seed) due to its seed being speckled by 
white or brown patches. Datura Alba is named Ghanta- 
pushpa (bell-flower) due to the shape of its flowers. The long 
and cylindrical podded Cassia Fistula gets the name 
Deergha-phala (long fruit) and the plant Sapindus Emargi- 
natus is called Bahuphena (very foamy) because its berries 
produce a rich soapy lather when rubbed and shaken with 
water.
A full study of all the herbal medicines is not a possibility 
in the columns of a magazine. Even a detailed consideration 
of the most important of the herbs does not come within the 
province of an article. Hence a few of the very prominent and 
widely used herbs are discussed here chiefly with e view that 
they mayserve to give the interested reader some idea of the 
precious gems that are to be found in the mine of the 
Ayurvedic Materia Medica.
Ashwagandha (Withania Somnifera)
It is one of the important tonic medicines in the herbal 
Materia Medica. It is generally found all over India. It is a 
straight growing shrubby plant between 2 to 4 feet tall. Both 
its leaves and flowers are somewhat rounded in shape. The 
root is thin and tapers conically. The root is sedative, tonic, 
alterative, aphrodisiac and nutritive.
It is used in doses o.f about 30 grains in cases of 
consumption, rickets, senile debility, rheumatism, and all 
types of debility, neurasthenia and nervous breakdown, 
brain-fag, loss of memory, loss of muscular strength, and it 
strengthens semen and is therefore used with success in 
spermatorrhoea and impotency. It possesses Vasayana Guna, 
i.e., quality of infusing flesh strength and energy, and is thus a 
valuable protective tonic-food for the system when worn out 
by ravages of constitutional diseases like Syphilis, Rheumatic 
fever etc. As a nervine sedative, it is serviceable in Insomnia. 
Ashwagandha is also a Galactagogue and is given to nursing
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
119

mothers to increase lactation. For weak children the 
Ashwagandha root, reduced to a paste and given with milk 
and clarified butter, forms an invaluable dietary supplement. 
A fortnight’s course is sufficient to bring about a tangible 
improvement.
The herb is administered in the form of powder, extract, 
confection and also decoction.
Apamarga (Achyranthes Aspera)
It is a prickly chaff-flower — an annual herb. It is laxative, 
diuretic and alterative. It also has emetic property. It is 
pungent.
Due to its alterative properties, Apamarga is used as a 
blood-purifier. Though emetic in large doses yet when given 
in small doses, it is a useful expectorant. In powder-form it is 
taken with honey in conditions of asceites, dropsy, 
enlargement of glands and cutaneous affections. Externally 
Apamarga is used as application in cases of dog-bite, 
snake-bite, etc.
Arka (Calotropis Gigantea)
A middle 
sized 
milky shrub. Emetic, purgative, 
rubefacient, alterative, digestive and abortifacient.
A well-known medicinal plant famous all over India as a 
herb of versatile therapeutical value. There are two varieties, 
one with white flower and the other having a somewhat 
reddish flower. The former variety is more abundant in U.P., 
Sindh, Punjab and Bihar.
The leaves reduced to ash with i/^th part of rock salt 
when administered in whey in 10 to 15 grain doses, forms a 
valuable remedy in all affectations of spleen, liver and 
stomach. 5 to 20 grains of the powdered root-bark is used in a 
variety of conditions like leprosy, constitutional syphilis, 
ulcerations, skin-diseases, glandular swellings, poisons, 
worms, anasarca, etc. Due to its remarkable action in 
Syphilitic affectations Arka is referred to as “Vegetable
120
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Mercury”. It is useful in Pyrexia, which it lowers by causing 
diaphoresis. The root, rubbed into paste with rice gruel is 
used externally with effect as an application in Elephantiasis 
and enlarged scrotum. The milky sap of thin plant cures 
chronic obstinate eczema and ring worm and ripens boils 
quickly. Even Plaque Buboes are aborted by the repeated 
application of the milk of Arka plant. In most of the cases the 
patient is saved. The milk is a poison and, therefore, 
constitutes a valuable counter-irritant and a good antidote to 
poisonous bite of reptiles. It is used on the spot of the bite.
Brahmi
Herpestis Monniera or Gratiola Monniera; also known as 
‘Jalneem' and Mandukapami (another sister herb: the 
Hydrocotyle Asiatica; also known as Brakma-manduki) \
Brahriii is a marshy labrous runner. Mandukaparni is a 
prostrate perennial herb: grows by the banks of rivers and 
streams amidst common grass and is usually surrounded by 
the latter. In very many ways these two herbs are closely 
similar in their medicinal properties so that they have come 
to be regarded as almost interchangeable herbs.
Brahmi is a wonderful herb. It is possessed of peerless 
therapeutical values. Rarely is it possible to come across a 
herb of such great worth. It is slightly bitter, diuretic and 
nervine tonic. It is useful in blood-pressure and skin diseases 
and also valuable as a voice-improver.
It is a brain tonic par excellence. It cools the brain, 
strengthens and sharpens the intellect; increases memory 
power and infuses vigour and radiance. It purifies the whole 
system. It is a first-rate herb to cleanse the system by 
eliminating all sorts of poisons. It is, therefore, very useful in 
leprosy, syphilitic and scrofulous ulceration, obstinate 
eczema, cutaneous affections and psoriasis. It is administered
* In Punjab and Uttara Pradesh the Creeper Hydrocotyl Asiatica is 
regarded as Brahmi but the physicians of Bengal take Cratiola 
Monniera as Brahmi.
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
121

in powder as well as liquid form. Ghee, medicated with it, is 
prescribed for brain and voice, and externally the oil is much 
in vogue.
Aijuna (Terminalia Arjuna)
A huge white-barked tree. A most valuable Cardiac tonic 
and stimulant. It is a hemostate—very cooling. It is 
invaluable in heart-diseases where stimulant action is 
indicated. It also acts with wonderful effect in local 
inflammation of the heart. It has a Glucoside that is 
extremely useful in heart-disease. It slows the palpitation of 
heart but strengthens the force of the beat. Arjuna has all the 
valuable properties of Digitalis but has one great advantage, 
namely, it is entirely non-poisonous whereas Digitalis is a 
deadly poison. Arjuna is used with great effect in Cardiac 
dropsy. Since very ancient times it has been used in all 
heart-diseases. It is very quick in its action and, withal, safe. 
In feeble pulse and in palpitation, tablets of Aijuna, allowed 
to dissolve gradually in the mouth, work miraculously. The 
effect on the pulse is immediate and lasting too. It is also 
useful as a diuretic. The whiter the colour of the bark the 
greater is its efficacy.
Chirata (Swertia Chirata)
A perennial hilly herb. There are certain varieties of the 
plains also as the Chirata of Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. 
But the northern variety of the hills in Punjab is preferable, 
and the best is recognised to be the Chirata grown in Nepal. 
It is a plant about 3 to 4 feet in height. The leaves are of large 
size at the lower end of the plant and get smaller in size at 
the top. The leaves are characterised by five or six linear 
markings or veins upon them.
Chirata is a bitter tonic, laxative, febrifuge and 
anthelmintic. In India it has been for centuries used widely 
with success as an effective substitute for Quinine in Malaria. 
In such cases its tincture or the cold infusion is used. If the
122
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

decoction is boiled, its medicinal value is somewhat lessened. 
Even then it is useful to some extent. It is also a good tonic 
after fever. The herb is used when there are flowers in the 
plant. Great benefit is derived from administering Chirata in 
a variety of liver complaints. It flushes the liver and reduces 
enlargement. It contains Chiratin and Ophelic acids.
The special noteworthy feature about Chirata is its 
non-toxic nature. It acts effectively against Malaria avoiding 
at the same time the unpleasant reactions of Quinine or 
Cinchonism.
Bala (Sida Cordifolla)
There are four varieties of this herb. Their properties are 
all more or less similar. Besides Bala the other three varieties 
are Ati-Bala, Maha-Bala and Naga-Bala.
Bala is a common weedy herb. Ati-Bala is a large annual 
shrub. Maha-Bala is a pale flowering plant. Naga-Bala is an 
erect spiny shrub. Its Latin name is Sida Spinosa.
Properties: All are muscilaginous, diuretic, cooling, 
astringent and nutritive. They impart radiance, beauty and 
strength to the body. They strengthen the vital force and 
remove seminal weakness.
Preparations of Bala are administered in the form of 
medicated ghees, powders or confections. They are used with 
effect in sexual and general debility, rheumatism, fevers, 
bleeding, heart diseases, blood-pressure and gout.
Kutaja (Holarrhena Antidysenterica)
Its bark and seeds are astringent, very useful in dysentery, 
bleeding and in piles. It is a small tree very graceful in 
appearance. It grows in the hilly tracts: in the Himalayas, the 
Vindhyas and the Ghats of South India. It seldom grows in 
the plains except in some rare places in Bengal. It has a pale 
coloured slightly sweet-smelling flowers about two to three 
inches in size, that generally bloom during the rainy season. 
The fruit is straight bean-stalk like, about a foot long and half
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
123

an inch in diameter spotted slightly with white. It contains 
barley shaped seeds.
Kutaja is one of the most effective medicines in 
dysentery. The efficacy of both the bark and the seeds was 
well-known to the ancients. Modern research has now proved 
amply that the bark is an effective amoebicide. It contains 
conesine, 
an 
alkaloid 
which 
is 
suitable 
for 
oral 
administration. It is a specific remedy for amebic dysentery. 
As powerful as Emetine yet Kutaja does not produce any of 
the toxic effects produced by the former. In chronic cases 
particularly the action of Kutaja is nothing short of 
marvellous.
Punamava (White variety: Trianthema Monogina;
Red variety: Boerhasvia diffusa).
Punamava is a prostrate succulent herb. The red variety is 
more commonly found than the white one. It creeps along 
the ground and at times covers an area 4 to 5 feet square. It 
has tiny flowers growing in button like bunch and juicy.
Allopaths 
have 
incorporated 
this 
herb 
in 
their 
pharmacopoeia wherein it is known as Extractum Punarnava 
Liquidum. The white Punamava is stomachic, expectorant 
and slightly laxative. It has remarkable diuretic properties 
and is hence invariably used in cases of ascites.
The red variety too is similar in action, and is also used in 
hepatic and splenic enlargements, and also as a renal 
antiseptic in gonorrhoea and dysuria. Punarnava has the 
quality of reducing inflammation and is, therefore, found to 
be very effective in internal abscess, jaundice and piles. The 
white herb in tincture is useful in insomnia.
Sariva (Hemidesmus Indicus)
This is the Indian or Country Sarsaparilla. It is a 
demulcent, alterative, diaphoretic, diuretic, tonic and 
blood-purifier.
Sariva is a low twining shrub. It grows abundantly in
124
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Bengal. It is found in other hilly tracts of India. It is a 
creeper. It contains a sweet aromatic essence known as 
Counmarin. But the dried root is devoid of flavour or aroma. 
It is well-known in India as Anantamool. It acts as a good 
diuretic increasing the flow of urine copiously. It is used with 
great effect in the secondary and tertiary stages of Syphilis 
and ordinary skin diseases, too. Prolonged use is indicated in 
the former case. It is administered in the form of extract, 
syrup, tincture or as infusion.
Ashoka (Saraca Indica)
A very valuable Uterine styptic (drug that checks 
bleeding). Bark and flowers are used in uterine affectations 
like Menorrhagia.
Ashoka is a large beautiful ever-green tree found all over 
India but particularly abundant in Malabar, Bengal and M.P. 
The leaves are like that of mango tree, but of a deeper green 
colour and tender. Flowers are red. The bark is of a muddy 
brownish appearance externally but is of red colour upon the 
inner side. Its chief use is in uterine troubles in which it is 
often used in the form of decoction. It is a first-rate remedy 
and tonic in all sorts of troubles of the womb. It regulates the 
periodical menstrual flow. It is one of the best uterine tonic 
and its use averts the possibility of abortion in weak females.
India has ever been evolving art after art, science after 
science as her contribution to the common heritage of all the 
nations of the world. Her greatest gift to the world is the gift 
of the spiritual science of Self-perfection. Next to it I would 
place this Science of Life, the Ayurveda as a precious gift to 
be carefully developed and broadcast to all nations. It is a 
national duty of every Indian.
Inorganic Materia Medica 
(Mineral Medicines)
Mineral or inorganic medicines are generally described 
under five heads, namely, Rasa or mercury, Uparasa or
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
125

metallic ores and earths, Dhatu or metals, Lavana or salts 
and Ratna or precious stones.
The metals are divided into two classes—principal and 
secondary. The principal metals or Dhatus are seven namely, 
Svarna (old), Rupya (silver), Tamra (copper), Banga (tin), 
Seesaka (lead), Yashada (zinc) and Loha (iron).
The secondary metals which contain any of the principal 
metals or their compounds, are also seven, namely, Tuttha 
(sulphate of copper), Sindura (red oxide of lead), Shilajit 
(bitumen), 
Kamsya 
(brass), 
Reeti 
(calcined 
zinc), 
Swarnamakshika (yellow pyrites), Tamramakshika (white 
pyrites).
Sulphur, talc or mica, calamine, alum, borax, chalk, conch 
shells orpiment, lead stone, realger, sulphate of iron, 
cinnabar, sulphate of lead, red sulphide of mercury, 
bisulphide of arsenic, ter sulphide of arsenic, sulphide of 
lead, lapis lazuli, carbonate of zinc, litharge come under the 
category of Uparasas.
The precious stones (Ratnas) are also divvied into two 
classes, principal and secondary. Heera (diamond), Manikya 
(ruby), Neela (sapphire), Garutmata (emerald), Pushparaga 
(topaz), Gomeda (onyx), Vaidurya (lapis lazuli or cat’s eye), 
Mauktika (pearl) and Pravaala (coral). Pearl and coral 
belong to the animal kingdom.
The secondary stones are Suryakanta (sun-stone), 
Chandrakanta (moon-stone), Sphatika (crystal), Haritshyama 
(turquoise) and Kancha (glass).
The principal salts that are included in the Indian 
Pharmacopoeia are Saindhava (rock salt), 
Sambhara 
(Sambhara lake salt), Samudra (sun dried sea salt), Navasara 
(ammonium chloride), Yavakshara (carbonate of Soda), 
Suryakshara (nitrate of potash), Tankana (borax).
The Ayurvedic physicians have for ages past used 
Mandura 
(hydrated 
oxide 
of 
iron), 
Pashanabheda
126
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

(carbonate of iron and lime), Yashadapushpa (oxide of 
zinc), Rasasindura (sulphide of mercury), Rasakonpura 
(corrosive sublimate), Shankavisha (arsenious acid).
Metals and metallic compounds must be purified in 
order to remove their impurities. They will produce 
diseases if they are used in an unpurified state. The metals 
are purified by repeatedly heating their plates and plunging 
them in oil, whey, sour conjee, cow’s urine, Kulatha 
decoction. They can be dipped in the juice of the plantain 
tree also.
Metals and metallic compounds are reduced to powder 
or Bhasma (oxide) by various processes. The furnace for 
heating metals is usually a pit in the ground called 
Gajaputa. It is made one and a quarter cubits in depth, 
length and breadth. This is filled with dried balls of 
cowdung. The metals of metallic compounds to be burnt 
are enclosed in a covered crucible and placed in the centre 
of pit within the balls of cowdung, which are then set fire 
to and allowed to burn till consumed to ashes.
Vegetable drugs become inert after a year; powders 
keep up their power for two months, pills and tinctures for 
a year and oily preparations for sixteen months. But 
Bhasmas are infinitely more effective than the vegetable 
drugs. They are given in very small doses.
The literature on metallic remedies is very voluminous 
in Ayurveda. The metallic oxides do more harm than good 
if they are not carefully and properly prepared.
INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA
127

Chapeter XIV
HOME REMEDIES
Everyone should possess an elementary knowledge of the 
‘Practical Household Remedies.’ Even an elementary 
knowledge of the ‘Practical Household Remedies’ will go a 
long way in alleviating human sufferings and saving valuable 
lives. All cannot afford to pay the doctor’s bill and purchase 
costly 
patent 
medicines. 
The 
results 
achieved 
by 
“Chamberlains Cough Remedy” or “Venos Lightning Cough 
Cure” can be very easily obtained by a decoction of the 
vegetable Ladies’ Finger at the cost of one or two pies, or a 
lozenge made out of black pepper, sugarcandy, liquorice and 
honey.
This book supplies a handy list of “Practical Household 
Remedies” and a list of very useful, practical, potent 
prescriptions made up from them. There are very good 
prescriptions for diarrhoea, dysentery, fevers, malaria, 
indigestion, flatulence, constipation, debility, influenza, 
bronchitis, cough, scurvy, rheumatism, biliousness, liver, 
kidney, lung troubles, etc.
In places where there are no dispensaries “Practical 
Household Remedies” will come to your help, and guide you 
like an able Family Physician.
Prakriti or Mother Nature has been very, very kind and 
beneficent. She has placed valuable potent herbs and plants 
at your backyard, immediate neighbourhood and garden. 
Make use of these herbs and be healthy and strong.
Equip your household, domes'tic, medicine-chest with 
preparations like dysentery powder, diarrhoea powder, cough 
lozenges, constipation powder, pills, etc. Your whole family 
will be immensely benefited.
128
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Rural dispensaries can give you a great deal of medical 
relief at a very little cost, if “Household Remedies” or 
Bazaar medicines are intelligently* judiciously and largely 
used.
In the Medical Schools and Colleges in India, Europe 
and America, the students should get a knowledge of 
Indian plants, herbs and drugs during their course of study 
of Materia Medica. There is great potency or potentiality in 
Indian herbs and plants. Many plants have very great 
therapeutic value.
Free India should start now many Ayurvedic laborato­
ries in different parts of India to manufacture various 
Ayurvedic preparations and send them to different parts of 
the world and should have Ayurvedic conquest. Ayurveda 
will surely have triumph over other systems of medicine as 
the preparations are very potent, cheap and produce lasting 
effect and permanent cure.
A doctor should have a very large Vedantic heart and 
broad tolerance. He should see good in every system of 
medicine. He should welcome the good from each system 
and utilise it in the treatment of his patients. Every 
individual has a peculiar temperament. Allopathic drug that 
suits one temperament will not be suitable to another 
person. Homoeopathy suits X, Allopathy suits Y and 
Ayurveda suits Z. And as such a synthetic doctor can do 
more good to the patients by taking recourse to different 
systems. Every doctor should have a synthetic knowledge of 
all systems. Every doctor should have a perfect knowledge 
of the Indian plants and herbs and the Household 
Remedies or Indian Bazaar drugs.
In 
olden 
times 
Indian 
grandmothers 
had 
good 
knowledge of Household Remedies. They were good 
Family Physicians. Present-day Indian women also should
HOME REMEDIES
129

possess a knowledge of the herbs and plants. Then they can 
attend well to the health of their families.
It is your duty and the duty of Government to see how 
you enrich the forest, herbal wealth of India. If the 
Government undertakes to turn the jungle herbs and 
shrubs into remedies which are badly needed in our towns 
and villages, you can put a check on the import of foreign 
remedies and thereby save millions of rupees every year, 
which can be utilised for solving more urgent problems 
facing the country.
Glory to the Ayurvedic Rishis of India like Charaka, 
Sushruta, Dhanvantari and others.
130
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

COMMON HERBS 
Their names in different languages
Chapter XV
Tamil
Sanskrit
Hindi
English
1. Chitramutti
Bala
Khareti
Pavonia Zeylanica
2. Peramutti
Mahabala
Suganda Vala
Pavonia Odorata
3. Karkadaga Singhi
Karkatashringi
Kakrasing
The Galls
4. Karisilankanni
Bhringaraj, Kesaranja
Bungrah
Eclipta Prostata
5. Vallarai
Brahmi
Khulakudi
Indian Pennyworth
6. Sombu
Sthula Jeerakam
Motajeera
Anise seeds
7. Sathakuppai
Misi
Suva
The Dill
8. Vasambu
Vacha
Bach
Sweet-flag
9. Kudasapalai (Bark used) Kutaja
Karva, Indarajow
The Kurchi, Tellicherry bark
10. Amman Pachcharisi
Kshirirti
Dudhi
Australian Asthma Weed
11. Kandangkattiri
Kanta Kaarikaa
Kateli
Wild egg plant
12. Mudakkatran
Karnaspota
Kanphata
Balloon-Vine
13. Ponnangkanni
Meenakshi
Machhchhi
Alternanthera Sessiles
14. Tumbai
Dronapushpi
Gumamadhupati
Leucus Aspera

Tamil
Sanskrit
Hindi
English
15. Manaththakkali
Kakamachi
Mako
Salanum Nigrum
16. Chukku
Nagaram
Sonth
Zingiber Officinalis (Dried Ginger)
17. Atimaduram
Yashti-Madhukam
Mulatthi
Indian-Liquorice
18. Inji
Ardrakam
Adrakh
Green Ginger
19. Jadamanji
Jatamansi
Jatmasi
Valerian Root
20. Jathikkai
Jatiphalam
Jaiphal
Nutmeg
21. Chirakam
Jirakam
Zira
Cumin Seeds, Carawey
22. Thalisapaththiri
Talisapathram
Talispatri
Many spiked Flacortia
23. Thippili
Pippali
Pippali
Long Pepper
24. Nayuruvi
Apamargah
Chit-Chita
Rough Chaff
2S. Nervalam
Jayapalah
Jamalgotta
Purgative Croton
26. Manjal
Haridra
Haldi
Turmeric
27. Vellaippundu
Lasunam
Lahsun
Garlic
28. Karimulli
Brihati
Barahantta
Indian Nightshade
29. Ati Vidayam
Ativisha
Atis
Indian Atees
30. Vendayam
Methi
Methi
Fenugreek
31. Kartazhai
Kumari
Ghikauvar
Aloes
32. Nilavembu
Kirathathikta
Chirayata
Chiretta
33. Amukkarak Kizangu
Aswagandha
Aswagandha
Winter Cherry
34. Aduteendap palai
Ajaasparshah
Gandan
Indian Birthwort
' 
Tfcrnll
Sanskrit
Hindi
English
35. Amanakku Muththu
Yeranda Beejam
Arandi
Castor oil seeds
36. Alivirai
Chandrasura
Chansar
Lefidium Sativum
37. Lavangapatri
Lavangapatram
Tejpat
Chinnamum leaves
38. Etti
Visha mushti
Kuchla
Strychnine tree
39. Elam
Elah
Elachi
Cardamom seeds
40. Omam
Yavani
Ajvaian
Bishops Weed
41. Kadukkai
Hareetaki
Pile Hara
Ink Nut
42. Kumkumappu
Kunkuma
Kesar
Saffron
43. Kuppaimeni
Arittamanjari
Kuppi
Intian acalypha
44. Kottumalli
Kustumbari
Dhaniya
Coriander Seeds
4S. Jathipatri
Jathipatram
Javatri
Arillus
46. Drakshai
Draksha
Munakka
Grapes
47. Tottarchu ringi
Namaskari
Lajalu
Sensitive Plant
48. Pachchai payaru
Mugdam
Moong
Green Gram
49. Agatti
Agastya
Agti
Agati Grandiflora
50. Akrottu
Akshota
Akhrot
Walnut
51. Atari
Karaveera
Karher
The Oleander
52. Alisivirai
Atasi
Alsi
Linseed-seeds
53. Azhavnam
Raktagarbha
Kurantak
Henna Plant
54. Avarai
Taiapotakam
Tarvar
Tanners-cassia
55. Kariabolam
Ikshumalika
Chhotakanvar
Small aloe

Tamil
Sanskrit
Hindi
English
56. Karakkarunai
Arsaghnakanda
Zaminkand
Amorphophalus
57. Sirupasalai
Laghulonika
Chaulayi
Portulacea Quadrifida
58. Puthina
Pudina
Pudina
Marsh Mint
59. Vettiver
Usheera
Balah
Cuscus grass
60. Kundumani
Gunja
Ratti
Jequrity
61. Pirandai
Asthisamhari
Harahankar
Vitis Qudrangularis
62. Perungayam
Hingu
Hing
Asafoetida
63. Valmilagu
Lankesah
Kababchini
Cubebs; Tail pepper
64. Vaivilangam
Vidanga
Baibadang
Embelia Ribes
65. Akkarakaram
Aakaarakarabah
Akhalkara
Pellitory root
66. Atti
Udumbarah
Gular
Country Fig
67. Abini
Ahihenam
Hafim
Poppy
68. Arasu
Aswatha
Pipal
Peepul tree, Sacred Fig
69. Chittarattai
Rasna
Khulanjan
Galangal the lesser
70. Perichchu
Kharjuram
Kajur
Phoenix Ductylifera
71. Thirunitruppachchai
Viswatulasi
Sabzah
Sweet Basil
72. Umattai
Unmaththah
Dhatura
Dhatura, Thom apple
73. Erukku
Arkah
Ak
Mudar
74. Elumichchai
. Jambirah
Nimbu
Acid Lime
75. Kadugu
Rajika
Kalasarason
Black Mustard
76. Kalli
Dugdhika
Dugdhavatee
Milk Hedge plant
Tamil
Sanskrit
Hindi
English
77. Kariveppilai
Surabhinimba
Meeta Neem
Curry Leaf
78. Vembu
Nimba
Nim
Margosa tree
79. Vellarikkai
Urvarukam
Kakri
Common Cucumber
80. Vilvam
Bilvah
Bel
Bael tree
81. Marudam pattai
Arjuna Thwak
Arjun
Aijuna Myrobalan (bark)
82. Mathuiai
Dadima, Sukhaadana
Anar
Pomegranate
83. Maramarlial
Daruharidra, Daarvi
Jaharhaldi
Treeturmeric
84. Nerinjil
Gokshura
Gokhru
Small Caltraps
85. Kungiliam
Guggulu
Guggul
Saul tree, resin of
86. Neermulli
Kokilakshab, Ikshuraka
Talmakhana
Hygrophila spinosa
87. Katukurohini
Katurohini
Kutki
Picrorhizakurroa
88. Karungali
Kadhira
Katha
Black Catechu
89. Chattichcharanai
Punarnava
Peescopra
Trianthema decandra
90. Intuppu
Saindhava Lavanam
Senda nimak
Rock Salt
91. Nannari
Sariba
Magrabu Nannar
Indian Sarasaparilla
92. Thannirvittan kilangu
Satavari
Satawar
Asparagus Racemosus
93. Moongiluppu
Vamsalochana
Thabashir
Bamboo Manna
94. Niradimuthu
Tuvarkah
Jangli Badam
Jangli Almond
95. Mullikkai
Sringaatakah
Singhada
Water Chestnut
96. Parpaatakam
Parpatakam
Taph-jhad
Mollugo Cerviana

CHARAKA’S CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS
Chapter XVI
Jeevaneeya are medicines which prolong life. Jeevaka, 
Rishabhaka, Meda, Mahameda, Kaakoli, Ksheerakaakoli, 
Mashaparni, Mudgaparni, Jeevanti and Yastimadhu belong 
to this group.
Brimhaneeya are medicines which promote nutrition and 
increase 
corpulency. 
Ksheerini, 
Raajakshavaka, 
Bala, 
Kaakoli, 
Ksheerakaakoli, 
Vatyaayani, 
Bhadroudani, 
Bhaaradwaaji, Payasyaa, Rishyagandhaa are some medicines 
under this category.
Lekhaneeya thin the tissues or reduce corpulency. Musta, 
Kushta, Haridra, Vacha; Daaruharjidra, Ativisha, Katuka- 
rohini, Bhadroudani, Bhaaradwaaji, Payasyaa, Rishyagandhaa 
come under this group.
Bhedaneeya promote excretions. The following come 
under this: Trivruth, Arka, Eranda, Agnimukhi, Danti, 
Chitramula, 
Chiribilwa, 
Sankhini, 
Katukarohini, 
Brahmadandi.
Sandhaneeya promote the union of fractured or divided 
parts. 
Yashtimadhu, 
Guduchi, 
Prisniparni, 
Ambashta, 
Samanga, Mocharasa, Daataki, Lodhra, Priyangu, Katphala 
help union of fractured parts.
Deepaneeya increase the appetite and digestive power. 
Pippali, Pippalimoola, Chavya, Chitraka, Sunthi, Amla- 
vestasa, Maricha, Ajamoda, Bhallaathakaasthi, Hingu help 
digestion.
Balya promote strength. They are tonics. Indravaaruni, 
Vrishabha, Sataavari, Maashaparni, Vidaari, Aswagandha, 
Sthiraa, Rohini, Bala, Atibala are all tonics.
Varnya improve complexion. Chandana, Tunga, Tadmaka,
136
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

U seer a, Yashtimadhu, Manjista, Saariba, Ksheera-Kaakoli, 
Sita, Lata belong to this group.
Kanthya improve the voice and cure hoarseness. Saariba, 
Ikshumoola, Yashtimadhu, Pippali, 
Draaksha, Vidaari, 
Kayaphala, Hamsapadi, Brihati, Khantakaarie come under 
this category.
Hridaya promote cheerfulness, happy feeling and joy. 
Amra, Aamrathaka, Lakucha, Karamarda, Vrikshaamla, 
Amlavetasa, Kuvala, Badara, Baadima, MaatUlunga help 
cheerfulness.
THptighna destroy satisfaction. They remove the phlegm 
which causes a sense of satiety. The following are Triptigiia: 
Sunthi, Chitramoola, Chavya, Vidanga, Murva, Guduchi, 
Vacha, Musta, Pippali, Patola.
Arsoghna destroy piles. Kutaja, Bilwa, Chitraka, Sunthi, 
Ativisha, Harithaki, Dhanvayaasaka, Daaruharidra, Vacha, 
Chavya, are all useful in piles.
Kusthaghna cure all skin diseases. Kahaira, Hareetaki, 
Aamalaki, Haridra, Bhallaataka, Saptaparna, Aaragwadha, 
Karaveera, Vidanga, Jathi, Pravaala are useful in all 
skin-diseases.
Kandughnam destroy itching. Chandana, Jataamaamsi, 
Aaragwadha, 
Naktamaala, 
Nimba, 
Kutaja, 
Sarshapa, 
Yastimadhu, Daaruhardra, Musta come under this category,
Krimighnam destroy parasites. Sigru, Maricha, Gandira, 
Kebuka, Vidanga, Nirgundi, Kinihi, Gokshura, Bhaaragi, 
Aakshuparnika, all destroy germs.
Vishaghna act as antidotes to poisons. Haridra, 
Manjishta, Raasna, Sukshmila, Syaama, Chandana, Kataka, 
Sireesha, Sindhuvaara, Sleshmaataka all destroy poison.
Stanyajanana improve the secretion of milk. Virana, 
Saah, Shastika, Ikshumoola, Kusamoola, Darbhamoola, 
Kaasamoola, Gundra Utkatamoola, Katrianamoola—all help 
the secretion of milk.
CHARAKA’S CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS
137

Slhanyasodhana purify milk. They improve the quality of 
milk. Paathaa, Sunthi, Devadaaru, Musta, Murvaa, Guduchi, 
Kutajabeeja, Bhunimba, Katukarohini, Saariba purify milk.
Sukrajanana increase the secretion of semen. Jeevaka, 
Rishabhaka, Kaakoli, Ksheerakaakoli, Mudgaparni, Maasha- 
parni, Meda, Sataavari, Jataamaamsi, Karkatakasringi come 
under this group.
Sukrasodhana purify the seman. Kustha, Elavaaluka, 
Katphala, Samudraphena, Kadambaniryaasa, Ikshukanda, 
Ikshuraka, Vasuka, Useera are all purifiers of semen.
Snehopayoga promote lubrication. Draaksha, Yasti- 
madhu, Guduchi, Meda, Vidaari, Kaakoli, Ksheerakaakoli, 
Jeevaka, Jeevanti, Saalaparni come under this group.
Svedopayoga promote sweat. Sigru, Erandamula, Arka, 
Vrischira, 
Punarnava, 
Yava, 
Tila, 
Kuluttha, 
Maasha, 
Badariphala promote sweat.
Vamanopagam promote vomiting. Madhu, Yastimadhu, 
Kovidaara, Karubudaara, Neepa, Vidula, Bimbi, Sanka- 
pushpi, Arka, Pratyakpushpi come under this category.
Virechanopagam 
promote 
purgation. 
Draaksha, 
Kaasmaree, 
Parushaka, 
Abhaya, 
Aamalaki, 
Vibhitaki, 
Kuvala, Badara, Karkandhu and Pilu promote purgation.
Asthaapanopagam are medicines for use in non-oily 
enemas. Trivruth, Bilwa, Pippali, Kushta, Sarshapa, Vacha, 
Kutajabeeja, Satapushpa, Yashtimadhu, Madanaphala are all 
non-oily enemas.
Anuvasanopayoga are medicines for oily enemas. Raasna, 
Devadaaru, Bilwa, Madanaphala, Satapushpa, Punarnava, 
Vrishcheera, Gokshura, Agnimantha, Syonaka all come 
under this group.
Sirovirechanopayoga promote discharge from the nose. 
Jyotishmati, Kshavaka, M;.richa, Pippali, Vidanga, Sigru, 
Sarshapa, Apaamaarga, Svveta, Mahaasweta, all come under 
this group.
138
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chhardinigrahanam relieve vomiting. Jambu, Aamra- 
pallava, Maadiphala, Badara, Daadima, Yava, Yasthimadhu, 
Usmeera, Mrith, Laaja all relieve vomiting.
Trishnaanigrahanam relieve thirst. Sunthi, Dhanvayaasa, 
Musta, Parpataka, Chanana, Bhunimba, Guduchi, Useera, 
Mrith, Laaja all relieve thirst.
Hikkanigrahanam relieve hiccup. Sati, Pushkaramoola, 
Badarabeeja, Kantakaari, Brihati, Vriksharuha, Hareethaki, 
Pippali, Duraalabha, Karkatakasringi are all useful in hiccup.
Purishe Sangrahaniyam render the faeces consistent. 
Priyangu, 
Anantha, 
Aamraasthi, 
Katwanga, 
Lodhra, 
Mocharasa, Samanga, Dhaataki, Baarngi, Padmakesara come 
under this group.
Purisha Virajaneeyam alter the colour of the faeces. 
Jambu, Sallkitwak, Kachchura, Yashtimadhu, Mocharasa, 
Devadaru-niryasa, Bhrutamrit, Payasyaa, Utpal, Tilakana all 
alter the colour of the faeces.
Mootra-sangrahaneeyam reduce secretion of urine. 
Jambu, Aamra, Plaksha, Vata, Kapeetana, Udumbara, 
Aswaththa, Bhallaathaka, Asmanthaka, Somavalka all reduce 
the secretion of urine.
Mutra-virechaneeyam 
increase 
urine. 
Vrikshaadani, 
Swadamstra, Vasuka, Suryaavrata, Paashaanabhedi, Darbha, 
Kusa, Kaasa, Musta, Utkatamoola all these increase urine.
Kaphahara 
relieve 
cough. 
Draaksha, 
Hareethaki, 
Aamalaki, Pippali, Duraalabha, Karkatasringi, Kantakaari, 
Punarnava, Taalaki, Vruschira all relieve cough.
Svaasahara cure difficult breathing or Asthma. Sati, 
Pushkaranamula, Amlavetasa, Ela, Hingu, Agaru, Surasa, 
Taamalaki, Jeevanti, Chandan are useful in Asthma.
Sothahara cure swelling. Paatala, Agnimandha, Syonaka, 
Bilwa, 
Kaasmaree, 
Kantakaari, 
Brihati, 
Saalaparni, 
Prisniparni, Gokshura, (Dasamoola) cure swelling.
CHARAKA’S CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS
139

Jwaraharam relieve fever. Saariba, Sarkara, Paatha, 
Manjistha, 
Draaksha, 
Peelu, 
Parushaka, 
Hareethaki, 
Aamalaki, Vibheetaki relieve fever.
Sramaharam relieve exhaustion. Draaksha, Kharjura, 
Piyala, Badaara, Daadima, Phalgu, Parushaka, Ikshu, Yava, 
Shastika relieve exhaustion.
Daahaprasamanam relieve burning sensation. Laaja, 
Chandana, Kaasmaree, Madhuka, Sarkara, Neelotpala, 
Usheera, Saariba, Guduchi, Hribera relieve burning and 
reduce heat in the body.
Seethaprasamana 
relieve 
cold. 
Tagara, 
Agaru, 
Dhaanyaka, 
Sringabera, 
Ajmoda, 
Vacha, 
Kantakaari, 
Agnimandha, Syonaka, Pippali relieve cold.
Udardaprasamanam relieve rashes. Tinduka, Piyaala, 
Badara, Khadira, Kadara, Saptaparna, Aswakarna, Arjuna, 
Asana, Irimeda are useful in rashes.
Angamardaprasamanam relieve bodily pains. Vidari- 
gandha, Prisniparni, Brihati, Kantakaari, Eranda, Kaakoli, 
Chandana, Useera, Ela, Madhuka help relief from bodily 
pains.
Sulaprasamanam relieve colic. Pippali, Pippalimoola, 
Chavya, Chitraka, Sunthi, Maricha, Ajamoda, Ajagandha, 
Jeeraka, Gandeera relieve colic.
Sonitathapanam restore blood. 
Madhu, 
Madhuka, 
Kumkuma, 
Mocharasa, 
Loshta, 
Lodhra, 
Gairaka, 
Prenkhana, Sarkara, Laaja restore blood.
Vedanaasthapana relieve suffering. Arjuna, Katphala, 
Kadamba, Padma, Kumuda, Mocharasa, Sirisha, Vanjula, 
Ela, Valuka, Asoka all relieve suffering.
Samjnaasthapana 
restore 
consciousness. 
Hingu, 
Katphala, 
Irimeda, 
Vacha, 
Sati, 
Brahmi, 
Golomi, 
Jataamaamsi, Guggulu, Katurohini restore consciousness.
140
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Prajaasthapana cure sterility. Indravaaruni, Brahmi, 
Durvaa, 
Swetadurvaa, 
Paatali, 
Aamalaki, 
Hareethaki, 
Katurohini, Bala, Prenkhana, are useful in pregnancy.
Vayasthaapana prevent the effects of age. Guduchi, 
Hareethaki, Aamalaki, Raasna, Sweta, Jeevanti, Satavari, 
Brahmi, Sthira, Punarnava help rejuvenation.
CHARAKA’S CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS
141

CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS —I
Chapter XVII
Angamardaprashamana (Antispasmodic) as Vidarigandha 
(costus speciosus).
Anulomana 
(Cathartic) 
as 
Hareetaki 
(terminalia 
chebula).
Arshoghna 
(Haemostatic) 
as 
Indrayava 
(wrightia 
antidysentrica).
Artavotpadaka 
(Emmenagogue) 
as 
Jyotishmati 
(cardiospermum helicacabum).
Ashmareeghna (Lithonyltic), as Gokshura (tribulus 
terrestris).
Avrishya (Anaphrodisiac), as Bhoostrina (andropogon 
scoenanthus).
Bhedana (purgative), as Katuki (pricorrhiza kurroa).
Chhardinigrahana 
(Anaematic), as Dadina (punica 
granatum).
Chhedana (Laxative), as Marichi (piper nigrum).
Daahaprashamana 
(Antipyretic), 
as 
Usheera 
(andropogon nardus).
Dambha 
(Escharotic), 
as 
Bhallataka 
(semi-carpus 
anacardium).
Deepaneeya 
(Stomachic), 
as 
Pippalimoola 
(piper 
longum).
Garbhasraavi (Ecbolic), as Girinjana (daucus carota).
Grahi 
(Carminative 
and 
Exsiccative), 
as Jeeraka 
(cuminum cyminum).
Hikkanigraha (Antisingultus), 
as 
Shati 
(hedychium 
spicatum).
142
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Jvarahara (Antipyretic), as Peelu (salvadora indica).
Kaphahara 
(Antiphlegmagogue), 
as 
Bibheetaka 
(terminalia bellerica).
Kaphakara 
(Phlegmagogue), 
as 
Ikshu 
(saccharum 
officinarum).
Kandughna (Antipsoric), as Chandana (santalum album).
Kandura 
(Rubefacient), 
as 
Kapikachhu 
(mucuna 
pruriens).
Kanthya (Expectorant), as Brihati (solanum indicum).
Karshyakara (Antifat), as Gavedhu (a kind of corn).
Krimighna (Anthelninatic), as Vidanga (embelia ribes).
Krimikrit 
(Vermiparaous), 
as 
Matha 
(phaseolus 
aconitifolius).
Kuthtaghna 
(Antiscorbutic), 
as 
Haridra 
(curcuma 
zedoaria).
Lalaghna (Antisialoagogue), as Jatiphala (myristica 
moschata).
Lalotpadaka (sialagogue), as Akalakarabha (spilanthes 
oleracea).
Lekhana (Liquefacient), as Vacha (acorus calamus).
Madaka (Inebrient), as Dhattura (datura stramonium).
Mootrasangrahana (Anuretic), as Pippalachchala (cortex 
ficus religiosa).
Mootravirechaneeya 
(Diuretic), 
as 
Kasha 
(poa 
. cynosuradies).
Nidrahara (Anti hypnotic), as Shigrubeeja (moringa 
pterygosperma).
Nidrakara (Hypnotic), as Kakajangha (capparis sepiaria).
Niromakara (Depilatory), as Rala (shorea robusta).
Pittahara 
(Anticholeric), 
as 
Kamala 
(nelumbium 
speciosum).
CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS-I
143

Pittakara (cholagogue), as Tvak (cinnamomum cassia).
Prajasthapana (Anebolic), as Vishnukranta (evolvulus 
hirsustus).
Pramathi (Antiphysical), as Hinga (narthex asafoetida).
Prasvaka (Parturifacient), as Beejapura (citrus acida).
Prativasa 
(Antibromic), 
as 
Karpoora 
(camphora 
officinarum).
Purishasangrahana (Astringent), as Priyangu (panicum 
miliaceum).
Rasayana 
(Rejuvenesent), 
as 
Guggulu 
(amyris 
pentaphylla).
Rechana (Hydragogue), as Trivrita (ipomaea terpethum).
Roha'na (Epulotic), as Tila (seasumum indicum).
Sammohana (Anaesthetic), as Madhya (vina medicata).
Samshodhana (Emetic and Purgative), as Devadali (luffa 
echinata).
Sankochana (Constringent), as Mayophala (quercus 
infectoria).
Sanjeevasthapana (Restorative), Jatamansi (nardostachys 
jatamansi).
Shamaneeya (Calmative), as Amrita (coculus cordifolius).
Sheetaprashamana (Antalgide), as Agaru (aquilaria 
agallochum).
Shirovirechana 
(Sternutatory), 
as 
Agastya 
(agati 
grandiflora).
Shophakara (Epispatic), as Snoohee (euphorbia tirucalli).
Shoolaprashamana (Anticolic) as Ajamoda (ptychotis 
ajowan).
Shothahara (Discutient), as Arani (premna serratisfolia).
Shramahara 
(Refrigerant), 
as 
Ikshu 
(saccharum 
officinarum).
144
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Shronitasthapana (Styptic), as Kesara (crocus sativus).
Shukrajanana 
(Spermatopoietic), 
as 
Ksheerakakoli 
(hedysarum gangeticum).
Shukrala (Tonic), as Rishabhaka (helekteres isora).
Shukrashodhana 
(Semen-improver), 
as 
Kushtha 
(saussurea lappa).
Shvasahara (Antiasthmatic), as Ela (amomum elettarum).
Snehopaga (Demulcent), as Vidari (batatas paniculata).
Sransana (Drastic), as Rajataru (cassia fistula).
Sthanyajanana 
(Galactagogue), 
as 
Sthatapushpa 
(pimpinella anisum).
Sthaulyakara 
(Fat-former), 
as 
Panasa 
(artocarpus 
integrifolia).
Svarya (Voice-improver), 
as Madhuka 
(glycyrrhiza 
globra).
Shvedopaga (Diaphoretic), as Punarnava (boerhaavia 
diffua).
Trishna Nigrahana (Frigorific) as Ashwagandha (physalis 
somnifera).
Vajeekara (Aphrodisiac), as Ashvagandha (physalis 
somnifera).
Vamana (Emetic), as Madana (randia dumetrorum).
Varnya (Cosmetic), as Manjishtha (rubia cordifolia).
Vatakara (Flatus-producer) as Vallaka (dolichos sinensis).
Vedaanasthapana (Anodyne), as Shireesha (mimosa 
seriassa).
Visha (Toxic) as Vatsanabha (aconitum napellus).
Vishaghna (Antitoxic), as Nirgundi (vitex negundo).
Vyayayi (Sedative), as Bhanga (cannabis sativa).
CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS-I
145

CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS-II
Chapter XVIII
Anulomana are medicines which digest the humours and 
set them free. They promote excretions and help their 
discharge.
Abhishyandi are medicines which retain the secretions 
and cause heaviness of the body through their qualities of 
heaviness or emollient qualities, e.g., Dadhi or curd.
Bhedana are medicines which set free scybala and other 
contents of the intestines and discharge them from the 
bowels, without producing watery motions are called 
Bhedana, e.g., Katuki (Pricorrhiza Kurroa).
Balya or tonics are medicines which increase strength.
Brimhana are medicines which promote nutrition and 
increase the bulk of the body.
Chhedana are medicines which remove forcibly and 
eliminate from the body phlegm or other humours, e.g., black 
pepper, emetics, expectorants, errhines, caustics.
Deepana are medicines which promote appetite but do 
not help in digesting undigested food.
Grahi or inspissants are medicines which dry the fluids of 
the body through their digestive and healing properties.
Lekhana or attenuants remove bad humours by thinning 
them gradually and eliminating them from the system e.g., 
warm water, barley, honey, etc.
Mutrala are medicines which promote the secretion of 
urine.
Pachana are 
medicines which assist 
in digesting 
undigested food but do not increase the appetite.
Pramathi are medicines which facilitate the removal of
146
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

collecting secretions from their tubes or receptacles, e.g., 
Vacha (acorus calamus).
Rechaka are medicines which cause the discharge of the 
digested or undigested contents of the intestines in a liquid 
form, e.g., Trivriti (Impomeoa Turpethum).
Rasayana or alterative tonics are medicines which 
prevent or remove the effects of age, increase the vigour and 
cure the diseases.
Samsamana are medicines which rectify the deranged 
state of the humours and calm their excited action, without 
promoting the excretions.
Samsodhana are medicines which remove collections of 
bad humours and discharge them by the excretions, e.g., 
emetics, purgatives, errhines and other depuratories.
Sransara are medicines which hurry the chyle or materials 
for digestion without allowing them to be properly digested, 
e.g., the pulp of cassia fistula.
Svedana are medicines which promote the secretion of 
perspiration.
Stanyajanana are medicines which promote the secretion 
of milk.
Stambhana or constipators are medicines which increase 
the air and retain the secretions through their drying and 
astringent properties e.g., Indrayava seeds or Holarrhena 
antidysenterica.
Vamana or emetics are medicines which cause emesis of 
bile, mucus and other contents of the stomach.
Wajeekarana or aphrodisiacs are medicines which 
increase the sexual power.
CLASSIFICATION OF DRUGS-II
147

Chapter XIX
INDEX TO THERAPEUTIC ACTION OF BAZAAR
DRUGS
Alterative (Vyadhi-bheda-kari) is a drug that alters the 
morbid or unhealthy processes in the body and restores the 
normal functions of an organ in some unknown way. It 
corrects or alters a poisoned condition of blood-stream and 
restores healthy functioning. Example: Akrot (walnut), 
adhatodha, white pumpkin, apamarga, garlic, Ammonium 
Chloride, bach, chiretta, chobchini, gulancha, mudar, 
sarsaparilla.
Anaphrodisiac is opposite of aphrodisiac. It depresses the 
sexual organ. Example: Camphor, etc.
Anti-sialagogue. A drug or substance that reduces the 
flow of saliva.
Antiseptic (Dhatu Ksheenarodhi) is a remedy that 
prevents putrefaction and inhibits the growth of germs. 
Example: Ajowan, Benzoin, tobacco, betel, Neem oil, cloves, 
sugarcane, sandal, etc.
Antispasmodic (Angakarshana Nasini). It is an agent or 
remedy that allays or relieves convulsions or spasmodic 
pains. Example: Cloves, Adhatodha, Ajowan, cannabis, 
saffron, tobacco, mint, asafoetida, borax, camphor, Datura, 
jetamansi.
Antilithic is a medicine or substance that prevents the 
formation of stones in the gall-bladder, kidneys, urinary 
bladder, etc. Example: Coffee seeds, benzoin, mountain 
Neem.
Anti-philogistic. A remedy that reduces inflammation. 
Example: Opium.
148
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Anti-soporific. A remedy that prevents sleep and keeps 
one awake. Example: Tea, coffee, etc.
Antidote (Vishanasini). A remedy that counteracts the 
action of a poison. Example: Belladonna, opium, etc.
Antibilious (Pittasantini). A remedy that produces a 
soothing effect over diseases caused by excessive secretion of 
bile. Example: Ginger, lemon, cumin, coriander, etc.
Anthelmintic (Kriminasini). A remedy or medicine that 
either kills or renders powerless or expels intestinal worms 
(vermicide and vermifuge). Example: Bark of walnut, 
adhatodha, black cumin, palas, asafoetida, bark, fruit, 
root-bark and seeds of pomegranate, garlic, leaves and seeds 
of Neem, baberaug, Bhoree Loth, butea seeds, kamala, 
papaya, somraj, supari.
Anti-periodic. An agent that acts against the poison of 
periodic fever like malaria. Example: Apamarga, pepper.
Anti-rheumatic (Vataharini). A remedy that prevents the 
Vata diseases in the body. Example: Pepper, dried ginger.
Anti-pyretic. A remedy that reduces the temperature of 
fever. Example: Pepper.
Anodyne (Vedanasantini). A drug that gives relief from 
pain. Example: Opium, cannabis.
Aphrodisiac (Kamavardhini) is a medicine that stimulates 
the sexual passion. Example: Walnut, linseed, black-gram, 
cinnamon, cannabis, radish, nutmeg, jalamisri, asafoetida, 
dates, cashewnut, lady’s finger, methi seed, betel.
Aromatic is a drug that stimulates digestion and appetite. 
It has good aroma. Example: Cardamom, Spirit Ammonia 
Aromaticus, calumba, etc.
Astringent (Sankochanakari). A substance that causes 
contraction of organic tissues or arrests bleeding, diarrhoea, 
etc. Example: Walnut, isafgul, Ajowan, poppy seeds, 
Beneal-gram, 
Madras-nut 
(coloured), 
ragi, 
guava,
INDEX TO THERAPEUTIC ACTION OF BAZAAR DRUGS 
149

horse-gram, sandal, cumin seeds, triphala, apamarga, jambul, 
mint, methi seeds, gum-arabic, alum, ashoka bark, babul 
gum, bael, betel leaf, betel nut, butea gum, catechu, copper 
sulphate, galls, kurchi bark, kurchi seeds, mangostin, 
myrobalans, opium, pomegranate.
Cardiac Stimulant (Hridushnakari) is a remedy that 
stimulates the heart. Example: Chillies, coffee.
Carminative (Udaravathaharini). A drug that expels wind 
from the bowels and relieves pain and corrects digestion. 
Example: Long pepper, nux vomica, lemon, coriander, 
ginger, dried ginger (sonth), mint, asafoetida, pepper, tailed 
pepper, methi seeds, garlic, white pepper, betel, Fennel, 
nutmeg, Kala Mirch, pipul, Tulasi, turmeric, Ajowan seeds, 
aniseed, capsicum, caraway seeds, cardamom, chamomile, 
cinnamon, cloves, coriander, cumin, dill seeds.
Cathartic. A drug that promotes evacuation from the 
bowels. It is divided into (1) laxative which induces gentle 
bowel movement. Example: Figs, prunes, phenolphthalein, 
etc., (2) purgative which produces copious, repeated and 
more watery motions. Example: Pulvis Jalapa, Croton, etc.
Cholagogue (Pittakari). A remedy that promotes the 
secretion or excretion of bile. Example: Podophyllin, walnut
seed.
Cordiac (Raktavardhini). Blood tonic. A drug that 
improves the quality and quantity of blood. Example: Fig, 
sarsaparilla.
Depurative (Malinanivartini). A remedy that purifies the 
animal economy. Example: Palas.
Deodarant (Bhutigandha-nasini). A remedy that destroys, 
removes or collects offensive odour. Example: Benzoin.
Demulcent (Antar Snigdhakari). The drug that soothes or 
protects the mucous membrane. Example: Black-gram. 
sesamum, cucumber, poppy seeds, gum, sugarcane, wheat, 
grapes, Tulasi, sarsaparilla, jack, barley, dates, plantain fruit,
150
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

waoci apple, onion, lady’s finger (bhindi), methi seeds, bara 
gokhru, basil seeds, chaulmoogra, cocoanut oil, garjan oil, 
isafgul, kakrasinghi, linseed oil, liquorice.
Diaphoretic is a drug that produces increased perspi­
ration. It reduces fever by inducing increased perspiration. 
Example: Hyoscyamus, Spirit Actheria, Nitrosi, etc.
Discutient: An agent that causes disappearance of a 
swelling. Example: Neem leaves.
Disinfectant (Agantuka-roga-nasini). A remedy that 
destroys germs and prevents fermentation and putrefaction. 
Example: Vasambu.
Digestive (Pachanakari). A drug that promotes digestion. 
Example: Ginger, bael, Ajowan, cumin, black pepper.
Diuretic (Mootravardhini). A drug that increases the flow 
or secretion of urine. Example: Cubebs, gokhru, gulancha, 
moringa root, Potas Nit., talmakhan.
Ecbolic is a drug that increases the activity of a pregnant 
uterus.
Emetic (Vamanakari). A remedy that causes vomiting. 
Example: 
Alum, 
Dhatura, 
tobacco, 
copper 
sulphate, 
Jangli-pikvan, mudar, mustard, salt.
Emmenagogue (Ritu-vardhini). A remedy that stimulates 
and regulates the menstrual flow. Example: Pine-appie, 
adhatodha, linseed, sesamum, black cumin, saffron, papaya, 
asafoetida, onions, methi leaves.
Emollient (Snigdhakari). An agent which by external 
application soothes the skin. Example: Castor oil, vaseline, 
isafgul, gum arabic, lady’s finger, methi seeds.
Errhine (Sirovirechani). A drug when applied to the 
mucous membrane of the nose, increases nasal secretion. 
Example: Tobacco.
Expectorant (Kaphakarini). A drug that promotes 
expectoration of phlegm or sputum. Example: Opium,
INDEX TO THERAPEUTIC ACTION OF BAZAAR DRUGS 
15 1
151

adhatodha, jatamansi, benzoin, Tulasi, asafoetida, dates, 
tailed pepper, garlic, Ammonium-chloride, arusha, banafsa, 
cubebs, garjan oil, jangli pikvan, kakra singhi, liquorice, 
mudar, myrrh.
Febrifuge (Jvaraharini). A remedy that lessens or 
removes fever. Example: Bael leaves, betel, pepper, etc.
General Anaesthetic is a drug or substance that stops 
bleeding by coagulating the blood or contracting the .arteries 
and arterioles. Example: Calcium-chloride, pituitrin, opium, 
adrenaline, etc.
Germicide (Kriminasini). A remedy that destroys the 
micro-organism or germs. Example: Adhatodha, Vasambu. 
(Also see Anthelmintic).
Haemostatic (Rakta-sthambhanakari) is a drug that 
arrests or restrains bleeding. Example: Opium, pine apple, 
white pumpkin, pomegranate, gall-nut.
Hepatic (Yakrit-bala-kari) is an agent or medicine that 
tones the action of the liver. Example: Ammonium-chloride, 
etc.
Hydragogue (Jalavirechani). A drug that produces watery 
motions by inducing free secretion from the intestinal glands 
and removing much serum from the intestinal blood vessels. 
Example: Croton.
Hypnotic or Soporific (Nidrakari) is an agent or medicine 
that induces sleep. Example: Opium, cannabis. (For opposite 
action see Anti-soporific).
Lactagogue (Ksheera-vardhini). A remedy that increases 
the secretion of milk in the breasts of the nursing mothers. 
Example: Linseed, cotton seed extract, potatoes, black-gram, 
sesamum, black cumin seeds, methi seeds, betel.
Lactifuge (Ksheeranasini). An agent that reduces or stops 
the secretion of milk in the breasts. Example: The bark of 
walnut, arabian jasmine.
152
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Laxative (Malakari). A remedy that loosens the bowels, a 
mild purgative. Example: Walnut seed, liquorice, fig, castor 
oil, linseed, potatoes, sesamum, Bengal-gram, sugarcane, 
grapes, 
amalaka, 
myrobalan, 
papaya, 
tamarind 
fruit, 
asafoetida, radish, plantain fruit, bael fruit, methi leaves, 
groundnut.
Local Anodyne (Charmavedananashini). An agent which 
relieves pain in the skin (locally).
Local Anaesthetic (Smritirodhakari). A substance that 
produces less of sensation locally. Example: Oil of cloves, ice, 
cocaine, etc.
Local Stimulant. A drug that irritates the skin locally.
Lithontriptic (Pashanabhedini). A remedy that has the 
power of „ dissolving the various stones in the body, in the 
gall-bladder, 
kidneys 
and urinary bladder. 
Example: 
Benzoates for phosphatic and alkalis for uric acid calculi in 
the urinary tract.
Mild Diuretic (Laghu-mootra-vardhini) is a drug or 
substance that slightly increases the flow or secretion of the 
urine.
Muscular Tonic is a drug that tones up the muscular 
tissues. Example: The seeds of pomegranates, Madras-nut 
(Kalipakku).
Narcotic. A drug or remedy that produces narcosis or 
stupor. Example: Opium, stramonium or Dhatura, cannabis, 
nutmeg, tobacco. (Also see Hypnotic, Soporific).
Nervine Tonic. A remedy that causes nervous excitement 
or gives tone to the nervous system. Example: Brahmi.
Nervous Sedative (Nadisamanakari). A remedy that 
produces a soothing influence by lowering the functional 
activity of the nervous system. Example: Potatoes, opium, 
cannabis.
Nutrient or Nutretic (Poshanakari). A drug that nourishes
INDEX TO THERAPEUTIC ACTION OF BAZAAR DRUGS
153

the body as a whole. Example: Lavang (cloves), black-gram, 
sesamum seeds, cucumber, poppy seeds, sugarcane, white 
pumpkin, wheat, ragi, sweet-potatoes, 
maize, grapes, 
green-gram, barley, jack, dates, plantain fruit.
Parasiticide (Krimighna). An agent that kills parasite. 
Example: Black cumin.
Parturifarient (Prasavakari). A remedy that induces the 
labour pain in order to hasten the delivery. Example: 
Cannabis.
Purgative (Virechani). A remedy that causes copious 
watery evacuation of the bowels. Example: Castor oil, 
Croton, Jalapa, etc.
Refrigerant (Seetalakari) is a drug that has cooling 
properties or lowers the bodily temperature. Example: 
Walnut, black-gram, sandal, lemon, Bengal-gram (Chana), 
sugarcane, sweet-potatoes, grapes, cocoanut water.
Resolvent. An agent that causes the absorption of 
inflammatory or other swelling. Example: pepper, hill Neem 
flower.
Restorative. It is a drug or medicine or food that is 
efficacious in restoring one to health and vigour.
Rubefacient (Shonakari). A drug that produces reddening 
of the skin.
Sedative (Samanakari). A substance that produces a 
soothing effect by lowering functional activity. Example: 
Cannabis, tobacco, borax, camphor, Dhatura, Jatamansi, 
opium, asafoetida.
Sialogogue (Dravakari). A drug that increases the flow of 
saliva. Example: ginger, Ajowan, tobacco, betel.
Stimulant (Ushnakari). A remedy that excites the 
functions of an organ or some process of the body economy. 
Example: Opium, ginger, nux vomica, sesamum, Ajowan, 
cannabis, coffee, saffron, coriander, jatamansi, cardamom,
154
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

cumin, dried ginger, Tulasi, chiretta, mint leaves, turmeric, 
chillies, pepper, resin, radish, tailed pepper, onions, garlic, 
betel, ghee, camphor, musk, sandalwood oil.
Stomachic 
(Jatharagni 
Vardhini). 
An 
agent 
that 
invigorates the functional activities of the stomach. Example: 
Ajowan, ginger, cloves, black cumin, cardamom, saffron, 
coriander, cumin, dried ginger, jambul, chiretta, mint, dates, 
chillies, radish, bael, garlic, betel, the flower of Neem.
Tonic (Balakari). A drug that restores the normal tone of 
the body. Example: Akrot, black-gram, sesamum, Ajowan, 
white 
pumpkin, 
horse-gram, 
sarsaparilla, 
atis, 
bach, 
bonduc-nut, 
chamomile, 
chaulmoogra 
oil, 
chinchal 
(chatium), chiretta, chobchini, creat, gokhru, gulancha, 
moringa root, mudar, Neem bark, rasaut, salsa, sat gilo, 
sulphate of iron.
Uterine Tonic. A drug that tones the uterus. Example: 
Ashoka.
Uterine Sedative. A remedy that produces a soothing 
effect on the uterus by lessening its functional activity. 
Example: Ashoka.
Vermicide is a drug that kills the worms in the bowels. 
Example: Santonin, Batanaphthol, oil Of chenopodium, etc.
Vermifuge is a drug that causes expulsion of worms from 
the bowels.
Vesicant (Tvakspotakari). A drug that produces vesicles 
and blisters when applied to the skin. Example: Mustard.
INDEX TO THERAPEUTIC ACTION OF BAZAAR DRUGS 
 155

Chapter XX 
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS
(Vividha Niraian)
Anjana
(eye-salve)
Asava
(tincture)
Avaleha
(electuary)
Basti
(enema)
Bhasma
(alkaline ashes)
Bindu
(drops)
Chukra
(vinegar)
Churna
(powder)
Dhumapana
. (inhalation)
Dhumra
(fumigation)
Drava
(acid)
Dravasveda
(medicated bath)
Gandusha
(gargle)
Ghrita
(ghee)
Gutika
(pill)
Hima
(watery extract)
Kalka
(paste)
Kanjika
(gruel)
Kavalika
(suppository)
Kvatha
(decoction)
Lepa
(ointment)
Manjana
(dentifrice)
Modaka
(bolus)
Nasya
(snuff)
Paka
(confection)
Panaka
(syrup)
Peya
(emulsion)
Phanta
(infusion)
Pindi
(poultice)
156
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Plota
(lotion)
Satva
(extract)
Sechana
(spray)
Shrutambu
(Cold water in which a very hot
piece of brick or iron is quenched)
Shukta
(ferment)
Svarasa
(expressed juice)
Sveda
(vapour)
Taila
(oil)
Udvartana
(liniment)
Upanaha
(fomentation)
Vatika
(lozenge)
Vartika
(bougie)
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS
157

AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
Chapter XXI
(Nirmana Vivarana)
Choorna
Choorna or powders are prepared by pounding dry 
substances in a mortar with a pestle and passing the powder 
through a fine cloth.
Kvatha (Quath)
Kvatha or decoctions are prepared by boiling one part of 
vegetable substances with sixteen parts of water, till the latter 
is reduced to one fourth. The medicines should be pounded 
small, then boiled over a slow fire. The decoction should be 
strained through a cloth. Decoctions are administered with 
the addition of salt, honey, sugar, treacle.
Avaleha
Avaleha or extract. Decoctions after being strained are 
again boiled down to the consistence of a thick extract. 
Extracts are administered with the addition of sugar.
Vatika and Gutika
They are pills and boluses. They are prepared by reducing 
a decoction of vegetable substances to a thick consistence 
and then adding some powders for making a pill-mass. 
Sometimes pill-masses are made of powdered medicines with 
the addition of treacle or honey.
Modaka
Modaka are boluses prepared by adding powders to cold 
syrup and stirring them together till uniformly mixed. No 
boiling needed in this preparation.
158
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Asava and Arishta
They are medicated liquors. They are prepared from 
honey and treacle with the addition of various medicinal 
substances. They are all steeped in water and put aside in 
earthen jars for vinous fermentation. When raw medicinal 
substances are used for fermentation, the resulting fluid is 
called Asava. When the decoction of drugs only is added, the 
fermented liquor is called Arishta.
They are heating, stimulating, easily digested and 
stomachic.
Medicated Oils and Ghritas
These are decoctions of vegetable drugs in oil or Ghrita 
(ghee or clarified butter). The Ghritas are used internally. 
The oils are rubbed on the body.
They are prepared by boiling vegetable drugs in ghee or 
oil with the addition of water, milk or a decoction of drugs.
Dravaka
This is a distilled mineral acid. A number of mineral 
substances of salts are heated in a retort and the distilled 
fluid is collected in a glass-reservoir.
Sankadravaka and Svalpadravaka are examples.
Seeta Kashaya
This is a cold infusion. This is prepared by steeping one 
part of a drug in six parts of water for the night and straining 
the fluid in the morning.
Phanta
They are infusions prepared by steeping one part of 
powered herbs in 8 parts of hot water for 12 hours during the 
night. Strain the liquid.
Svarasa
This is expressed juice prepared by pounding vegetables 
in a mortar expressing the juice and straining it through cloth.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
159

Kalka
This is a paste prepared by grinding dry or fresh vegetable 
substances on a stone with a muller and then making a thin 
paste with the addition of water if necessary.
Khandapaka
These are confections. They are made by adding to syrup 
medicines in fine powder and stirring them over the fire till 
ultimately mixed and reduced to proper consistence. Honey 
is subsequently added to confections. Syrup may be made 
with sugar and water or milk or the strained decoction of 
some medicinal substances.
Ayuryedic Preparations
Arishta, Asava is a fermented drink of honey, syrup and 
water with various medicinal stuffs.
Bhasma is an oxide of metal or jewel.
Choorna is a powder pounded in a mortar and is strained 
through a piece of cloth.
Choornarishta is mixed with a powder.
Ghrita is a medicinal preparation with cow’s ghee. It is for 
internal use.
Gutika is a ball.
Kashaya, Kvatha is a decoction of 4 to 16 parts of water 
with one part of medicine. The mixture is boiled until one 
fourth remains.
Kalka is a paste of a plant bruised on a stone.
Kanjika is a fermented rice-gruel.
Kanjika guda is a mixture with syrup.
Kanjika lavana is a mixture with salt.
Lehya, Avalehya is a licking substance or confection 
consisting of thick extracts from plants with addition of sugar.
Lepa is an ointment.
Modaka is sweet, uncooked pill.
160
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Putapaka is a roasted vegetable medicine. The stuffs are 
turned into a ball which is enveloped in leaves strung 
together and is covered with a layer of mud. The whole is 
roasted. Then the shell is broken and the roasted medicine is 
given either as a pill or a powder, or its extract as juice with 
honey.
Parpati is like a pappad.
Pak is like mysore pak, cake or chocolate.
Rasa is a mercurial preparation.
Svarasa is a natural juice, which is produced in a mortar 
by pounding fresh plants.
Taila is a medicinal preparation with oil. It is for external 
use.
Varti is suppository.
Vatika is a pill.
Yavagu is a meal sauce with an addition of medicinal 
stuff.
ARISHTAS
Dose: V2 to 2 tolas (1 oz.) twice a day after meals 
diluted with half the quantity of water.
Abhayarishta: Chief ingredient is Hareetaki. Dose for 
adults is one ounce twice daily with one ounce of water, 15 
minutes after food. Useful in piles, dysentery, anaemia, 
bowel complaints, worms, chronic constipation, spleen and 
liver disorders. For children below six years 2 teaspoonfuls,
Amritarishta: Chief ingredients are Gudoochi or Giloy, 
Satavari, 
Prapak, 
Saptaparna 
(sarsaparilla), 
Kaituki, 
Tirukutu, black cumin. This is a bitter tonic and stimulant 
specially beneficial in chronic fevers, malaria, night sweating, 
debility. It improves appetite. It is useful in liver and spleen 
complaints.
Arjunarishta: It contains the bark of Arjuna tree,
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
161

Munakka (grapes), Madhukapushpa, old gud (jaggery). 
Useful in diseases of heart, lungs and Blood-Pressure.
Ashokarishta: 
Chief 
ingredient 
is 
Ashoka 
Bark. 
Alterative, uterine tonic and stimulant. It eradicates all 
diseases of the womb and strengthens the womb. Useful in 
leucorrhoea, dismenorrhoea or difficulty of menstruation, 
menorrhagia and other female complaints, amenorrhoea or 
absence of menstruation, Metitis. It regulates menstruation.
It contains also triphala, dry ginger, black cumin, bark of 
Vasaka, red sandal powder, the seed of mango, neelkamal or 
blue lotus, Nagarmotha, dhaykapool.
Aswagandharishta: 
Chief 
ingredients: 
Aswagandha, 
honey, Musali, white Manjistha, Hareetaki (big), Rasna, 
Turmeric, Mulati (liquorice), Bidari kand, Arjuna sal, 
Nagarmotha, red sandal, white sandal, trikote. Useful in 
Epilepsy, general and nervous debility, sleeplessness, loss of 
memory; a tonic for all rheumatic complaints.
Balarishta: Chief ingredients are Bala, Aswagandha, 
Dhatakipushpa (wood fordia, Floribunda), Satavari, Rasna, 
big cardamoms, cloves (lavanga), Gokuru, Purana gud. 
Useful in all kinds of debility, Rheumatic pains, asti jwara, 
pains in joints, heniplegia, all discharges. Promotes health 
and vitality, bestows dhatupushti.
Babbuladyarishta: Babbulka chhal (bark), Dhataki­
pushpa, pippali (long pepper), Jeyapal (nutmeg), cardamoms, 
cinnamon, cloves, Nagkesar (Masuaferia), black pepper, 
Tamalpatra (cinnamonum tamala). Useful in consumption, 
cough, asthma, parswasool (pain in the side of the chest), all 
sorts of urinary complaint, diarrhoea, leprosy.
Dasamoolarishta: There are 71 herbs. Chief ingredients 
are Guduchee (or Giloy or Amrita), Chitrak (Plumbago 
zeylanica), Amla, Khadir bark, Hareetaki, Devadaru, Mulati 
(liquorice), Punarnava, Pippali, Nagarmotha, Ashtavarga, 
Musk, Munakka, old gud, honey, etc. Useful in piles, leprosy,
162
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

sexual and general debility, cough, cold, consumption, 
pulmonary and urinary diseases, dysentery. It purifies the 
womb. It is given as a tonic to women after delivery. It is 
useful in Prasuthijwara of women after delivery. It is a 
stimulant when one is fatigued.
Dantyarishta: Chief ingredients are: root of Jamalgota or 
croton, Chitrak, Dasmool, triphala, Dhatakipushpa, old gud. 
Useful in anaemia or poverty of blood, bleeding piles, 
constipation, worms, anaemia (Panduroga), obesity. It 
increases appetite and digestion.
Draksharishta: Chief ingredients are Munakka (big 
grapes), pippali (long pepper), cinnamon, small cardamom, 
Tejpatra, Nagkesar, black pepper, Dhatakipushpa. Useful in 
consumption, typhoid, influenza, cold, cough, asthma, 
dyspepsia, anaemia, loss of appetite, tonic for children. It 
increases Jatharagni or the digestive fire.
Dhatryarishta: Chief ingredients are Green Amla juice, 
sugar, honey, pippali, Dhatakipushpa. Useful in jaundice, 
anaemia, fever, malaria, blood pressure, cough, hiccup, 
asthma, dyspepsia, biliousness.
Eladyarishta: Ingredients: Small cardamoms, Vasaka 
(panchanga, five parts), Majyth, Indrajau, dantimool, Giloy, 
Khas, Mulati, Khadir bark, Arjun bark, Chiretta, Neem bark, 
Chitrak, Satpushpa, (saunf, feniculum bulgeri), honey, 
Dhatakipushpa, Trikatu. Useful in influenza, chicken pox, 
sinus, fistula, gonorrhoea (Upadans), ordinary fever, measles, 
urticaria, itching, asthma, erysipelas (visarp).
Jeerakadyarishta: Ingredients: White cumin seed, old 
gud, 
Dhatakipushpa, 
dried 
ginger, 
nutmeg 
(jaipal), 
Nagermotha, 
cinnamon, 
small 
cardamoms, 
Tejpatra, 
Nagkesar, ajwain, cloves. Useful in dyspepsia, sprue, chronic 
diarrhoea, dysentery (sangrahani), Soothikarog (diseases 
after delivery), cough, asthma, consumption. This is a best 
tonic for women after delivery. It is a galactagogue. It purifies 
and increases the milk in nursing mothers.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
163

Khadirarishta: Ingredients are Khadir bark, Devadharu, 
triphala, Dharuhaldi, Bhaguchi, honey, sugar, Dhataki­
pushpa, Seetalcheeni, cloves, small cardamoms, nutmeg, 
cinnamon, Nagkesar, black pepper, Tejpatra. Useful in 
leucoderma, leprosy, impurities of blood, diseases of skin, 
anaemia, heart diseases, cough, boils, plchodar, jaundice, 
gulma of women.
Kutajarishta: Ingredients are Kutaja bark, Munakka, 
madhuka pushpa, Gambari bark, old gud, Dhatakipushpa. 
Properties: Astringent, stimulant and anti-periodic. Useful in 
chronic diarrhoea, sprue, dysentery and long continued 
fevers and bleeding piles.
Karpoorarishta: Ingredients are camphor, small carda­
moms, Nagermotha, dried ginger (soont), Ajwain, black 
pepper, rectified spirit, Dhatakipushpa, sugar. Useful in 
cholera, vomiting, indigestion, diarrhoea, stomach pain, 
intestinal colic, flatulence or wind in the bowels. In cholera 
this works marvellously if it is given once in 2 or 3 hours till 
purging stops. It is used as a local application in toothache.
Mustakarishta: Ingredients are Nagermotha, Dhataki­
pushpa, Ajwain, sont, black pepper, cloves, methi seeds, 
Chitrak, Jeera white, old gud. This is a general tonic for 
children. 
Useful in dyspepsia, 
agnimandha, vomiting, 
dysentery, diarrhoea. It is a deepan (increases the digestive 
fire), pachan (digestive).
Parpatadyarishta: Ingredients are Parpat, Dhataki­
pushpa, Giloy, Nagermotha, Dharuhaldi, Devadaru, damasa, 
chavya, chitrakmool, Trikatu, Vidang, old gud, Bhadi katteri. 
Useful in bilious fever, jaundice, bilious complaints, 
panduroga, Kamala, complaints of liver and spleen, 
abdominal disorder. It increases Jatharagni (Agni deepak).
Pippali Arishta: Ingredients are Pippali, black pepper 
(kali 
mirch), 
chavya, 
Haridra, 
Chitrak, 
Nagermotha, 
vaividang, supari (arecanut), Lodhra, Patha, Amla, Khus, 
powder of white sandal, cloves, Kusht, Tagar, Jatamansi,
164
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

cinnamon, small cardamoms, Tejpatra, Nagkesar, Priyanku, 
Dhatakipushpa, Draksha (big grapes), old gud.
This is a stimulant, deepan (increases the digestive fire) 
and pachan (digestive). It puts the three Doshas in a state of 
equilibrium (Tridosha prashamaka). It is useful in dysentery, 
consumption, anaemia, diseases of stomach, flatulence, 
dyspepsia, vomiting, anorexia (loss of appetite), piles, cough, 
Asthma.
Punarnavarishta: Ingredients are Punarnava, sont, 
Mirch, pippali, Harad, Baheda, Amla, Dharu haldi, Gokuru, 
Vasaka, Kutki, Gajapippali, Neem bark, Giloy, Damasa, 
Pattolapatra, Dhatakipushpa, Munakka, sugar, honey. Useful 
in liver and spleen complaints, general debility, dropsy of 
hands, feet and body, blood-pressure (raktachap), diseases of 
heart (hridaya rog), fistula (bagandara), piles, asthma, 
leprosy, dysentery, itching of body, diseases of stomach, 
flatulence, constipation, hiccup, fever, amla pitta. It increases 
vitality and veerya (semen). It bestows longevity. It regulates 
the function of the kidney (Vrikkasanshodhak).
Rohita 
kadyarishta: 
Ingredients 
are 
Rohit 
bark, 
Dhatakipushpa, panchakola, Trijatak, Triphala, old gud. 
Useful in old fever (jeerna jwara), disorders of spleen and 
liver, piles, jaundice (Kamala), indigestion, dysentery 
(sangrahani), abdominal troubles (udaravikar), Sothrog 
(swelling of body, sohai), leprosy.
Saribadyarishta: Chief ingredients: white and black 
Sariba, Nagermotha (cyperus rotundous), balka chal, 
.pipalkachal, Amla, Giloy, Khas, red and white sandal, 
Ajwain, Kutki, small cardamom, Tejpatra (leaf of cinnamon), 
big cardamoms, Hareetaki, Dhatakipushpa, old gud. This is a 
blood purifier. This is useful in liver complaints, Prameha 
(spermatorrhoea), itching (scabies), skin diseases, destroys 
poison, 
urinary 
complaints, 
scrofula 
(kandamala), 
constipation and debility, Raktapradar (red metarrhagia in 
women).
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
165

Saraswatarishta: Ingredients are Brahmi, Satavari kand, 
Harad, Khus, fresh ginger (adrak), sont (dried ginger), 
Dhatakipushpa, Sambalu seeds, nishoth, pippali, cloves 
(lavang), Bacha, Kusht, Aswagandha, Baheda, Giloy, small 
cardamoms, vaividang, cinnamon, gold leaf, honey, sugar. 
This is Veeryavardhak. So it is useful in sexual debility, 
seminal weakness. It is useful in general debility. This is a 
tonic for brain. This is beneficial in fainting, convulsions, 
nervous debility. This is useful in stammering, svarabhanga. It 
gives good memory (Smarana Sakti) and Dharana Sakti 
(Dhriti). It is useful in menstrual disorders.
Vidangarishta: Ingredients are Vidanga, pippali mool, 
Rasna, Kutaja bark, Indrajau Patta, Elavaluk, Amla, honey, 
Dhatakipushpa, Trijatak, Priangu, Kachnar, Lodhra, Trikatu. 
Useful 
in 
abscess, 
fistula, 
scrofula 
(Kandamala), 
spermatorrhoea (prameha), worm, stone in the kidney 
(patri), urinary complaints, obesity, lockjaw (Mooka), 
locomotor ataxia.
ASAVAS
Dose: 1 oz (2V2 tolas) twice daily after food. Dilute with 
V2 ounce of water. For children of six months quarter 
teaspoonful. For children of six years 2 teaspoonfuls.
Aravindaasava: Ingredients: White Kamal (lotus), Khus, 
Kesar, Neelotpal, Manjista, small cardamoms, Balamool, 
Jatamansi, Nagermotha, Krishna Sariba, Triphala, Bacha, 
Kachoor, Krishnanisroth, Patolpatra, Peetha Papada, Arjuna 
sal, liquorice, Mahuva flower, Mura, Munakka, Dhataki­
pushpa, Sugar and honey.
This is a tonic for children. This is useful for all diseases 
of children. This is beneficial in the vomiting of children, 
enlargement of spleen in children. This is Agnivardhak or 
Deepan for children. It increases the Jatharagni or digestive 
fire. This is useful in Raktapradhar (metarrhagia) of women. 
This is beneficial in the gonorrhoea of males.
166
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Ahiphenaasava: Ingredients: Opium, Nagermotha, Jaipal, 
Indrajau, big cardamoms, Mahuvasura.
This is useful in acute diarrhoea and cholera, udarasoola 
(stomach pain, intestinal colic), vomiting, diarrhoea of 
children (Balatisara). It produces sleep.
Chandanaasava: Ingredients: Svetachandan, Netrabala, 
Nagermotha, Gualbari, Neelotpal, Priyanghir, Padmak, 
Lodhra, Mapit, Raktachandan, Patta, Chirayatha, Badkichal, 
Pippali, Kachoor, Pithapapda, Mulahati, Rasna, Patolpatra, 
Kachnarchal, Amkichal, Semalka goand, Dhatakipushpa, 
Munakka, sugar, honey and old jaggery.
This is useful in chronic gonorrhoea, gleet, sperma­
torrhoea, dysuria or difficulty in passing urine and other 
urinary diseases, stone in the kidney (patri), heat in the body. 
It gives strength to the heart.
Chavika Asava: Ingredients are Chavya, Chitrak, Bacha, 
Hingupatri, Pushkarmoola, apusha, Kachoor, Patolmool, 
Triphala, Ajwain, Kutajbark, Indrayana, Dania, Rasna, 
Dantimool, 
Vaividang, 
Nagermotha, 
Majit, 
Devadaru, 
Pippala, Sonth, Marich, Dhatakipushpa, Purana gud, Chatur 
Jatak, Lavang and Seetalcheeni.
Properties: Deepan and Pachak. Agnivardhak, stimulant, 
useful in constipation, udara rog (diseases of stomach), 
dysmenorrhoea or difficulty in menstruation, Raktasrava in 
women 
(bleeding 
after 
delivery), 
cough, 
abdominal 
complaints, consumption, urinal troubles, phthisis, nasal 
catarrh, hernia.
Dasamoola Asava: Ingredients are Dasamoola, Lodhra, 
Pushkarmoola, Gudoochi, Amalaki, Draksha, Dhataki­
pushpa.
This is stimulant, alterative and bitter tonic. It increases 
blood. It is useful in cough, piles, anorexia, asthma, vomiting, 
alcoholism. It keeps the bile in a harmonious state 
(pittaprasamana).
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
167

Drakshaasava: 
Chief 
ingredients 
are 
Draksha 
(Munakka), sugar, honey, Dhatakipushpa, Jeyapal, lavang, 
Seetalcheeni, Lalchandan powder, Pippali, Dalchini and 
Tejpatra.
Properties: Stimulant, especially cardiac, antipyretic, 
diuretic and disphretic, Tridosha prasamana, deepan and 
pachan.
It is useful in anaemia, cold, cough, dyspepsia, loss of 
appetite, diseases of heart, chronic wasting diseases such as 
Phthisis, sleeplessness, sudden fainting. Maintains strength in 
acute diseases characterised by excessive debility, worms in 
the bowels, fever, fistula.
Kanakaasava: Ingredients are Dhaturika panchang, sont, 
Vasaka jada, Mulati, pippali, Nagakesar, Kathali, Bharangi, 
Taleesa patra, Munakka, Dhatakipushpa, sugar, honey.
Properties: Expectorant, stimulant and laxative. Useful in 
asthma, dry cough, phthisis, flatulence or wind in the bowels, 
Raktapittha vikar, old fever (jeerna jwara), hiccup, leprosy 
and pain in the kidney.
Kumariasava: Ingredients: Ghrita Kumari, Purana gud, 
choti ilachi, cinnamon, Tejpatra, Nagakesar, Red salt (senda 
nimak), Haridra, Dharu Haridra, pippali, Marich, Kharanj, 
Dhatakipushpa, Akarkara, Bacha, Vidang, Javitri.
Properties: Stimulant, laxative, alterative, tonic, deepan, 
pachan. Useful in diseases of women, agnimandya (loss of 
appetite), Udar Rog, (diseases of stomach), abdominal 
complaints, parswa soola (pain in the sides of trunk), 
Asthma, cough, consumption, enlargement of liver and 
spleen, sothanasak 
(removes swelling of the body), 
flatulence, dyspepsia, colic pain, liver and spleen disorders, 
piles and tympanitis.
Karpuraasava: Ingredients: camphor, small cardamoms, 
Nagarmotha, sont, Ajwain, black pepper, rectified spirit. 
Useful 
in 
Cholera, 
vomiting, 
indigestion, 
diarrhoea,
P R A C T IC E  O F  AYU R V E D A
168

dysentery, udarasoola (stomach pain), pain in the teeth. It 
can be applied locally to teeth.
Lodhraasava: Ingredients: Patani Lodhra, Kachur, Poha 
karmool, small cardamoms, Moorva, Vidang, Triphala, 
Ajwain, Chavya, Priangu, Chikni supari, Indrayana mool, 
Chirayatha, Katki, Bharangi, Chitrak mool, Pippali mool, 
Kusht, Atees Patta, Indrajau, Nagkesar, Kutajbark, Nak, 
Tejpatra, Mirch, Nagarmotha, honey. Useful in Prameha 
(spermatorrhoea, 
veeryavikar), 
piles, 
cough, 
anaemia, 
dysentery, leprosy, Raktapittha, Raktapradhar, Raktavikar in 
children, diabetes, retention of urine, worms, dyspepsia.
Lohaasava: Ingredients: Triphala, Neem bark, Patolpatra, 
Nagarmotha, Patta, Giloy, Chitrak, Lalchandan, Vidanga, 
Majit, Kachoor, Basa, Trivrit, Haldi, Damasa, Pithapappada, 
Indrajau/ Javasa, Sanoi, Bawachi, Bilvachal, Kutajchal, 
Kutkee, Trayamana, Poha karmool, Conchroot, Mahuva gum, 
Katha, 
Suddha 
Loha 
Choorna, 
Madhoor 
Bhasma, 
Sampoorna Jeevaneeya Gana oushadi, gud. It is an iron tonic 
for blood. This is an alterative; useful is anaemia, jaundice 
(Kamla), dropsy (jalodhara), diseases of spleen and liver, 
malaria, old or chronic fever.
Mrigamadaasava: Dose: 10-30 drops with one ounce of 
water. Ingredients: Kasturi, Marich, lavang, Jeyapal, Pippal, 
Dalcheeni, Mritasanjeevni sura or Rectified spirit, Madhu. 
Useful in cholera, hiccup, pneumonia, typhoid fever, Hriday 
Asad (pain in the heart), Nadika Ksheernata, increase of 
Vatha. This is a general tonic for all. It gives strength. It is a 
tonic for women after delivery.
Pippaliadyaasva: Ingredients: Pippali, Marich, Chavya, 
Haridra, Chitrak, Nagermotha, Vaividang, Lodhra, Patta, 
Amla, Rakta and Sveta chandan, Khus, lavang, sagar, 
Jatamansi, Dalcheeni, Nagakesar, Priangu, Choti Ilachi, 
Tejpatra, Dhatakipushpa, Munakka, Purana gud. It is deepan 
and pachan. Useful in indigestion, dyspepsia and other 
stomach troubles, dysentery, diarrhoea, Kshayaroga (T.B),
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
169

Pandurog (anaemia), piles, Gulmarog, worms in the bowels 
(threadworms).
Punarnavaasava: Ingredients: Sonth, Marich, Pippali, 
Harad, Bibheetak (Baheda), Amla, Dharu Haldi, Gokuru, 
chota katteri, Bhada katteri, Vasaka, Irendramool, Kutake, 
Gajapippali, Punarnava, Nimichal, Giloy, Sukhi Mooli, 
Damasa, Patolpatra, Dhatakipushpa, Munakka, sugar and 
honey. Useful in enlargement of spleen and liver, diseases of 
spleen and liver, amlapitta, dropsy, all kinds of fever, diseases 
of kidney.
Sharibadyaasava: Ingredients are Sveta-Krishna ananta- 
mool, Nagarmotha, Lodhra, Bhatki chal, Pippalki chal, 
Kachoor, padmak, Netravala, Patha, Amla, Giloy, Khus, 
Svetachandan, Lalchandan, Ajwain, Kutki, Tejpatra, Choti 
Ilachi, Badi llachee, Koot, sanai, Harad, Dhatakipushpa, 
Munakka, old gud.
Properties: Pittaprasamana (equalises the pitta), Rakta 
Sodhak (purifier of blood). Useful in urinary complaints, 
relieves retention of urine, dysuria (or difficulty in passing 
urine), gonorrhea, syphilis, Prameha or spermatorrhoea, 
boils, eruptions, itching, fistula, destroys poison, skin 
diseases, leprosy, jaundice, increases appetite (deepan).
Ushirasava: Ingredients are: Khus, Netrabala, Lai Kamal 
(red lotus), Sweta Kamal, Priangu, Gambhmari, Padmak, 
Lodhra, Majit, Neelotpal, Damasa, Patta, Chirayatha, 
Bhadkichal, Goolarkichal, Kachoor, Pitha Pappada, Patol­
patra, Kachnarkichal, Jammukichal, Moochras, Munakka, 
Dhatakipushpa, sugar and honey.
Properties: Alterative, tonic, astringent, diuretic, Pitta 
samak (equalising of pitta).
Useful in bleeding piles, dysentery, urinary disorders, 
Mootra krischra (dysuria or difficulty in passing urine), 
gonorrhoea, syphilis, Raktapitta, anaemia, haemorrage,
170
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

dropsy, leprosy, worms, chronic diarrhoea, intestinal and 
pulmonary heamorrhages.
Vasakaasava: Ingredients: Vasaka Panchang (root, bark, 
flower, seed, leaf), Purana gud, Dhatakipushpa, Dalchini, 
choti ilachi, Tejpatra, Nagkesar, Sitalcheeni, Pippali, sont, 
Marich, Sugandwala.
Properties: Expectorant and antispasmodic. Purifies the 
blood. Useful in cough, bronchitis, asthma, phthisis and other 
chest affections, all diseases of lungs, blood spitting 
(Raktapittha), srotanasak.
AVALEHAS
(Confections)
Dose: V2 to 1 tola (one teaspoonful) 
to be taken twice a day with milk.
Milk should always be taken after taking Avaleha.
Oil, tamarind, sour things, gud, too much salt, mustard, 
black gram, sweet pumpkin, kachalu or Arabi or Seppan 
Kilangu, potato should not be taken.
Aswagandhadi Lehyam: Chief ingredients are Aswa­
gandha, cow’s ghee, Banslochan, honey, sugar, talispatra, 
pippali, dalcheeni. Useful in sexual debility, spermatorrhoea, 
general debility, senile debility or debility on account of old 
age, epilepsy, nervous debility. It purifies blood. It is the best 
nervine and brain tonic.
Agastya Hareetaki Avaleha: This was prepared by 
Agastya Rishi. Chief ingredients are Hari, Hareetaki, Yava, 
Dasamoola, Chitraka, Pippali, Gokaru, cow’s ghee, honey, 
Banslochan, Dalcheeni.
Properties: Alterative and nutritive. It is Ayurvardhak; 
gives longevity. Useful in cough, hiccup, asthma, piles, 
phthisis, general debility, constipation. It is Raktapravardhak, 
increases blood. It gives energy to the heart.
Chyavanaprash: This was prepared by Chyavan Maharshi 
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED 
171

and was used by him. Hence the name. He lived for 1500 
years.
Chief ingredients: Amalaka, Dasamoola, Ashtavarga, 
Pippali, 
Banslochan, 
Choti- Ilachi, 
Jeevanti, 
Kachur, 
Pohakarmool, cow’s ghee, honey, sugar.
Properties: Nutritive, tonic, strengthens the constitution, 
gives vigour, vitality, good memory, brain power, longevity.
Very useful as a nutritive in phthisis, general debility, 
cough, spermatorrhoea (suklanasha), hoarseness of voice, 
debility of old age, all kinds of debility, anaemia, 
constipation, dhatudourbalya (semen becomes watery).
Ashtavarga: Jeevak, Rishabhak, 
Meda, 
Mahameda, 
Kakoli, Ksheera Kakoli, Riddhi, Vriddhi.
Dasamoola: Bilwa, Padal, Ghanakarika or Arini, Syanak, 
Gambhari are five big mools. Sataparni, Plashtaparni, 
Vartaki, Kantakarika, Gokuru are the five small mools.
Kantakarya Avaleha: Chief ingredients: 
Kantakari 
(Katteri), sugar candy, cow’s ghee, Chitraka, Trikatu, 
Nagermotha, shringi, Rasna, Bharinghi.
Properties: 
Expectorant 
(kaphanasak), 
diuretic 
and 
aperient, gives energy to lungs, vathanasak (destroys wind), 
purifies the blood.
Useful in cough, bronchitis, asthma, hiccup and other 
chest diseases, parsvasool, consumption. It is also useful as a 
diuretic in dysuria and dropsy.
Kutajavaleha: Chief ingredients are: Kutaj bark, old gud, 
Trikatu, Triphala, Rasanjan, Bhallataka, Baelgiri, Chitraka, 
Vaividanga, honey.
Properties: astringent, antiperiodic, Deepak, pachak, 
Raktapravardhak (increases blood). Useful in all kinds of 
piles, chronic diarrhoea, anaemia, dysentery, hematemesis, 
melaena, vomiting, chronic dyspepsia, jaundice, Amlapitta. 
Take goat’s milk, buttermilk.
172
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Kooshmandavaleha: Chief ingredients: fresh Koosh- 
manda, cow’s ghee, sugarcandy, pippali, sont, jeera, tejpatra, 
marich, Dalchini, Ilachi, honey.
Properties: Shakti vardhak (promotes energy, vigour), 
cools the brain, nervous system and the eyes, gives strength 
to lungs and heart, nutritive, gives Dehapushti, dhatupushti, 
veerya vardhak.
It is a tonic for old people and children.
Useful in Asthma, cough, consumption, fever, giddiness, 
excessive thirst, Haemophysis.
Maha Bilwadi Lehyam: Chief ingredients: Bilwa, 
Baelgiri, sugarcandy, honey, Chitraka, Trikatu, cow’s ghee, 
Banslochan.
Useful in indigestion, distaste for food, constipation, 
gastric 
troubles, 
intestinal 
weakness, 
spermatorrhoea, 
diabetes, chronic diarrhoea and dysentery.
Vasakavaleha: Chief ingredients: Fresh Vasaka panchang, 
pippali, honey, Banslochan, cow’s ghee.
Properties: expectorant (Kaphanasak), antispasmodic, 
alterative, astringent, gives strength to the lungs.
Useful in asthma, cough, bronchitis, phthisis and other 
chest 
affections, 
especially 
those 
attended 
with 
haemmorrhages.
GHRITAS
Ashoka Ghrita: Chief ingredients: Cow’s ghee, Ashoka 
chhal, Ashtavarga (Jeevaka, Rishabhak, Meda, Mahameda, 
Kakoli, Ksheera Kakoli, Riddhi, Vriddhi), Masparani, 
Mudgaparni, Jeevanthi etc.
A general tonic and alterative for women. Useful in 
amenorrhoea, menorrhagia, metritis, leucorrhoea.
Dose: 0.25 to 1 tola to be taken twice a day with sugarcandy.
Brahmi Ghrita: Chief ingredients are Brahmi, cow’s
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
173

ghee, Brahmi Svarasa (essence of fresh Brahmi leaves), sont, 
Marich, Chavya, Bacha.
A Brain tonic useful in Hysteria, Epilepsy, loss of 
memory. It is beneficial in aphonia or loss of speech and 
hoarseness of voice. It is taken with milk or sugarcandy twice 
daily, on an empty stomach in the morning and evening. It 
must be prepared fresh.
Brihat Aswagandha Ghrita: Ingredients: Cow’s ghee, 
Aswagandha, goat’s milk, Kakoli, Ksheera Kakoli, Riddhi, 
Vriddhi, Meda, Mahameda, Jeevak, Rishabhak.
It is useful in phthisis, cough, fever, loss of appetite, 
general debility, Hasmoptysis (Rakta Pitta), Rheumatism, 
malaria, alopecia or baldness, epilepsy (Apasmara, Mirighi), 
sterility.
It is a sexual tonic. It increases memory (Medha and 
Buddhi vardhak). It is useful in timira or night blindness 
(nictolopia).
Changeri Ghrita: Chief ingredients are cow’s ghee, 
Changeri Svarasa (juice), Badri quath, sour curd, sont, 
Yavakshar.
Deepak, Pachak, appetizer and digestive, alterative. It is 
intestinal tonic. It cleanses the lower bowels, gives strength to 
the intestine. It is specially useful in prolapsed anus (Guda 
bhramsa).
Jatyadi Ghrita: Chief ingredients: Jatipatra, Neempatra, 
Patol patra, Katuke, Neela tutha, wax, majit, Dharu haldhi, 
haldhi, Khus, Mulhati, cow’s ghee.
This is for external use only. This is useful in chronic 
ulcers, wounds, fistula, sluggish ulcers, chaneres. It is a 
styptic, local stimulant, escharotic.
Kantakari Ghrita: Ingredients: Cow’s ghee (Goghrita), 
Rasa of chota Katteri, badi khaterka Svarasa, bharanghika 
Svarasa, vasaka Svarasa, goat’s milk, Gaja pippali, pippali, 
Marich, pippali mool, red and white chandan.
174
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Useful in cough and asthma; to be used with decoction of 
Vasaka. Chiefly beneficial in the asthma and cough of 
children. Useful in fever, stomach pain. It increases the 
digestive fire (Agnivardhak, deepak).
Mahatikta Ghrita: Chief ingredients are Cow’s ghee, 
Amla Svarasa, Atees, Amaltas, Katuki, Triphala, neem chhal, 
Dharu haldi, Bhasaka, ananta mool, Chirayata, giloy, Gaja 
pippali, etc.
Bitter tonic, alterative, purifies the blood. Useful in 
leprosy, Visarpa, amla pitta, heart diseases, fever, jaundice, 
boils, itching, scrofula, bleeding piles.
Mahatriphala Ghrita: Ingredients: Cow’s ghee, Triphala 
quath, Bhangra Svarasa, Vasaka Svarasa, Satavari Svarasa, 
goat’s milk, Giloy Svarasa, Draksha, Ksheera Kakoli.
Useful 
in ophthalmia, Trichiasis, 
night blindness, 
lachrymal fistula, conjunctivitis and other eye diseases. 
Digestive, appetizer (Pachak), deepak, Drishti prasarak, 
increases the power of vision.
Phala Ghrita: Chief ingredients are Triphala, Dharuhaldi, 
Kustha, Kutaki, Vacha, Sariva, Rasna, Vansalochana.
Useful in uterine disorders, anaemia, ristelity and 
prolapsed uterus.
Saraswati Ghrita: Ingredients: Haree Brahmi Svarasa, 
cow’s ghee, Haridra, Amla, Kushta, Nisoth, pippali, 
Vaividang, saindhava, lavang, sugar, Bacha.
Bitter tonic, stimulant, brain tonic. Useful in aphonia and 
hoarseness 
of 
voice, 
leprosy, 
piles, 
spermatorrhoea 
(prameha), cough.
BHASMAS
Bhasma is an oxidised or reduced metal mineral or jewel. 
Metals and metallic compounds are subjected to a process of 
purification to free them of their impurities. Otherwise they 
are likely to induce certain diseases or morbid symptoms.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
175

The metals are purified by heating the respective plates again 
and again. They are then plunged in the following liquids viz., 
oil, whey, or buttermilk, sour conjee, cow’s urine, tamarind 
water, decoction of a pulse called Kulattha (Dolichos 
uniflorus, horse gram). There is yet another method of 
purifying these metals i.e., by soaking plates of heated metals 
in the juice of plantain tree.
The thing is heated in a hot iron vessel and dipped in the 
oil etc., each seven times. Oil, buttermilk, should be fresh for 
each time.
Metal and metallic compounds are reduced to powder. 
The operation is called Marana, the destruction of their 
metallic character. It is practically reduced to powder either 
in the metallic state or after conversion into an oxide or 
sulphide.
The furnace for heating metals is usually a pit in the 
ground called Gajaputa. It is made one and a quarter cubits 
in depth length and breadth. This is filled with dried balls of 
cowdung. The metals or metallic compounds to be roasted 
are enclosed in a covered crucible and placed in the centre of 
the pit within the balls of cowdung, which are then set fire to 
and allowed to burn till consumed to ashes.
The apparatus employed in preparing these chemical 
compounds consisted of crucibles of different sorts, glass 
bottles and earthen pots etc.
After purification it is burnt. It is rubbed in a mortar with 
the juice of Ghrit Kumari for 3 days and rose water for 3 days 
and Arkadhooth for 3 days and cow’s milk for three days. 
Afterwards it is made into tablets, the size of a rupee. Then it 
is dried in the sun. Then it is kept in a mud pot and covered 
with an earthen lid. Pieces of cloth dipped is Multani mitti, 
are covered over the pot. The pot is dried in the sun for a 
day. Then it is put in Gajaput and burnt for 24 hours. Then it 
is taken out and rubbed again. This is burnt eleven times.
176
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Ordinary Bhasmas like coral, pearl, Sukti, conch are 
burnt eleven times. Abhrak is burnt 100 times (Sataputi), 500 
times (Pancha Sataputi) and 1000 times (Sahasraputi).
Test of a Pure Bhasma
1. When the Bhasma is put in water, it must float. Then it 
is properly burnt. It can be taken safely.
2. When it is put in fire, there must be no smoke or smell.
3. There must be no shining when it is exposed to the sun 
after rubbing it on finger.
4. It must be tasteless when applied to the tongue.
5. It must be very, very light.
How to administer?
Dose: Adults 1 to 2 grains. Children from 6 to 12 years: 
Vi a grain. Bhasma should not be given to children below 6.
It is usually given with honey, butter, cream, ghee on an 
empty stomach in the early morning and evening. Oil, red 
chillies, tamarind, gud (jaggery), black gram, sour things, 
mustard, should be avoided.
Abhrak Bhasma (Mica): Sataputi, Pancha Sataputi, 
Sahasraputi. Useful in phthisis, diabetes, debility of old age. 
Gives strength to the body, promotes vigour. It cures old 
fever, bronchitis, asthma, piles, palpitation of the heart, 
blood pressure, nervous debility, spermatorrhoea, hard 
breathing, coryza, leucorrhoea, stricture urethra, Mutra 
Krichra, Mutra Agad, thickens the watery semen.
It produces longevity (Ayurvardhak), Agnipradeepak 
(increases the digestive fire), cures leprosy.
Bhanga Bhasma (black): It is very difficult to prepare this 
Bhasma. Increases semen and power of retention. Useful in 
seminal impurities, nocturnal emission, urinary disorders, 
leucorrhoea, general debility, asthma, consumption, diabetes.
Coral (Pravaal Bhasma): There are three kinds of 
preparations Aeni, Surva and Chandra puti.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
177

It is useful in phthisis, cough, spermatorrhoea, asthma, 
menorrhagia, haemophtysis, Haematatemes. It is Deepak 
(appetizer) and Pachak (digestive). It checks haemorrhage. It 
increases the lustre in the eyes.
Chandrodaya: It contains mercury, sulphur, bhang, 
Krishna Abhrak.
Most popular remedy in sexual debility for Dhatu vriddhi. 
It gives strength to the heart and lungs. It is useful in cough, 
asthma, dhanurvata (tetanus), chronic fever.
Take this with honey or butter or ghee. Drink half a seer 
of milk afterwards.
Godanti Hartal Bhasma: Useful in bilious fever, malarial 
fever, dry cough, haemorrhage, headache, leucorrhoea, 
menorrhagia, leprosy, rheumatism. It is Deepak and Pachak.
Louha Bhasma (Iron): It gives longevity. It is useful in 
anaemia, chlorosis, visarpa, heart’s affections, phthisis, 
scrofula, general debility, sexual debility, Bright’s disease, 
blood impurity, jaundice, liver and spleen complaints. It 
promotes digestion.
It is burnt 50 times, 100 times (Sataputi) and 200 times.
Mandoor Bhasma: Useful in anaemia, chlorosis, general 
debility, sexual debility, liver and spleen complaints, 
jaundice, piles.
It is a blood purifier, Shakti vardhak (increases strength 
and vitality), increases red blood cells.
Mukta Bhasma: It is a Veerya Vardhak. Gives strength to 
the heart. It is useful in palpitation of heart (Hridaya 
prakampan), blood pressure (Raktachap). It gives longevity, 
and gives lustre to the eyes. It is useful in all kinds of debility, 
consumption, nervousness, chronic fever, cough, asthma, 
hysteria, 
heart 
diseases, 
haemoptysis 
(Rakta 
pitta), 
indigestion, seminal diseases, haemorrhage, rickets. It is 
given to pregnant women as it supplies vitamin A. It is useful 
in urinary diseases such as Mutrakrischra, Mutra Aead. It is
178
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

useful in leucorrhoea. It equalises the bile (pitta prasamak). 
It is Agnipradeepak, increases the digestive fire. It is useful in 
gonorrhoea.
Makaradhwaja: It is Khoopipakwa rasayana. It is 
prepared in a glass bottle, a special variety. It contains gold, 
pearl, sulphur, mercury.
It is a wonderful tonic. Useful in all kinds of debilitv. It 
gives vigour, vitality, energy to heart, lungs and the entire 
constitution. It strengthens memory. It improves blood.
It is Veerya vardhak and so is useful in impotency. It is 
useful in palpitation of heart, blood pressure, old fever, 
constipation. It is useful for women after delivery.
Rajata Bhasma (silver, Roupya): It is Agnipradeepak, 
increases" the digestive fire. It is useful in seminal diseases, 
nervous diseases, general debility, consumption, 
liver 
complaints, hemiplegia, epilepsy, chorea, consumption, 
anaemia, leucorrhoea (svetapradar), hectic fever, old fevers, 
asthma. It promotes memory and intellect, lustre of the eyes. 
It is a blood purifier. It is a Veeryavardhak, increases sexual 
vigour. It is a pittaprasantak, keeps the bile in a normal 
condition.
Rasasindhu: This is also a Koopipakwa rasayana 
prepared in a special bottle. It contains sulphur, mercury.
Useful in sexual and general debility. It is Pachak 
(digestive) and Deepak (increases the digestive fire). It 
increases the blood (Raktavardhak).
Sankha Bhasma (conch shell): Useful in diseases of the 
stomach, tympanitis, flatulence, colic, asthma, acidity, 
bronchitis, loose stools, abdominal and pelvic tumours.
Svarna Bhasma (gold): Useful in phthisis, asthma, 
general 
debility, 
hysteria, 
diabetes, 
chronic 
fever, 
spermatorrhoea, impotency. It strengthens memory. It is a 
tonic, Veerva vardhak, increases sexual vigour.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
179

Shringa Bhasma (stag’s horn): Useful in pneumonia, 
cough, chest pain, parsva sool.
Swarnamakshika (Pyrite-Yellow): Useful in sperma­
torrhoea, anaemia, itching. It gives strength to heart, lungs, 
intestines, brain and keeps them in fit condition. It is 
beneficial in enlargement of spleen, bleeding piles, 
consumption, asthma. It purifies the blood. It has the 
qualities of Swarna Bhasma.
Tamra Bhasma (copper): Useful in leprosy, asthma, 
bronchitis, cough, consumption, anaemia, piles, liver trouble, 
blood impurities, diseases of stomach, colic.
THbhanga Bhasma (lead, zinc, seesha): Useful in 
gonorrhoea, all seminal impurities, sterility, all female 
diseases pertaining to the irregularity of menses.
CHOORNA
Dose: V4 to V2 tola (24 to 48 grs.) twice or thrice daily.
Usually the powders are taken with milk, water, ghee, 
honey, sherbet or sugar.
Wherever the Anupan or vehicle is ghee or honey with 
milk, the powder should be first mixed with ghee or honey 
and milk to be taken afterwards.
Ajmodadi Choorna: The ingredients are Ajmoda, 
Moochras, Sonth, Dhatakipushpa. This should be taken with 
buttermilk. Useful in diarrhoea, dysentery.
Aswagandha Choorna: Ingredients are Aswagandha, 
Bhidara or Vriddhdarak. It should be taken with milk. Tonic, 
alterative, blood purifier. Gives Dhatupushti, strengthens 
memory. Useful in sexual and general debility, sperma­
torrhoea, impotency, emaciation of children, nervous 
diseases, old age. It prevents the hairs from becoming grey.
Bhaskar Lavan Choorna: Lord Surya gave this recipe to 
Aswin Kumars, the celestial physicians. This can be taken 
before or with food or after food.
180
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chief ingredients are Saindhava, Vida, Souvarchala, Kala 
nimak, Dhania, Pippali, Pippalamool, Amla vetasa, Trikatu, 
Anardana. Gastric, stimulant, carminative, Deepak, Pachak. 
Useful in indigestion, all kinds of stomach diseases, 
flatulence or wind in the bowels, nausea, constipation, loss of 
appetite, bowel complaint, diarrhoea, piles (to be taken with 
butter milk), fistula, enlargement of spleen.
Chitrakadi Choorna: Ingredients are Chitrak root, Hing 
(asafoetida fried), Sonth, Pippali, Pippala mool, Chavya, the 
five salts viz., Saindhava nimak, Kala nimak, Vida, Samudra, 
Sambar (Souvarchala). (In Tamil Induppu, Kalluppu, Kari- 
uppu, Paraiuppu, Valayaluppu).
All these are powdered and pounded in the mortar along 
with big lemon juice and then dried in the sun. Deepak, 
Pachak. Useful in chronic .diarrhoea, dyspepsia, anorexia, 
gulma (stomach ache)
Eladi Choorna: Ingredients are small Cardamom seeds, 
Pippali, Nagermotha, White Chandan, Trapusha, Cloves, 
Nagakesar.
Diuretic, demulcent, Tridosha prasamak, Pitha prasamak 
(Keeps bile in normal condition), mutra samsodhak (purifies 
urine). Very useful in dysuria (mutra krischra), incontinence 
of urine, Mutra Agad (pain in passing urine). In acute 
gonorrhoea it makes the urine alkaline and non-irritating. It 
stops vomiting. It is useful in influenza, bronchitis. It is taken 
with honey.
Hinguashtak Choorna: Ingredients are Sonth, Marich, 
Pippali, Ajwain, Saindhava nimak (red salt), Sveta Jeera, 
Kala Jeera, Hingu. Hingu must be fried. It can be taken 
before food, with food and after food.
Gastric 
stimulant, 
carminative, 
Deepak, 
Pachak, 
Agnivardhak (increases digestive fire). Very useful in loss of 
appetite, indigestion, colic, dyspepsia, flatulence, tympanitis, 
all stomach diseases, constipation.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
181

Katphaladi 
Choorna: 
Ingredients 
are 
Katphal, 
Pokkarmool, Kakkad Singi, Nagarmotha, Trikatu, Kachur. 
Kaphanasak (destroyer of phlegm), Pachak. Useful in cough, 
asthma, phthisis, rheumatism, vomiting, stomach pain. It is 
mixed with honey and then taken.
Lavangadi Choorna: Chief ingredients are Lavanga 
(cloves), Bheemseni 
Kapur, 
Chota Ilachi, Dalcheeni, 
Jeyaphal (Jatiphal), Sonth, Banslochan, Pippali, Jatamansi, 
Sugandawala, Kankola, sugar.
Kantha samsodhak (cleanses the throat and vocal cords), 
Agni pravardhak, Suruchikar (gives taste to the food), Dhatu 
vardhak, Tridosha prasamak, sedative, anti spasmodic, 
carminative, expectorant (Kaphanasak), diaphoretic.
Useful in cold, hiccup, diarrhoea, lumbago, whooping 
cough, flatulence, spermatorrhoea, consumption, urinary 
diseases like Mutra krischra, Mutra Agad, diarrhoea, 
dysentery, hridaya rog (heart diseases), fever due to cold.
Maha Khandava Choorna: Ingredients are Marich, 
Nagakesar, Talispatra, five salts, Pippalamool, Dalcheeni, 
Pippali, Sonth, Nagarmotha, sugarcandy.
Deepak, Pachak, Agni Vardhak, Krimi Nasak. Gives 
strength to the heart. Useful in anorexia, diarrhoea, 
dysentery, cholera, piles, cough, worms, vomiting, stomatitis, 
diseases of stomach.
Narayana Choorna: Ingredients are Chitrak root, 
Triphala, Trikatu, Svet Jeera, Bacha, Pippala mool, Vana 
Tulasi, Vaividang, five salts, Danti, Pohakar mool. Deepak, 
Pachak, 
Agni 
vardhak, 
Dastavar 
(rechak), 
Svedhak 
(diaphoretic), Snehak (makes the body shine), Saktivardhak.
To be taken with warm water when required as purgative. 
Useful in heart disease with honey. Useful in piles with 
butter milk. Useful in indigestion, flatulence, constipation, 
stomach pain, acid eructation from stomach. Useful in wasp
182
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

sting with ghee. Useful in fistula, cough, asthma, anaemia, 
fever, leprosy, dysentery.
Navayas Choorna: Ingredients are Chitrak jada, Triphala, 
Nagarmotha, Vaividang, Trikatu, Loha Bhasma. Rakta 
pravardhak, sakti vardhak, aruchi nasak. Useful in fistula, 
leprosy, piles, mandagni (indigestion), anaemia, worms, 
asthma, phthisis. To be taken with honey or butter milk.
Pippalyadi Choorna: Chief ingredients are Pippali, Bari 
Katteri, Chhoti Katteri, Javakshara, Indrajava, Chitrak jada, 
Ananta mool (Sariva), Kachoor, five salts, Patha.
Alterative, blood-purifier, tonic, Deepak, Pachak, Vatha 
prasamak, diuretic, antilithic, antacid. Useful in chronic 
diarrhoea and chronic dysentery, dyspepsia, sprue, influenza, 
stones in the kidney. It is taken with buttermilk or hot water.
Pushyanuga Choorna: Chief ingredients are Patha, 
Jamun beej, Amkigiri, Pashana bhed, Atees, Rasanjan, 
Nagarmotha, Trikatu, Red Sandal, Indrajava, Dhata ki 
pushpa, Arjun chal, Gheru, Lodhra, Ananta mool. All these 
drugs are collected in Pushya Star.
Alterative, 
tonic, 
astringent, 
diuretic. 
Useful 
in 
leucorrhoea, menorrhegia (raktapradhar), Rajodosha (men­
strual troubles), all female complaints, lumbago in females. 
To be taken twice daily with rice water obtained from boiled 
rice or raw rice water with honey.
Sitophaladi Choorna: Chief ingredients are Sugarcandy, 
Banslochan, Pippali, Ilachi, Dalcheeni.
Expectorant (Kapha nasak), stimulant, Suruchikar (that 
which gives good taste), Sakti pravardhak (gives strength and 
energy), Jwaranasak (destroys fever), Pittahari (destroys 
bile). Useful in cough, asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia, 
phthisis, chest diseases, burning of the feet, bilious fever, 
excessive thirst (daha santi), mandagni nasak (destroyer of 
indigestion). To be taken three times a day with honey before 
food.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
183

Sonthyadi Choorna No 1: Ingredients are Sonth, Kala 
nimak, Hingu (fried), Anardana, Amlavet. Useful in cough 
and asthma, hridaya rog (heart diseases).
Sonthyadi Choorna No. 2: Ingredients are Sonth, Atees, 
Hingu (fried), Nagarmotha, Kutaj, Chitrak root. Useful in 
dysentery and diarrhoea, to be taken with hot water.
Sudarshana Choorna: Chief ingredients are Kirata and 
52 bitter tonics, Triphala, Haldi, Darn haldi, Choti and Bhada 
Katteri, Kachar, Trikatu, Pithapapada, Banslochan, Guduchi, 
Talispatra.
Bitter tonic, blood purifier (Rakta sodhak), Tridosha 
prasamak, Jwara nasak, Deepak (increases digestive fire). 
Useful in fevers, malaria, dyspepsia, nausea, typhoid fever 
(Sannipata Jwara), Jaundice, anaemia, lumbago, parsva sool, 
asthma, cough. To be taken with hot water twice daily before 
food, morning and evening;
Talisadi Choorna: Chief ingredients are Talispatra, 
Trikatu, Banslochan, Ilachi, Nagakesar, Khus, Dalchini, 
sugar, Pippali.
To be taken before meals thrice with honey or Brahmi or 
Anar Sherbet. Stimulant, expectorant (Kapha prasamak), 
laxative, alterative, Swasa-Kasa nasak (destroyer of cough). 
Useful in anorexia (distaste for food), chronic cough, chest 
diseases, dyspepsia, enlargement of spleen, vomiting, 
dysentery, fever, Shoth (swelling of body), stomach diseases, 
anaemia.
Trikatu Choorna: Ingredients are Sonth, Marich, Pippali, 
Harad, Baheda, Amla Chavya, Bhatkichal, Katphal.
Kapha prasamak, Rakta shodak, Deepak, Pachak. Useful 
in cold, cough, anorexia or loss of appetite, colic, chest pain, 
parsva sool. It should be taken twice daily before meals with 
honey or hot water or cow’s ghee.
Triphala Choorna: Ingredients are Hareetaki, Bibhitaki 
(Baheda) and Amlaki.
184
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Alterative, Rakta sodhak, astringent, purgative (Rechak), 
Pitta-Kapha 
prasamak, 
Mutra 
samsodhak. 
Useful 
in 
dyspepsia, chronic diarrhoea, hiccup, colic, itch, skin 
diseases, spermatorrhoea, bilious fever (Pitta Jwara), Mutra 
krichra, Mutra Agad, gonorrhoea. Useful in eye diseases for 
fomentation, internal haemorrhages. Take with hot water or 
honey or sherbet.
Vriddha Gangadhar Choorna: Ingredients are Musta 
(Nagarmotha), Syonaka, Sonth, Lodhra, Dhatakipushpa, 
Mochrasa, Patha (patal), Kutaj twak, Indrajava, Amka gutli.
Astringent (digestive), tonic, blood purifier, Pachak. 
Gives tone to the intestines, promotes appetite and increases 
digestive power. Useful in chronic diarrhoea, ordinary 
diarrhoea. It is taken three times daily with whey or butter 
milk or raw rice water.
Yastimadhu 
Choorna: 
Ingredients 
are 
Liquorice 
(Mulhati), Amla, Baheda, Harad, Chitrak, Bacha, Dalchini, 
Banslochan,.
Expectorant (Kapha prasamak), demulcent, slightly 
laxative, Svara samsodhak (improves the voice), Krimi nasak. 
Useful in asthma, cough, bronchitis, laryngitis, catarrh, 
hoarseness of voice, gonorrhoea, hridaya vikar (heart 
diseases), worms. To be taken with honey or sherbet.
MODAK OR LADDU
Abhayadi Modak: 48 grains. Chief ingredients are 
Chitrak Jad, Abhaya (Harad), Amalaka, Pippali, Dalcheeni, 
Tejpatra, pure Jamalgota (croton seeds or Danti Seeds), 
Trivrik, sugar.
Drastic, purgative. Useful in constipation, indigestion, 
dropsy, rheumatism, gout, stomach pain. Not to be given to 
pregnant women, old and weak persons and children. One 
Modak to be taken with hot water or hot milk.
Brihad Satavari Modak: Chief ingredients are Satavari, 
Gokuru. Bala. Ati-Bala. Vidari Kand. Satavarka Svaras.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
185

Vidari Kand Svaras, Trikatu, Triphala, Choti Ilachi, Dalchini, 
Gandawala, 
Kasturi, 
Kismiss, 
Banslochan, 
Jeyaphal, 
Jatamansi, Daruhaldi, Guggulu, pure Kapoor (Bheemseni), 
sugar.
Gives energy, vigour (Ojas), Rati Vardhak (sexual 
excitement), Buddhi Vardhak, Svarahit prada. Useful in 
leprosy, impotency, hoarseness of voice, spermatorrhoea, 
cough, piles, elephantiasis of legs, Soth (swelling of body), 
removes sterility in women. It should be taken with milk 
fifteen minutes before food.
Brihat Sooran Modak: Chief ingredients are Jemi Kand 
(sooran), Chitrak, Sonth, Marich, Triphala, Pippali, Choti 
Ilachi, Triphalamool, Vaividang, Vidara seeds, Dalchini, 
sugar.
Maha Veerya Vardhak, Deepak, Pachak, Agnipradeepak, 
Vataprasamaka, Ayurvardhak. Useful in Bhasmak rog 
(excessive hunger), Soth (swelling), all kinds of piles, 
elephantiasis of legs (sleepad), dysentery, hiccup, cough, 
consumption, enlargement of spleen, asthma, poison in food. 
It should be taken with honey or milk.
Methi Modak: Chief Ingredients are Methi seeds, 
Trikatu, Triphala, Nagarmotha, Jeera, Kalajeera, Dhania, 
Ajwain, Saindhava nimak, Talispatra, Jeyaphal, Dalcheeni, 
Lavang, Javitri, Nagakesar, pure Kapoor, sugar, cow’s ghee, 
Madhu.
Saktivardhak, Deepak, Vatha prasamak, Stanya vardhak 
(lactagogue), Pachak. Useful in spermatorrhoea, dysentery, 
rheumatism, 
anaemia, 
stone 
in 
the 
kidney, 
cough, 
Mootragada, Raja Yakshma (consumption), increases the 
milk in nursing mothers. It should be taken with milk twice 
daily.
Pippali Modak: Ingredients are Honey, cow’s ghee, 
Pippali, sugarcandy, cow’s milk, Tejpat, Ilachi seeds, 
Nagakesar.
186
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

It is Kapha, Vatha prasamak, Agnipradeepak. Useful in 
chronic fever, cough, asthma, anaemia, jaundice, Veeryapat 
(spermatorrhoea), indigestion. It is taken with milk twice 
daily before food.
Sri Kameshwar Modak: (48 grains) Chief ingredients are 
Aswagandha, Guduchi, Methikibeej, Vidarikand, Moosli, 
Gokuru, Talmakhana, Satavari, Jeyaphal, Trikatu, Chitrak, 
Gajapippali, Munakka, sugar.
Vaajeekarana (Ativeerya Vardhak), Kamagni Deepak 
(increases sexual vigour), Stambhak (retains the semen), 
Vathaprasamak. Useful in impotency, all kinds of sperma­
torrhoea, piles, consumption, cough, asthma, rheumatism. 
One Modak to be taken with milk.
Svabaghyasonti Modak: (48 grains) Chief ingredients are 
Trikatu, Triphala, white Jeera, Ajamoda, Dhania, Katphala, 
Nagarmotha, Choti Ilachi, Jeyaphal, Jatamansi, Lavang, 
Sonth.
Tridosha prasamak, 
Deepak, Pachak, Agnivardhak. 
Useful in vomiting, burning in the throat due to sour belching 
(Kanthadaha), headache, Mandagni (indigestion), Hridaya- 
sool (heart pain), Parsvasool (side chest pain), fever.
TViphala Modak: Chief ingredients are Triphala, Bavache, 
Vaividang, Nisoth, pure Guggulu, Silajit, Pokkarmool, 
Marich, Trikatu, Dalcheeni, Choti Ilachi, sugar.
Vata, Pitta, Kapha Prasamak, Rakta prasodhak. Useful in 
fistula, enlargement of spleen, fissure in the tongue, 
Kantharog (throat pain), lumbago, leprosy. It is taken with 
milk before food twice daily.
PILLS
Oil, oil preparations, chillies, tamarind, mustard, jaggery, 
black gram, sour things, pumpkin, too much sweets should be 
avoided when you take these pills.
Chandraprabha Pill: (6 grains) Chief ingredients are 
Refined 
Kapoor 
(Bheemseni), 
Bacha, 
Nagarmotha,
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
187

Chirayata, Triphala, Trikatu, five salts, Dalchini, Shilajit, 
Guggulu, sugarcandy, Loha Bhasma, Svarnamakshik Bhasma.
Tonic, 
Shakti 
Vardhak, 
Rakta 
Shodhak, Tridosha 
Prasamak, Mutra Samshodhak, diuretic, diaphoretic (Sveda 
Prada), Deepak, Pachak. Useful in spermatorrhoea, Mutra 
krichra, Mutra agad, stone in the kidney, gonorrhoea, 
anaemia, lumbago, bleeding piles, leprosy, itch, enlargement 
of spleen, stomach diseases, fistula, diseases of teeth, 
menstrual 
disorders, 
rheumatism, 
cough, 
asthma, 
albuminuria, phosphaturia, chronic fever. One pill to be 
taken with milk twice daily morning and evening.
Gokshuradi Guggulu: (6 grains) Chief ingredients are 
Gokuru, pure Guggulu, Sonth, Marich, Pippal, Triphala, 
Nagarmotha.
Diuretic, alterative, Rakta Samsodhak, demulcent, tonic, 
Mutra Samsodhak. Useful in spermatorrhoea, Mutra Krichra 
(dysuria), leucorrhoea (Sveta Pratar), gonorrhoea, Mutra 
agad, stone in the kidney (patri), rheumatism, albuminuria, 
phosphaturia. One pill twice daily with cold water or raw rice 
water before food.
Kanchnar Guggulu: (6 grains) Chief ingredients are 
Kanchnar bark, Triphala, Trikatu, Ilachi, Dalchini, Tejpatra, 
pure Guggulu, Go Ghrita (cow’s ghee), Varuna.
Alterative, Tridosha Prasamak, Rakta Samsodhak, tonic. 
Highly beneficial in scrofula. Useful in fistula, leprosy, ulcers 
(Vrana), sinus (Nasur Nadi Vrana). 2 pills to be taken with 
hot water twice daily before food.
Sanjeevani Vati: Chief ingredients are Vaividang, Sonth, 
Pippali, Triphala, Guduchi, pure Ballatak, pure Vatsanab.
Deepak, Pachak, Agni Vardhak, Tridosha Prasamak. 
Useful in indigestion, cholera, snake bite, typhoid fever, 
vomiting and diarrhoea of children all stomach diseases of 
children. One pill twice daily before food.
In typhoid fever with ginger juice; in snake bite with the
188
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

juice of plantain root; in cholera with mint juice; in vomiting 
and diarrhoea of children with mother’s milk or juice of mint, 
or juice of Ajwain, or juice of Karpura Valli.
Triphala Guggulu: (6 grains) Chief ingredients are 
Triphala, pure Guggulu, Pippali.
Rakta 
Pravardhak, 
Rakta 
Samsodak, 
Rakta 
Vata 
Prasamak. Useful in fistula, bleeding piles, carbuncles, 
abscesses, ulcer, sinus (Nadi Vrana), rheumatism. One pill to 
be taken with milk twice daily before food.
Yograj Guggulu: (6 grains) Chief ingredients are Triphala, 
Trikatu, pure Guggulu, Vacha, Hing (fried), Kala Jeera, Go 
Ghrita, Ajmoda, Indrajav, Vaividang, Atees, Gaja Pippali, 
Jeera, Bharangni, Patha, Kutaki.
Alterative, Shakti Pravardhak, Vata Prasamak, Rakta 
Samsodhak, tonic. Useful in syrovitis, rheumatism, leprosy, 
piles, dysentery, spermatorrhoea, wet dreams, fistula, 
epilepsy, indigestion, asthma, cough, hemiplegia (ardit, 
lakua), paraplegia, tetanus, sciatica, all menstrual disorders, 
consumption. Reduces Vata, removes stomach pain. One pill 
twice daily before food with milk.
RASAS 
(Mercurial Preparations)
Ananda Bhairava Rasa: Dose 2 to 4 grains (1 to 2 Rattis) 
to be taken with honey or buttermilk or water.
Chief Ingredients are pure Hingul (Rasa Sindhura), 
Vatsanabhi, Marich, Sohaga (Tankan), Pippali.
It is diaphoretic (Svedavardhak), Mutra Samsodhak, 
anodyne. It is useful in chronic diarrhoea, dysentery, Malaria. 
Take rice and buttermilk in diarrhoea, dysentery. Take 
Ghritapakva rice in Malaria. Take this twice daily before 
food. This is given in a pill form.
Arshakuthara Rasa: This is given in a powder form. Dose 
4 Rattis to 6 Pattis (8 to 12 grains);
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
189

Chief ingredients are purified mercury, pure sulphur, 
Tamra Bhasma, Loha Bhasma, Kalihari mool choorna, 
Trikatu choorna, Dantimool choorna, Peeluk choorna, 
Chitrakmool tvak choorna, Yavakshara, pure Sohaga.
It is alterative, Raktaprasodhak, tonic, laxative. This is 
specially prescribed in piles. This is taken with butter, or 
honey, or buttermilk, or pomegranate sherbet.
Ichhabhedi Rasa: This is given in a powder form with 
water, milk. Dose 6 grains. Chief ingredients are pure 
Hingul, Sohaga, Sonth, Pippali, Satyanasi root (Hemakshini 
mool), Danti bhij (pure Jamalgota).
It is a powerful purgative and Vataprasamak. It is useful 
in obstinate constipation, worms, dropsy, all conditions 
where a powerful purgative is needed. This should not be 
given in feeble patients and inflammatory conditions of the 
stomach and intestines. Motions stop if hot water is given. If 
you drink four handfuls of cold water you will get 4 motions; 
if you take six handfuls of water, you will have six motions.
Lakshmi Vilas Rasa: Dose: 4 grains (2 Rattis) with butter 
or honey or milk twice daily before food. Chief ingredients 
are pure Sourashtra mygritika, pure mercury, pure sulphur, 
Marich, pure Kuchla, Sohaga, ginger Svarasa, Ajwain Rasa, 
Punarnava Svarasa, Abhrak Bhasma, Loha Bhasma.
It is Rativardhak, Veerya Vardhak, Bala pushtikar (gives 
strength and nutrition), tonic. It is useful in consumption, 
spermatorrhoea, chronic fever, sexual debility, impotency, 
cough, asthma, dysmenorrhoea.
Loknath Rasa: Dose: 1 to 2 Rattis (2 to 4 grains), twice 
daily before food with honey and sugarcandy or Vasaka 
Svarasa or Durvarasa or Guduchika Rasa. Take milk after 
taking medicine. Chief ingredients are Rasa Sindhur, pure 
mercury, pure sulphur, Trikatu, Shankha Bhasma, Viratika 
Bhasma, Sohaga.
It is Deepak, Pachak, Agnivardhak, Sakti Vardhak, Veerya
190
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Vardhak (aphrodisiac), Svastiprada (gives good health). It is 
useful in Rakta pitha, cough, asthma, anaemia, Svarabhanga 
(hoarseness of voice), jaundice, diarrhoea, dysentery, 
indigestion (Mandagni), diseases of liver, dropsy, sleepless­
ness, general debility, weakness due to fever, piles, vomiting, 
bleeding from nose.
Maha Mrityunjaya Rasa: Dose: 1 to 2 Rattis (2 to 4 
grains) with ginger juice or honey or Tulasi juice or Guduchi 
juice before food twice daily. Chief ingredients are pure 
Vatsanabh, pure mercury, Marich, Pippali Svarasa, Loha 
Bhasma, Abhrak Bhasma, Vanga Bhasma, pure Manashila, 
Swarjikakshara, Yavakshara, Adrak Svarasa.
Vatha Sleshmak Dosha prashamak, Jvarahara, Bala- 
pushtikara (gives strength and nutrition) and it is a nervine 
tonic also. It is useful in chronic fever, typhoid fever, malaria, 
asthma, hiccup, epilepsy, pneumonia, consumption, Shoth 
(swelling).
Maha Jivarankusha Rasa: Dose 4 grains to be taken in 
ginger juice or honey twice daily before food. Chief 
ingredients are purified mercury, pure Vatsanabh, pure 
Gandhak, Dhatura ka bij, Satyanasika jad.
It is Tridosha Prasamak, Jwarahara. It is useful in fevers, 
malaria, typhoid fever, chronic fever.
Manikya Rasa: Dose 1 to 2 Rattis (2 to 4 grains) with 
cow’s ghee or butter twice daily before food. Chief 
ingredients are pure Harital, pure sulphur, pure Manashila, 
pure mercury, Sheeshak Bhasma, Tamra Bhasma, Abhrak 
Bhasma, Loha Bhasma, Vatadhug, Guduchi Svarasa.
It is Seetaprada (cools the system), gives strength to the 
heart (Hridaya ojas kar), Tridosha prasamak, Balapushtikar. 
It is useful in hiccup, fever, rheumatism, anaemia, cough, 
asthma, jaundice, leucorrhoea, all kinds of fever, itch.
Panchamrit Parpati: Dose 2 to 4 Rattis (4 to 8 grains) 
twice daily with ghee, or honey, or butter. Chief ingredients
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
191

are pure sulphur (Gandhak), pure mercury (parad), Loha 
Bhasma, Abhrak Bhasma, Tamra Bhasma.
It is Deepak, Pachak, Agnipradeepak, Balapushtikar, 
Veerya Vardhak, Tridoshaprasamak, Netrahitakar (keeps the 
eyes in a healthy condition), Jwarahara, Kshudha Vardhak. It 
is useful in sprue, chronic diarrhoea, chronic dysentery, 
chronic piles, vomiting, fever, eye-diseases, enlargement of 
spleen, consumption, Shoth (swelling of body), rheumatism.
Pratap Lankeswar: Dose: 1 Ratti (2 grains) to be taken 
with honey, butter, cbw’s ghee, Anarka sherbet, ginger juice, 
sandal sherbet, twice da% before food. Chief ingredients are 
pure mercury (parad), pure Gandhak, Tamra Bhasma, pure 
Guggulu, pure Manashila, Amlaki choorna, Trikatu, Vacha, 
Vaividang, Nagarmotha, pure Vatsanabh.
It is Deepak, Pachak, Kapha-vatha Prasamak, Ojaskar, 
Jwarahara. It is useful in rheumatism, typhoid fever, chronic 
dysentery, diarrhoea, malaria, anaemia, puerperal fever 
(Prasoothi Jwar).
Rajamriganika Rasa: Dose: 1 Ratti or 2 grains to be 
taken with cow’s ghee or honey or sherbet or butter, twice 
daily before food. Chief ingredients are Rasa Sindhur, 
Swarna Bhasma, Tamra Bhasma, Manashila, Harital Bhasma, 
pure Gandhak.
Tridosha Prasamak, Veerya-pravardhak, Raktaprasodhak, 
tonic, Deepak, Pachak, Jwarahara. It is useful in phthisis, 
chronic fever, asthma, cough, parsva sool, enlargement of 
liver, spermatorrhoea.
Ramban Rasa: Dose: one to two grains. To be taken with 
honey or butter or ghee or ginger juice, juice of bael leaves or 
Vasaka or coriander leaves or Punarnava two times daily 
before meals. Chief ingredients are: Swarna Bhasma, 
Rasasindur or Parad Bhasma, Swarnamakshik Bhasma, 
Vaikrantha Bhasma, Ragavart Bhasma, pure Gandhak.
It is Bala Veerya Vardhak, tonic, Jwarahara, antiperiodic,
192
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Rakta pravardhak, Tridosha Prasamak, Agnipradeepak. It is 
useful in spermatorrhoea, gonorrhoea, fever, asthma, cough, 
malaria, anaemia, wet dreams, chronic rheumatism, gout, 
dysentery, scrofula, chronic skin diseases such as eczema, 
psoriasis, lichen, pemphigus, neuralgia, chronic nasal catarrh, 
weakness of heart.
Shwas Kuthara Rasa: Dose: 2 Rattis (4 grains) with 
honey or ginger juice or butter twice daily before meals. 
Chief ingredients are pure Parad, pure Vatsanab, pure 
Gandhak, Sohaga, Manashila, Marich, Pippali, Sonth.
Deepak, Pachak, gastric stimulant, Balavriddhikar, Rakta 
pravardhak, Sveda prad (diaphoretic), Jwarahara, sedative or 
pain reliever. Useful in cough, asthma, consumption, fevers, 
typhoid fever, pneumonia, erysipelas (visarpa), tonsillitis, 
parsvasool, painful neuralgic affections, Moorcha, Svara- 
bheda, hemicrania (suryavartha).
Svarnaparpati: Dose: 1 Ratti to 3 Rattis (2 to 6 grains) 
twice daily before meals, with cow’s ghee or butter or honey 
or sherbet. Chief ingredients are pure mercury, Svarnapatra, 
pure Gandhak.
Balaveerya Vardhak, tonic, Ojaskar, Saktiprada, Rakta- 
chancharak, 
Tridosha 
Prasamak. 
Useful 
in 
phthisis, 
Sangrahani (dysentery), chronic fever, pain in the body, 
epilepsy (mirigi, apasmara), leprosy, spermatorrhoea, general 
debility, weakness of memory, itch.
THbhavan Keerti Rasa: Dose 2 to 3 Rattis (4 to 6 grains) 
twice daily after food with cream or butter or honey or cow’s 
ghee or ginger juice. Chief ingredients are pure Tamra 
Bhasma, pure mercury, pure sulphur, Nirgundi beej, Pippali, 
pure Vatsanabh.
Tridosha Prasamak, 
Saktiprada, Rakta prashodhak, 
Jwarahara, Svedaprad (diaphoretic), anodyne (pain reliever). 
Useful in malaria, typhoid fever, high fever, consumption, 
spermatorrhoea, 
liver 
complaint, 
leprosy, 
pneumonia,
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
192

visarpa, tonsillitis, painful neuralgic affections, prasuthi rog 
in women.
Tripur Bhairava Rasa: Dose 1 to 2 Rattis (2 to 4 grains) 
with Trikatu choorna and honey or ginger juice, Tulasi juice, 
or bael juice or Punarnava juice or buttermilk twice daily 
before meals. Chief ingredients are pure Vatsanab, Sohaga, 
pure Gandhak, Tamra Bhasma, pure Hingul, Dantibeej.
Deepak, Pachak, Tridosha Prasamak, Agnivardhak, 
Jwarahara (antipyretic), anodyne (pain reliever), Arogya- 
prada (Rasayana), Raktaprasodhak, diaphoretic (Sveda- 
prada), antiphlogistic. Useful in high fever, malaria, typhoid 
fever, pneumonia, visarpa (erysipelas), tonsillitis, eruptive 
fevers, painful neuralgic affections, indigestion (Agni- 
mandya), Shoth (swelling), intestinal colic, piles, worms.
Vasantakusumakar Rasa: Dose 1 to 2 Rattis (2 to 4 
grains) with honey, or butter, or bael juice, twice daily before 
meals. Take one tumbler of milk after taking the medicine. 
Chief ingredients are Swarna Bhasma, Rajata Bhasma, Vanga 
Bhasma, Seeshak Bhasma, Kanta-loha Bhasma, Abhrak 
Bhasma, Mukta Bhasma, Praval Bhasma, Musk.
Ayurarogya Vardhak, Tridosha prasamak, Jwarahara, 
Rakta Samsodhak, Veerya Vardhak, Buddhi Vardhak, 
Pushtikar, Mutra Samsodhak. Useful in cough, diabetes, 
spermatorrhoea, urinary diseases, consumption, Vishavikar, 
sexual debility, asthma, general debility.
Vasanta Malati: Dose 1 to.2 Rattis (2 to 4 grains) with 
honey and Pippali Choorna or butter or ginger juice, or 
Tulasi juice, twice daily before meals. Take one tumbler of 
cow’s milk preferably goat’s milk after taking the medicine. 
Chief ingredients are Swarna Bhasma, pure Hingul, Marich, 
pure Karpur Bhasma.
Kshudhavardhak (promotes appetite), Jwarahara, Ayur­
arogya Vardhak, Tridosha prashamak, Saktiprada, Rati-
194
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

vardhak. Useful in chronic fever, malaria, cough, asthma, 
debility, highly beneficial in phthisis.
TAILAS
Amla Taila: Chief ingredients: Fresh Amla juice, Harad, 
Baheda, Chandan, Choora, Khas Khas, Tejpatra, cow’s milk, 
sesame oil.
Cooling and refreshing hair tonic. Keeps the head cool 
and promotes the growth of hair. It is also good for the brain. 
It gives lustre to the eyes (Netra Jyotirvardhak). It is useful in 
epilepsy.
Brahmi Taila: Juice of green Brahmi leaves or Brahmi 
quath, Triphala, sandal wood powder, Panari, Khus Khus, 
Sugandhawala, Netravala, bark of small cardamoms, cow’s 
milk, sesame oil.
This is a brain tonic. It strengthens memory, cools the 
head and brain, cures headache, eye ache, hemicrania or 
unilateral headache, epilepsy, sleeplessness (Prajaagar).
Bhringamalaka Taila: Sesame oil, Bhringaraj Svarasa, 
Amla Svarasa, Manjishta, Padmak, Mulhati, Lalchandan, 
Nagakesar, cow’s milk, Bala, Dharu Haldi.
It is useful in sleeplessness, epilepsy, excessive heat, 
headache, mental weakness. It is an excellent bathing oil for 
everyday use. It cools the head and strengthens the memory. 
It removes burning sensation of eyes. It prevents premature 
grey hairs and falling of hair. It is a brain tonic. It is used as 
Nasya for snuffing. It is useful in diseases of ear and eyes. It 
makes curly hairs.
Brihat Vishnu Tailam: Til Tel (gingily oil), Satavara 
Svarasa, cow’s milk, Aswagandha, Nagarmotha, Jeevak, 
Rishabhak, Jeevanti, Jatamansi, Kasturi.
Useful in rheumatism, manniasthambha, Sirkampan, 
angaruksha, gallagraha, anguligraha.
Brihat Dashamool Tailam: Oil of mustard. Dashamool,
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
195

Dhatura, Punarnava, Sambalu, .Vasaka bark, Devadara, 
Trikatu, Rasna, Karang Beej, Kala Jeera.
Useful in Karnasool, Netrasool, headache, hemicrania, 
rheumatism; cleanses the ulcers.
Brihat Lakshadi Tailam: Chief ingredients are Til Tel, 
Laksha Svarasa, Rasna, Aswagandha, Devadara, Sveta 
Chandan, Moorva, Katuki, Kusht, Haridra.
A very useful remedy as a massage in old fevers, malaria, 
cough, asthma, cold, epilepsy, Rhithesis, itching, anaemia, 
rheumatism, emaciation. It gives garbhapushti.
Brihat Mareechadi Tailam: Chief ingredients are 
mustard oil, cow’s urine, Marichi, Dantimool, Mandarka 
dhoot, Devadaru, Dharu Haldi, Kutaj bark, Kadhir bark.
Useful in scabies, leucoderma, leprosy, pruritus, psoriasis, 
eczema, ringworm.
Chandanadi Tailam: Til oil, Bringraj Svarasa, Triphala, 
Lalchandan, Priyanthu, Neelotpal, Guduchi, Bootkeshi, 
Anantamool.
Coolijig and refreshing to the head and eyes; useful in 
burning sensation in the head, hemicrania or one-side 
headache, burning of the feet, headache, bleeding of the 
nose. It is used as a Nasya in bleeding of the nose. It 
strengthens the root of the hair on the head.
Chitrakadi Tailam: Chief ingredients are Til oil, cow’s 
urine, Chitra ka mool, Chavya, Ajwain, Choti Katteri, Karang 
Beej, red salt, Madarki jad or milk.
Useful in fistula, sinus and other deep ulcers. Soak a 
cotton wick in the oil and put it in the cavity of the ulcers. 
Useful as a Nasya in ulcers of the nose.
Haridradi Tailam: Chief ingredients are Til oil, Haridra, 
Daru Haridra, Darvi, Mulhati, Lalchandan, Kesar, Majit 
(Manjistha), Bhatpatra, Padma, Padmak Agaru.
196
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

A useful application in acne, gives glow to the skin of the 
face.
Hinguadi Tailam: Chief ingredients are mustard oil 
(Sarson ki Tel), Hingu, Trikatu, Saindhava (Senda Nimak), 
Sonth, Chitrak, camphor, Haridra, Saggkshar. Put three or 
four drops in the nose. This is useful in ozoena. Relieves pain 
in menstruation when applied to the trunk (massage).
Jatyadi Tailam: Til oil, Chameli Svarasa, Sankhpushpa, 
Molesarika chal, Kadir, Amka gutli, Triphala, Trikatu 
Sindhur. Useful in ulcer, fistula, all sorts of sores.
Karanjadi Tailam: Til oil, Karanja beej, Kutiki. Useful 
for application in ring worm of the scalp.
Maha Narayana Tailam: Chief ingredients are Til Tel, 
Satavari Svarasa, cow’s milk, goat’s milk, Bivamoola bark, 
Neem bark, Aswagandha, Gokuru, Punarnava, Lalchandan, 
Sendanimak, Atibala, Patala, Syonak, Agnimanthi.
It is a wonderful remedy as a local massage in 
Hemiplegia, lumbago, fever, phthisis, paraplegia, sciatica, 
synovitis, rheumatism, impotence, headache, rigid spasm.
Maha Saindhavadi Tailam: Ingredients are Iranda Tel, 
Sreyasi, Saindhavanimak (red salt), Rasna, Ajwain, Marichi, 
Pippali, Sonth, Ajmoda, Pohakar mool.
Useful in locomotor ataxia, synovitis, Parswa sool, stone 
in the kidney, hemiplegia, rheumatism.
Maha Vishgarbha Tailam: Ingredients are Til Tel, Neem 
bark, Nirgundi Svarasa, Bhringaraj Svarasa, Dhatura, aconite, 
Aswagandha, Dasamool, Anantamool, Arkamool.
Properties: anodyne, sedative. Useful in arthritis, tremors, 
sprain, chronic rheumatism, paraplegia, sciatica, lumbago, 
gout.
Nirgundi Tailam: Ingredients are Til Tel, Nirgundi 
Svarasa (leaf and root bark).
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
197

Useful in diseases of ear (to be used as ear drops); used 
as Nasya in scrofula sinus. It is beneficial in itching.
Shad Bindu Tailam I: Ingredients are mustard oil, cow’s 
ghee, Ark Svarasa, Mandar Patra Svarasa, cow’s urine, 
Gheru, Sindhur, Trikatu. Useful in leprosy, Visarpa.
Shad Bindu Tailam II: Chief ingredients are Til Tel, 
goat’s milk, Bhringaraj Svarasa, Iranda mool, Jeevanti, 
Rasna, Dalcheeni.
Useful in headache as Nasya (drops in the nose). Nasya 
strengthens the root of the hairs of the head and the root of 
the teeth and improves the vision and lustre of the eyes.
Triphaladi Tailam: Ingredients are Til Tel, Svaradhigana 
quath, Triphala, Atees, Nisooth, Chitrak mool, Vasaka chal, 
Guduchi, Trikatu. Useful for application in skin diseases.
Vidang Tailam: Chief ingredients are Til oil, Vaividang, 
Kalajeera, Chitrak, Trikatu, Triphala. Useful in itching. For 
chest pain and cough apply to the chest and throat.
Vyaghri Tailam: Til Tel, Choti Katteri, Vasaka, Bilwa 
bark, Devadaru, Bala, Dhanihaldi, Chaturjat. Useful in 
ozoena, catarrh, disease of nose.
QUATH
(Decoction)
Take V2 to 2 tolas of coarse powder of quath. Add water 
16 times its proportion. Boil and make it into a decoction. 
When three fourth the quantity of water is evaporated, 
strain the remaining portion.
Always prepare fresh quaths. Do not keep the 
decoction over night. You can prepare the decoction for 
the whole day. The quaths are prescribed as Anupans or 
vehicles for other drugs. Dose: 1 oz. to be taken twice daily 
with V2 oz. honey.
Abhayadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Harad, Damasa, 
Amaltas, Gokuru, Pashanabhedi.
198
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

It increases blood (Raktapravardhak). It purifies the 
blood (Rakta Shodak), laxative, bitter tonic and alterative. 
Useful in long continued fevers, chronic constipation, 
increases appetite.
Amritadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Guduchi, Eranda 
root, Vasaka panchang.
This is a blood purifier, Tridosha Prasamak (equalises 
the three Doshas). Useful in spermatorrhoea, cough, 
asthma, old fever.
Arjunatwak Quath: Chief ingredients are Arjun bark, 
Chitrak, Guduchi, Nagarmotha, Dhania.
Astringent and tonic. It is a heart tonic too. Useful in 
cirrhosis (liver disease), heart diseases.
Dasamool Quath: Chief ingredients are Shaliparni, 
Prasniparni, Bilus, Brihati, Kantakaritha (Choti Katteri), 
Gokshuraka, Agnimanthi, Shyonaka, Kashmari and Patala.
Alterative, bitter tonic, Tridosha Prasamak. Useful in 
typhoid fever, fevers, 
malaria, cough, cold, scrofula, 
neuralgia, puerperal diseases like Soothikarog, asthma, 
parsva 
sool, 
excessive 
perspiration, 
giddiness. 
Gives 
strength to the heart.
Devadarwadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Devadaru, 
Vacha, Kustha, Pippali, Sonth, Nagarmotha, Chirayata 
(Kirata), Kutuki, Gokuru, Katphala, Brihati, Guduchi, 
Shringi, etc.
Bitter tonic, alterative, stimulant, cools the system, gives 
strength to the heart, increases lustre in the eyes, Rakta 
prasodhak (purifies the blood). Useful for women after 
delivery 
or 
colic 
fever, 
headache, 
cough, 
moorcha 
(giddiness), pains in the body and the joints, etc.
Drakshadi 
Quath: Chief ingredients are Draksha
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
199

(Munakka), Harad, Nagarmotha, Kutuki, Amaltas ka gudha 
or pulp.
Guduchyadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Guduchi, 
Dhania, Khus, Sonth, Netrabala, Pithapapada, Baelgiri, 
Atees, Lalchandan, Chirata, Indrajav.
Bitter tonic, stomachic, antiperiodic, Rakta prasodhak 
(purifier of blood), Pitha Prasamak (keeps the bile in the 
normal condition). Useful in malaria, dysentery, diarrhoea. 
Give with half quantity of honey.
Kiratadi 
Quath: 
Chief 
ingredients 
are 
Kirata 
(Chirayata), Neem bark, Pippali, Kachur, Sonth, Satavari, 
Guduchi, Badi Katteri.
Bitter tonic, anti-periodic. Highly useful in malaria, 
atonia, influenza (sleshma jwara) and others fevers, 
dyspepsia.
Manjisthadi Quath: (Brihat) Chief ingredients are 
Manjistha, 
Nagarmotha, 
Kutakchal, 
Guduchi, 
Sonth, 
Bharanghi, Nimkichal, Dharu Haldi, Triphala, Trikatu, 
Moorva, Sariva. In all 45 drugs.
Alterative, Raktaprashodhak (blood purifier), tonic, 
diuretic, astringent, antiperiodic, stimulant, Pitta-prasamak 
(keeps the bile in a normal condition). Useful in all forms 
of leprosy, gonorrhoea (Upadamsa), hemiplegia, acne, skin 
diseases, boils, eye diseases. It improves general health.
Maharasnadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Rasna, 
Guduchi, Devadaru, Gokuru, Punarnava, Vasaka, Atees, 
Satavari, Lakshmana, Bacha.
Bitter tonic, aperient, diuretic. Gives foundation for 
pregnancy (Garbha sthapan).
Useful in all kinds of rheumatism, spermatorrhoea, 
paraplegia, sciatica, hemiplegia, lumbago.
Nimbadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Nimba, Katuki,
200
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Nagarmotha, Indrajav, Parpat, Patha, Hareetaki, Vasa, 
Gandawala, Katphala.
Bitter tonic, anti-periodic, aperient, Raktaprashodhak 
(blood-purifier), Pitta-prasamak (keeps the bile in a normal 
condition). Useful in Malaria, jaundice, worms, leprosy, 
hepatitis, etc., itch, bilious fever.
Parpatadi 
Quath 
(Panchabhadra 
Kahada): 
Chief 
ingredients 
are 
Pitha 
papada 
(Parpat), 
Nagarmotha, 
Guduchi, Sonth, Chirayata.
Blood purifier, Pittaprasamak, bitter tonic, Tridosha 
prasamak. Keeps the three Doshas in a normal condition. 
Useful in fevers. Take this with half quantity of honey.
Punarnavadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Punarnava, 
Nimbark, Darvi, Katuki, Sonth, Guduchi, Palota.
Bitter tonic, alterative, laxative, antiperiodic, diuretic, 
Shothahara (remover of swelling of body). Useful in 
jaundice, anaemia, cough, asthma, stomach pain, all 
diseases of stomach, chronic rheumatism, dropsy, bubo.
Pithapapada Quath: Rakta pravardhak (increases the 
blood), gives strength to the heart, tonic. Useful in debility, 
moorcha (fainting), Rakta Pitta, bilious fever (Pitta jwara), 
malaria, thirst, cools the lungs in dry condition.
Sarivadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Anantamool 
(Sariva), black Til, Lodhra, Mulati.
Alterative, blood-purifier, diaphoretic, diuretic, tonic. 
As a blood-purifier it is useful in skin diseases, itch, boil, 
scrofula, syphilis, cachexia, constitutional debility. As a 
diaphoretic and tonic it is given in fevers with loss of 
appetite and disinclination for food. It is useful in the 
beginning 
stage 
of stone 
in 
the 
kidney. 
It 
is 
a 
Mutrasamshodhak. It purifies the urine. So it is useful in 
scanty and high coloured urine.
AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS EXPLAINED
201

Triphaladi Quath: Chief ingredients are Triphala, 
Guduchi, Katuki, Nimbark, Chirayata, Adusha (Vasaka).
Alterative, laxative, Raktaprashodhak (blood-purifier), 
Kriminasak (killer of worms in the bowels), Pachak 
(digestive), Tridosha prasamak (keeps the three Doshas in 
a normal condition), Mutra samshodhak (purifier of urine). 
Useful in jaundice, anaemia, itch.
Trivritadi Quath: Chief ingredients are Trivrit or 
Trikatu (Sonth, black pepper, Pippali), Nirhoth, Sanai, 
Nagarmotha, Mulati, Bolamool, Haldi, Daruhaldi, Triphala.
Deepak, Pachak, tonic, purgative. Useful in obesity, 
orchitis, first stage of stone in the kidney, flatulence or 
wind in the bowels, pain in the stomach, headache.
202
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chapter XXII
KAYA KALPA
This is an age of science. This is an age of scientific 
discovery and inventions. Life is complex. Life is under great 
tension. Rivalry and competition are intense. Man exerts 
more. There is great tension on his brain and nerves. He is 
under great excitement. He is restless. There is undue strain 
on his nerves and brain. He gets exhausted quickly. There is 
great struggle in the daily battle of life.
Ayurveda shows you the way to attain a high standard of 
health, vim, vigour, vitality and longevity. It solves the riddle 
of old age. It helps you to preserve the youth. It gives a 
scientific description of the process of rejuvenation, Kaya 
Kalpa.
Chyavana and other sages of yore who had a broken and 
debilitated constitution on account of old age, renewed their 
vigour of life and lived for countless years by undergoing 
Kaya Kalpa treatment.
Chyavana prepared a confection out of various herbs and. 
took it. That herbal4 preparation is known by the name 
Chyavanaprash which is still used by the people of India. 
Mandavya Rishi who lived in the Vindhya mountains took an 
Elixir. He got perpetual youth through the use of drugs.
The Sanskrit word ‘Kaya’ means body and ‘Kalpa’ means 
transformation or rejuvenation. Kaya Kalpa is that form of 
treatment which restores the aged and debilitated body to its 
pristine youth and vigour, re-establishes the full potentialities 
of the senses and gives good health. Kaya Kalpa adds new life 
to years and new years to life.
Scientists also are attempting to find out the Elixir of life
KAYA KALPA
203

which will combat against decay and produce vigour and 
youth in the old and conquer the fear of death.
Kaya Kalpa restores the natural balance to Vatha, Pitta 
and Kapha, brings the functions of Saptadhatus to a normal 
condition and cures many incurable diseases. Kaya Kalpa 
should be conducted under the expert guidance of a very 
competent Ayurvedic physician.
The life-long accumulation of various poisons in the 
system causes decay, old age and death. Therefore one 
should take recourse to Pancha Karmas for purifying the 
body before he begins Kaya Kalpa treatment. The Pancha 
Karmas are 1. Nasya Karma (nasal purge), 2. Vamana Karma 
(emetics), 3. Virechana Karma (purgatives), 4. Niropa Vasti 
(clearing Enemata) and 5. Anuvaasana Vasti (soothing 
Enemata).
Forms of Kalpa Treatment 
Kuti Pravesika Kalpa
One remains in a dark cell. He lives on black cow’s milk 
alone. He should not take shave. He should not touch cold 
water. He lives in seclusion. He is cut off from friends and 
society. This gives complete rejuvenation.
Aja Kalpa
This is rejuvenation through goat’s milk. The goat should 
yield 4 pounds of milk. Salt, chillies, tea and coffee are 
forbidden. This Kalpa cures definitely diabetes, dyspepsia, 
Asthma, rheumatism and debility.
Ghrita Kalpa
Pure cow’s ghee is taken with cow’s milk eveiy morning 
for two months in every winter.
Harad Kalpa
Harad is Hareetaki or myrobalan. One big Harad 
(Terminalia chebula) is taken in the morning for 41 days.
204
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Somalata Kalpa
This process is a difficult, delicate and drastic one. The 
patient becomes unconscious for some days. The skin peels 
off. He comes back to consciousness and becomes a 
blooming youth.
Bodhi Kalpa
One regains lost memory. This is highly beneficial for all 
brain workers, professors, lawyers and doctors, students and 
scholars. No Pancha Karma is necessary. This is very easy. It 
can be taken for a week or more. Give up oil, chillies, sour 
things, ice, tea, etc.
Kesha Kalpa
Grey hair becomes black through this Kalpa. There is no 
Pancha JCarma or food restriction. It should be taken under 
the supervision of an experienced Ayurvedic physician. It 
causes vomiting.
Brahmi Kalpa
Brahmi is one of the beautiful creeper herbs found in the 
Himalayan regions. This is available in plenty in winter. 
During Vasanta-Greeshma Ritus (February to April) it 
flowers. In rainy season it is almost extinct. In the dictionary 
of herbs Brahmi is known as Somavati or Saraswati. This is 
found in places which are moist on the wet sandy mountain 
regions. This should be collected in Sisira Ritu and Vasanta 
Ritu (seasons) when it is full with beneficial juice. The leaves 
should be collected from clean places with fresh airy regions. 
Impure and unholy places should be avoided in collecting 
Brahmi leaves.
205
KAYA KALPA
Wonderful are the characteristic qualities of Brahmi. It 
develops bodily as well as mental faculties. It increases life

and checks degeneration. It develops intelligence and 
improves memory. It is effective in leprosy, leucoderma. It is 
very cooling in effect. It is good in clearing the bowels. Its 
taste is bitter. It improves intellectual faculties. It increases 
life. It makes the voice fine. It purifies urine. It is useful in 
blood impurities, Apasmar (Mrigi), loss of memory, in wet 
dreams, menstrual disorders, nervous debility, children’s 
diseases, pneumonia etc. In children’s diseases —pneumonia 
and cough — it should be made into a paste and applied to the 
neck.
Even the Westerners have done great researches over 
Brahmi. It is known as Gratila Monniera Hydrocotyle 
Asiatica. They are of the opinion that this should not be dried 
in the sun. If it is dried in the sun it loses some of its vitar 
qualities.
In Brahmi Kalpa fresh Brahmi is to be utilised. Fresh 
Brahmi abounds in wonderful life-giving strength and various 
beneficial qualities. It transforms a man immediately. Brahmi 
Kalpa is undertaken for 31 days. The person undergoing the 
Kalpa should first of all clean his bowels. The next day after 
bath and other cleansings he should take 6 Mashas (V2 tola) 
of Brahmi (leaves, roots, branches) and grind it very nicely. 
This is very effective. The paste should be as fine as possible.
Take half at sunrise. The remaining half (3 mashas) 
should be taken at sunset. Three hours later you should take 
cow’s milk half a seer or as much as you can digest. You can 
increase the quantity according to your capacity. While 
heating the milk put 6 mashas of fresh Brahmi leaves and 
boil it well. Cool it and take it. In case pure cow’s milk is not 
available, goat’s milk can be taken. After 3 or 4 days if there 
is difficulty in digesting the milk you can add a small quantity 
of dried ginger and Pippali (both powdered well).
During the Kalpa period take nothing prepared out of 
grains. Nothing other than milk should be taken. Have the 
senses under perfect control. Devote more time to prayer
206
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

and meditation. If you want to take rest lie on your left side. 
The rule is:
Care should be taken to see that the milk is freshly drawn 
every morning. The quantity of Brahmi should be increased 
in the following order. The entire course of treatment is for 
45 days.
1st day 
3 mashas both morning & evening
2nd day 
4 mashas both morning & evening
3rd day 
5 mashas both morning & evening
7th day 
9 mashas both morning & evening 
15th day 
17 mashas both morning & evening 
21st day 
23 mashas both morning & evening 
28th day 
30 mashas both morning & evening 
31st day 
33 mashas both morning & evening
From the 32nd day onward reduce 2 mashas each time 
and on the 45th day the quantity of Brahmi leaves Kalaa 
taken will be 3 Mashas morning and evening as on the first 
day of the Kalpa.
On the completion of Kalpa, food should be gradually 
Increased. First fruit juice should be taken. Then green gram 
and then old rice and easily digestible articles of diet should 
be taken before taking to the full normal diet. During the 
period following the treatment you should avoid onion, oils, 
chillies, tamarind (sour articles), etc.
Dugdha Kayakalpa
Ensures good health and long life. Treatment extends to 
30 days.
Avoid onions, chillies, non-vegetarian diet and seminal 
wastage. Cures headaches, fevers, consumption, dysentery 
and constipation.
Spring season is particularly suited for undertaking this
KAYA KALPA
207

treatment. Begin the Kalpa on a Suklapaksha (bright 
fortnight).
Before commencement of the treatment have a clean 
purgative with Triphala or Myrobalan (Hareetaki).
Take 9 Chataks (45 Tolas) pure cow’s milk. Add 3 Chataks 
of juice of bittergourd or 6 mashas of Triphala powder or 9 
mashas of Trikatu Churna. Mix any of these in milk. Heat and 
reduce the milk to half the quantity. Allow the milk to cool. 
Add one tola of sugarcandy. On the first day take this milk 
only. You should not take any other food. On the second day 
have 13 Chataks of milk. Mix one third the quantity of 
bitter-gourd juice or if Triphala Churna, add one Masha in 
addition. Other instructions as on the first day. Continue thus 
adding 4 Chataks of milk and juice of gourd or Triphala 
powder in the same proportion. Carry on the treatment for 
one full month (30 days).
During the treatment avoid all mental exertion, long 
night vigils. Maintain Brahmacharya. Observe vow of silence.
You can take juice of mosumbi or orange if you feel 
hungry at other times. No other food should be taken.
Note: — For fuller details refer my book Practice of Nature 
Cure.
Neem Kalpa
It is an admitted fact that herbs possess curative effect to 
a very high degree. The benefits of Indian herbs are known 
throughout the world. Herbal treatment is unparalleled in 
effect. Among herbs Neem occupies a very distinctive 
position.
It is beyond the power of words to describe the curative 
effect of this wonderful tree. Every part of this tree is useful. 
From very ancient times we have heard the glory of this tree. 
It is capable of destroying to the root many incurable 
diseases. Leaves, flowers and bark of the tree are highlv
208
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

useful. These act unfailingly in giving the maximum benefit 
to the patient and make the treatment successful.
People of good health derive the maximum benefit of this 
treatment as a recuperative tonic. The rules enjoined in the 
observance of this Kalpa have to be strictly adhered to to 
ensure the maximum result. Care should be taken to see that 
nothing is done by the patient which will go against his 
interests, i.e., he should be careful in following the rules 
relating the treatment.
March, April, October and November are the months 
highly beneficial in undertaking this Kalpa. Both men and 
women can derive the maximum benefit by undertaking the 
Neem treatment. Sunday, Tuesday and Thursdays are 
favourable in commencing the treatment for men. Monday, 
Wednesday, Friday and Saturday are days suitable for 
women.
Before commencement of the treatment the bowels 
should be cleared by a purgative. The observance of the 
following rules will be highly useful.
Live in seclusion. Speak slowly, moderately. Maintain 
celibacy. Remain in well-ventilated rooms. Rise up from bed 
early morning. General rules of health and hygiene should be 
adhered to.
Neem Kalpa can be successfully carried out within 31 
days. Take one Masha of the combined Trivarg (leaves, 
flowers and bark of Neem). Mix them all. Paste it well with 
water. Make pills. The pills are to be taken with fresh water 
drawn from well or river. Similarly in the evening prepare 
pills of weight one Masha and take them with fresh water. 
Three hours later take half a seer pure cow’s milk. Take milk 
at least 3 times daily. In this Kalpa food of all descriptions 
should be given up. Mix a small quantity of Trikatu powder 
(Sonth, Marich, Pippali) with milk before taking. This helps 
digestion and increases strength.
KAYA KALPA
209

On the second day add 4 rattis of leaves, flowers and bark 
of Neem. Thus the quantity has to be increased 4 rattis daily. 
The following table will give you an idea of the quantity of 
medicine to be taken.
1st day 
1 Masha morning and evening
2nd day 
1.5 Masha morning and evening
7th day 
4 Mashas morning and evening
15th day 
8 Mashas morning and evening
20th day 10.5 Mashas morning and evening
31st day 
16 Mashas morning and evening
On the 32nd day the quantity of the pill should be 
reduced by one Masha and thus every day one Masha is to be 
reduced and on the 45th day the size of the pill comes to one 
Masha. Thus the course of treatment comes to an end and 
the patient feels great strength, vigour and vitality.
The patient will do well to keep some green leaves of 
Neem under the pillow. This removes the heat in the system. 
This rejuvenates the entire nervous system.
Put 15 leaves of Neem in one glass of water and keep it 
covered near your bed at bed-time. On waking from bed at 5 
a.m. filter it and drink the water. This is known as Ushapan 
also. This cleanses the bowels and the bladder. It removes 
the defects of phlegm and bile. After Ushapan one should go 
for stroll in the early morning. The lungs are cleared. The 
heat in the system is reduced. On return from walk take rest 
for half an hour and practise mild Pranayama or deep 
breathing exercises.
During the course of treatment on account of little heat 
in the system you may feel weak, you may suffer from a little 
sleeplessness, a little whirling of the head etc., may be felt. 
But those will not last long and they will pass away. Be not 
moved by such experience. You should maintain mental 
equilibrium and not allow yourself to be led away by 
emotions.
210
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

The effect of Neem is cooling, and lightness of body. It is 
highly effective in curing skin diseases. It removes phlegm, 
wind and bile.
It is helpful in cough, all fevers, loss of appetite, thirst, 
cough, diabetes, leprosy, etc. The oil of Neem is very useful 
in all skin diseases, worms in teeth, infectious diseased.
Even the Western scientists have accepted the fact that of 
all medicines which help to cleanse the system Neem finds 
the first place.
Soon after the treatment the patient should take care to 
see that he takes no such thing which gives rise to the disease 
once agaiH. This is very, very important. Once the Kalpa is 
successfully undertaken the patient gets immunity from the
disease for a pretty long time.
Buttemilk Treatment (Takra Kalpa)
Takra Kalpa treatment is not merely a cure for diseases. It 
also bestows long life on the individual. Buttermilk contains 
in itself all the strength-giving elements which could 
otherwise be had only from a number of other edible articles 
of daily life. It gives more strength and energy than ordinary 
articles of diet. It contains very important vitamin useful for 
the building up of body cells.
In the chapter on dietetics in Ayurveda we find a full 
description of buttermilk as an important part of our food.
KAYA KALPA
211
The person who takes buttermilk never falls sick. It

destroys all kinds of diseases. It does not allow diseases to 
enter the system. Just as nectar is prescribed for gods in 
heaven, even so here in this world buttermilk is prescribed 
for human beings as a means for maintaining healthy life. 
They are ever happy.
In Kalpa Kosha we find a beautiful description of Takra 
Kalpa for a happy and diseaseless life.
This Kalpa is useful in dreadful diseases contracted by 
heredity. In short it is useful in all diseases. It should be 
administered with a thorough knowledge of the Pathyas 
(do’s) and Apathyas (don’ts).
We find Chandrasamputi, Amritakaran and many other 
varieties of Butter-milk treatment. But the following method 
is very useful. It is easy to practise and is highly fruitful.
This Kalpa is undertaken for 40 days. There are various 
methods of preparing curd and buttermilk. The most easy 
and useful method is described here.
For purposes of making curd cow’s milk is the best.
Cow’s milk is itself a Rasayana (tonic). Prepare curd out 
of pure cow’s milk. Add one part of water in 3 parts of curd. 
Take butter from one half of the curd. Add the other half and 
make buttermilk. Prepare curd in the early morning and keep 
it for one full day. The second day the curd is fit for use. Do 
not use old curd. The curd that is kept unused for 48 hours 
becomes unfit for use in Kalpa. It is even harmful. Do not 
preserve curd or buttermilk in brass or copper vessels. It is 
highly injurious to health.
Before commencing Takra Kalpa clear your bowels with 
Pancha Karma (Vamana, Virechana, Nasya, Niruhan and 
Anuvasan). By this not only the bowels but even the senses 
are purified.
Keep up the vow of Brahmacharya. Continue the Kalpa
212
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA
Cow’s milk is itself a Rasayana (tonic). Prepare curd out 
of pure cow’s milk. Add one part of water in 3 parts of curd. 
Take butter from one half of the curd. Add the other half and 
make buttermilk. Prepare curd in the early morning and keep 
it for one full day. The second day the curd is fit for use. Do 
not use old curd. The curd that is kept unused for 48 hours 
becomes unfit for use in Kalpa. It is even harmful. Do not 
preserve curd or buttermilk in brass or copper vessels. It is 
highly injurious to health.
Before commencing Takra Kalpa clear your bowels with 
Pancha Karma (Vamana, Virechana, Nasya, Niruhan and 
Anuvasan). By this not only the bowels but even the senses 
are purified.
Keep up the vow of Brahmacharya. Continue the Kalpa

for 40 days. Take bath in the early morning. At sunrise take 
10 Chataks (50 tolas) of buttermilk. Take an equal quantity 
at sunset also. The next day increase it by 2 Chataks i.e., 11 
chataks at sunrise and 11 chataks at sunset. Thus increase 2 
chataks daily.
If you find it difficult to take simple buttermilk as it is, 
you can add a small quantity of fried Jira, asafoetida mixed 
with a little Saindhava Nimak, well powdered.
On the 41st day onward reduce 4 Chataks every day 
until you come again to 1 seer and 4 chataks.
On the completion of Kalpa you should not commence 
your usual diet at once. Do not take salt and- chillies for 
some days. In the beginning take only fruit juice, palak, 
louki, parval and green vegetables. Then take milk and 
then gradually the usual diet. This Kalpa is not advisable in 
Varsha and Sarad Ritus (Rainy and winter seasons).
If th'e buttermilk is light it is useful in stopping motions. 
If it is sour in taste, it does not increase bile. It helps 
digestion. It improves digestion, strength and removes the 
evil effects of Vatha, Kapha, etc.
In cold season it improves digestion and removes bad 
taste. It improves the movement of Nadis and makes it 
normal.
KAYA KALPA
213

Chapter XXIII 
THE RASAYANA TREATMENT
In 
the Ayurvedic 
system 
Rasayana treatment 
is 
prescribed for keeping death at a distance and attaining 
longevity. This system has become a neglected science at 
the present moment. According to this treatment, old age is 
a disease. This needs to be treated. Accidental deaths can 
be avoided.
Life can be continued indefinitely through Rasayana 
treatment. Rasayana is the science of removing old age and 
diseases which do not yield to ordinary treatment, 
prolonging life and rejuvenating it. Whatever promotes 
longevity, retentive memory, health, vitality, is called 
Rasayana. It is called Rasayana because it has a beneficial 
effect on the ‘Rasas’ and other elements of the body. It 
strengthens the metabolic system, improves the blood and 
consequently the whole body.
Mandavya Muni who resided in Vindhya mountains 
attained long life and Siddhis by herbs. So did Chyavana 
Rishi through the reputed Chyavanaprash. Those who 
attained longevity through Rasayana are called Rasayanas.
Rasayana treatment is done through sulphur, mercury, 
nux vomica seeds, Neem, Haritaki and Amalaka.
The Rasayanas can immortalise the physical body. The 
Rasayanas keep the physical body healthy and strong for a 
long time in order to achieve the goal or Self-realisation in 
this very life. If the body is kept healthy and strong for a 
long time, the Yogic students have much time to attain the 
goal. Much time will not be lost in dying and being born 
again. This is the theory of Rasayanas.
214
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Three distinct processes are described in the Ayurveda 
to attain longevity and rejuvenation. They are ‘Rasaraj 
Rasayana,’ termed mercury which has first and foremost 
place among the ancient therapeutics, ‘Rasayana’ herbs and 
‘Aachara Rasayana.’
Eko Aso Rasaraj Shariram-ajara Amara Kurute — the 
only thing that can make the body ever young and 
immortal is the blessed Rasaraj.
Longevity is also attained through ‘Rasayana’ herbs 
such as Soma, Nila, Nari, Padma, Hareetaki and Amala. 
Amala and Hareetaki tone the body, give immense strength 
and virility and make it immune from many diseases. The 
patient is kept indoor (Kuti-pravesh) or out-door (Vatepik).
‘Aachara Rasayana’ or rejuvenation and longevity 
through the practice of Yama and Niyama or right conduct 
(Ahimsa, Satyam, Brahmacharya, etc.) is another kind of 
treatment by the Yogins and sages.
According to Sushruta the Rasayana treatment should 
be performed on the subject either in youth or in the 
middle age. It will not bestow the desired results, if it is 
performed when old age or decrepitude has already set in.
THE RASAYANA TREATMENT
215

Chapter XXIV
YANTRAS
The Yantras deal with the science of mercury and 
sulphur. These are useful in what are called Swedan, Pachan, 
Mardan, etc.
That which controls, protects and solidifies mercury and 
sulphur is called Yantram (Yantrayate, Niyamyate, Badhyate 
vaa Rakshyate Paradonenopayena Tadyantram).
Vaghbhata’s Rasaratna Samuchya gives description of a 
number of useful Yantras. Chief among them are Dola 
Yantra, Swedaneeya Yantra, Paatana Yantra, Adhapatana 
Yantra, Jarana Yantra, Kachchap Yantra, Vidhyadhar Yantra 
(Oordhwapatan), Somanal Yantra, Hamsapaak Yantra, 
Baaluka and Lavana Yantra, Bhoodhar Yantra, Koshtee 
Yantra, Valabhee Yantra, Tiryakpaatan Yantra, Paalika 
Yantra, Ishtikaa Yantra, Nabhi Yantra, Dhoopa Yantra and 
Tapta khal Yantra. Very important ones from among the 
above are described here in fuller details.
Dola Yantra
Fill a mud pot half with Dravadravya (mixture of sulphur, 
mercury and decoction) Rasa, Qwath, Kanji. Make two holes 
on the upper portion of the mud pot across and pass a 
straight wooden or iron rod. Suspend the Swedadravya from 
the rod tied to a cloth. Now heat the Dravadravya. Prepare 
Swedan pak. This is Dola Yantra.
Swedaneeya Yantra
Fill water or Dravadravya (Svaras, Kashaya, Kanji, milk, 
etc.) in a broad mud pot three fourth full. The pot should 
then be covered with a cloth and tied tight. Keep the 
Swedadravya which is to be cooked. Cover it with a similar 
mud pot (as one kept below). Both the pots together will
216
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

have a global appearance. New keep this over fire. Heat 
well. This is called Swedaneeya Yantra.
Paatana Yantra
Take a pot with an internal measurement of 16 inches. 
Invert the pot. On the top of it make a Jaladhar 10" long, 
8" broad and 4" high. Take another with its mouth slightly 
smaller than the previous one, which can fit in properly in 
the previous pot. In the second pot have mercury or 
sulphide of mercury. Now invert the first pot on the pot 
containing mercury. Join both the pots nicely with buffalo’s 
milk, iron powder, Sira (paste) muted together. When it 
gets dry keep the pot on fire. Fill the Jaladhar with water. 
This Yantra is called Paatana.
Adhah Paatana Yantra
Have two pots as described in the previous Yantra. In 
the pot that is kept on the top have a coating of paste of 
mercury and sulphur. Fill the other pot half with water. Fit 
in the pot containing the paste well into the water pot in 
an inverted position. Join them both with the paste 
referred in the previous Yantra. When the Lepan is dry 
have cow dung cakes on the top and set fire. The down pot 
is kept within the earth with water as mentioned above. 
When the upper pot gets hot, the mercury gets melted and 
falls into the water in the pot kept within the earth. This is 
Adhah Paatana Vidhi.
Vidyadhara Yantra
The Yantra prepared out of two pots of equal measure­
ment is called Vidhyadhara Yantra. In one pot mercury and 
other medicines are filled. The other pot is kept inverted 
on the first. Both the pots are then joined by Sandhilep. 
Then it is dried properly. In this Yantra a Chula (firepot) is 
to be used which will supply fire on all four sides.
YANTRAS
217

Hamsapaaka Yantra
Fill a Khappar (earthen pot thin and broad) with sand. 
Take another Khappar (Kunda). Take Javakhar, Pancha- 
kshar, five kinds of salt, grind them with cow’s urine. Heat 
it on mild fire, keeping it on the Khappar containing sand. 
This is called by the name Hamsapaaka Yantra. Sun is 
known by the name Hamsa. The fire should be as mild as 
the rays of the sun. 
Hence the significant name, 
Hamsapaaka.
Bhoodhar Yantra
Dig a pit in the earth. Fill it with sand to a height of 2 
or 3 inches. Above it keep a circular vessel filled with 
medicines (Moosha). Again fill the remaining part (2 or 3 
inches) of the pit with sand. Keep cow-dung cakes above 
this. Set fire to the cakes. This is known as Bhoodhar 
Yantra.
218
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Appendix 
DEFINITIONS IN AYURVEDA
Aapyayanak or Ghatayantra: An earthenware pot with a 
liquid content of 3 seers and 10 chataks water with its neck 
measuring 4 inches is called Aapyayanak or Ghatayantra.
Aaranaal or Kanjik: Rice, barley etc., are well cooked 
and kept in p6ts with three times the quantity of water. This 
is preserved for particular purpose and this is called 
Aaranaal.
Acchadan or Aavap: The mixing of some wet and dry 
substances in the molten Dhatu (metal) as per Ayurvedic 
rules is called Acchadan or Aavap.
Amriteekaran: When Bhasma (ashes) is preparad out of 
metals there are certain processes which remain incomplete 
which are detrimental from the point of view of health. The 
special process which is carried out in removing these defects 
is called Amriteekaran. In the case of copper Bhasma 
purification is done by ghee or Panchamrit. This is called 
Amriteekaran.
Anupan is something which is taken along with or soon 
after taking a medicine. It is prescribed by the doctor or by 
the Ayurvedic text. 'For example you have to take honey 
along with Abhrak Bhasma or take sugar Sherbat after taking 
.the husk of Isafgol etc.
Apurnarbhav Bhasma Lakshan is the method of testing 
the quality of a Bhasma.
Arishta 
Kalpana: 
Medicines useful in decoctions 
(Qwaths), sugar, pepper, etc., increased with Agar, etc., and 
kept in a closed vessel is called Asava or Arishta. Some call 
the process of Qwath combinations as Arishta and uncooked
DEFINITIONS IN AYURVEDA
219

medical combination as Asava. Learned Ayurvedic doctors 
maintain these subtle shades of differences.
Ark is a combination of boiled water and Vanaspathi 
products. It is called Triyakpatit Jal Ark.
Ashtavarga: Jeevak, Rishabhak, Meda, Mahameda, 
Kakoli, Ksheer Kakoli, Riddhi, Vriddhi —these are the 
famous Himalayan Ashtavarga.
Avaleha Kalpana: The decoction of herbs well filtered 
and cooked and made into the shape of medicines fit to be 
taken in by licking is called Rasa Kriya or Avaleha Kalpana.
Bahiseet is the removing of Put from fire and cooling it in 
the open air.
Bandh is the method by which the impurities and 
unsteadiness of mercury is removed. There are 26 methods of 
purifying mercury. They are Hat Bandh, Arot Bandh, Abhas 
Bandh, Kriyaheen Bandh, Pisthika Bandh, Khar Bandh, Khot 
Bandh, Pot Bandh, Kalk Bandh, Kajjali Bandh, Sajeeva 
Bandh, Nirbeej Bandh, Sabeej Bandh, Srinkhala Bandh, 
Druti Bandh, Kumar Bandh, Tarun Bandh, Vriddha Bandh, 
Moorti Bandh, Jala Bandh, Agni Bandh, Susamskrit Bandh, 
Maha Bandh, Jaluka Bandh.
Beej: The special process employed in colouring a metal 
is called Beej or Uttaran.
Charana is the process of feeding gold and other 
minerals into mercury. There are two methods of doing it. 
They are Sumukh and Nirmukh Charana.
Chaturbeej: Cumin seeds, Chansur, Kalojee (Mangroul) 
and Ajwain, these are called Chaturbeej.
Chaturjaat: Dalcheeni, Ilaichi (cardamom), Tejpatra and 
Nagakesar these are called Chaturjaat.
Chaturlavan: Saindhav, Souvarchal, Bid, Samudrik (sea 
salt) these are the Chaturlavan or four kinds of salt.
220
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Chaturooshan: Dried ginger, pepper, Pippali, root of 
Pippali — these four are called Chaturooshan.
Choorna is something ground in stone or pestle and 
mortar and then filtered through cloth. Any dry powder is 
Choorna.
Dasamool: Belgiri, Sonapaata, Gambhari, Pathal, Arani, 
Salaparni, Prisniparni, Kateri (2 varieties), Gokuru —are the 
ten roots constituting Dasamool.
Dravanapanchak: Gunja, Takkhan, honey, ghee and 
jaggery are the five Dravanas.
Dravanavarg: Gud (jaggery), Guggulu, ghee, honey, 
Suhaga—these come under Dravanavarg. These are utilised 
in melting things which are melted under special processes.
Dwilavana: Saindhav and Souvarchal these two are 
indicated by Dwilavana.
Ghritamoorchana: Put pure cow’s ghee in an iron pan 
(kadayi). Heat it over mild fire till the foam disappears. 
Make Kalka of Triphala, Mocha, Haridra, Bijoure Swarasa. 
Take l4th portion of ghee and 4 times that water. Prepare Pak 
in ghee. This is called Ghritamoorchana.
Gutika: Jaggery, sugar, Guggulu, honey or water —these 
when mixed with any powder and made into equally shaped 
pills are called Gutika.
Jalamrittika: Prepare a decoction of the skin of Babul 
tree. Filter it and make it sticky. Take powdered Mandoor, 
jaggery and lime. Mix the three powders well. Mix the 
powder and decoction well and make it stiff. This can be used 
to join broken vessels etc. Even when water is kept in such 
vessels there will be no leakage. This is called Jalamrittika.
Jeevaneeyagan: Jeevak, Rishabhak, Mahameda, Kakoli, 
Ksheer Kakoli, Riddhi, Vriddhi, Mudgaparni, Mashaparni, 
Jeevanti, Mulhati —these are called Jeevaneeya dravya.
Kaijal: Burn a ghee or oil light. Hold a mud'pot (small)
DEFINITIONS IN AYURVEDA
221

above it. The smoke that collects on the mud pot is called 
Kajjal. This is useful in preparing ointment for various eye 
diseases.
Kajjaii: Take purified mercury and purified sulphur. Mix 
them dry. In the process of mixing you get a shining thing like 
Kajjal. This is called Kajjaii.
Kalka: Any wet thing or any dry thing pasted with water 
on stone, the resulting lump is called Kalka. This is called 
Aavap or Prakshep also.
Kantakapanchamool: 
Karonda, Gokuru, 
Katsaraiya, 
Satavari and Chridranakh these five are called Kantaka­
panchamool.
Kappadmittl: Yellow mud, China clay, Multani mud or 
Khadia mud is powdered well and strained through cloth. It 
is then soaked in water. Then fine pieces of cloth and then 
the mud is pasted on a glass sheet uniformly. This is then 
hung in a piece of wood and dried well. When dried again 
another coating of mud is given over it. This is called 
Kappadmitti.
Krishnavarg: Kela (plantain), Karela, Triphala, Neel, 
Narsal, Kechad, Kasees, fresh mango, these are the objects of 
Krishnavarg. These are useful in changing the colour of 
mercury.
Ksharatraya: Javakshar, Sajji and Suhaga, these are 
called Ksharatraya.
Ksharapanchaka: Mokhakshar, Javakshar, Palaasakshar, 
Sajji, Tilakshar, these are known by the name of 
Ksharapanchaka.
Ksharashtaka: Sehud, Palaas, Apaamaarg, tamarind, 
Aak, Tilnal, Sajji, Yava —these are known by the name 
Ksharashtaka,
Ksheerapak: When you want to prepare Ksheerapak of 
anything take 15 times of milk. Add equal quantity of water 
as the object of which Ksheerapak is prepared. Heat it well.
222
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

When the water disappears by boiling, bring it down from the 
fire. Filter and then use it.
Ksheeratraya: Aak, Bargad, Sehud — the milk of these are 
called Ksheeratraya. These are useful in the process called 
Dhatumaaran.
Ksheerashtak: The milk of cow, buffalo, goat, camel, 
woman, bhed (sheep), elephant and horse come under 
Ksheerashtak.
Ksheeravriksha: Bargad, Goolar, Peepal, Paras, Paakar — 
these are called Ksheeravriksha (trees from which milky 
white secretions are seen when cut).
Laaksharas: Sealing wax tied in cloth is suspended in 
Dolayantra. Then six times water is filled. When one fourth 
water is left over, it is filtered 21 times. Some add water 21 
times and then prepare Laaksharas,
Lajamand: The bran of rice is separated and cooked with 
14 times water and filtered with cloth. This is called 
Lajamand.
Loh: Gold, silver, copper, led, black led, iron are the six 
kinds of metals. Kaansa and brass are called mixed metals. 
Gold, silver, copper, iron are the four pure metals.
Maaran: Purified metals when treated with different 
Swaras and when Puta Samskar is performed on fire the 
resulting ash is called Maaran.
Madhuratraya: Sugar, jaggery and honey —these three 
are called Madhuratraya.
Maharas: Abhrak, Vaikrant, Maakshik, Vimal, Samyak, 
Chapal and Karpar are called the Maharas. Two other 
authorities in Ayurveda have defined it in 2 other ways.
Maharatna: Heera, Manik, Moti, Pukhraj, Neelam, 
Panna, Lahsuriayam, Gomed and Munga —these are the nine 
great jewels (Navaratnas).
Mand: Take rice arid add 14 times of that water. Cook it.
DEFINITIONS IN AYURVEDA
223

When the rice is well-cooked collect the watery portion. This 
is Mand.
Mandh: In four tolas of cold water add one tola of 
medicine and churn it with the churning rod. The liquid that 
is got out of it is called Mandh. Sattu (fried barley or wheat) 
fried in ghee to be mixed with water in such a way that the 
resulting substance is neither too watery nor to thick. This is 
also called by the name Mandh.
Mardan: This process of purifying mercury.
Masi: Fill Dravya in a small vessel with a narrow neck. 
Cover it with Sarav on the top. Keep it on fire. The 
charcoal-like thing that is formed by heating is called Masi.
Medak is the sediment settling down in Asava. This is 
thicker than Agal.
Moorchan is the method of purifying and getting rid of all 
the impurities of mercury.
Mukh: The process of treating mercury with V64th part of 
gold or silver is called Mukh.
Mutrashtak: The urine of cow, goat, sheep, buffalo, 
elephant, camel, horse, donkey is called Mutrashtak. The 
urine of the female species of all these animals is meant here.
Nirvaap: Any hot thing when C9oled by pouring water is 
called Nirvaap.
Niyaman is a process in mercury preparations done after 
purifications. This is undertaken to reduce the quickly 
changing nature of mercury. This is done with a variety of 
articles.
Paanak: Well ripe fruits put in cold water and well mixed 
with sugarcandy and pepper etc. and filtered. This drink is 
called Paanak. This is used in hot season.
Paatan is the special type of purification of mercury by 
the process of distilling etc.
Panchaja: Curd, milk, ghee, urine and dung—these five
224
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

are called Panchaja or Panchagavya. This is done with respect 
to cow, goat and buffalo. Panchaja is the name for the five of 
goat, Panchamaahish for that of buffalo and Panchagavya for 
that of cow. This are also utilised in Abhraka-sattva-paatan.
Panchakol: Peepal, Peeparamool, Chavya, Cheeta and 
dried ginger when mixed in a certain method and proportion 
it is called Panchakol.
Panchalavan: Black salt, Saindhava salt, Bid salt, 
Oudbhid salt and sea salt are the five salts (Panchalavan). 
Some use Sambhar salt and Nausadar also.
Panchamrit: Cow’s milk, curd, ghee, honey and sugar are 
the five items in Panchamrit.
Panchapallava: Mango, Jamun, Kaitha, Vijoura and 
Bael —the leaves of the five are called Panchapallava. They 
are utilised in Gandhapaak.
Panchavalkal (five barks): Bargad, Goolar, Peepal, 
Paaraspeepal and Paakar are called Panchavalkal or 
Panchaksheeri. Valkal is the name for their bark.
Paribhasha: That which is indistinct, not properly 
expressed, meagerly-described, doubtful describing them 
clearly in a well defined manner is called Paribhasha.
Parisrut Jal: Water distilled and collected drop by drop is 
called Parisrut Jal.
Parpati: Kajjaii that is prepared out of mercury and 
sulphur is melted in mild fire. Then it is made into a sort of 
paste on plantain leaves and cow-dung. This is called Parpati.
Peetavarg: Kassum, Tosu, turmeric, Patang and Mehndi 
(leaf) these are called Peetavarg and are used in colouring 
mercury.
Peya: There are three kinds of Yavaagu. One is called 
Mand, another Peya and third Vilepi. The watery portion of 
Mand is taken. In Sikth both the watery and solid portions 
are taken. Similar in Peya, The watery portion is much more.
DEFINITIONS IN AYURVEDA
225

Six times medicated water is added and cooked and then we 
get what is called Peya.
Phand: Well boiling water is poured in earthen pot. One 
fourth part of powdered medicine is added. Cool it and strain 
it. This is Phand.
Phanit is prepared out of sugarcane juice. It is cooked 
well and made thick. This is Phanit. Phanit is prepared in the 
shape of Avaleh also.
Pishti: Mukta, Trinakanta, Pravaal all these are well 
pasted in rose water. The pasting should be done nicely. This 
is called Choorna Pishti or Pishtikaa. There is another 
method of preparing this with mercury and sulphur.
Pradeh: There are two kinds of Lep. One is called 
Pradeh. It is prepared hot, wet and thick. This is used as a 
remedy for phlegm and Vaata diseases (rheumatism).
Pralep: This is a variety of Lep. This is cold, light and also 
dry. This is useful in Raktapitta.
Pramathya is a drink. One tola of Dravya is pasted and 
mixed with eight times of water and well cooked. When only 
two tolas of water remains get it down from fire. This drink is 
called Pramathya.
Prasanna: The watery portion found in Asava on the top 
is called Prasanna.
Putapaak: Those of the leaves from which it is hard to 
extract juice by grinding, they are crushed with water. The 
leaves o t castor, plantain or banyan are taken and tied with 
weak string. A coating of wet mud is given over the leaves. 
They are then shown in fire, made red-hot and strained. This 
is called Putapaak Vidhi or method.
Saarkar: Take Hime, phante, quath (decoction) or Ark. 
Add twice the quantity of sugar to it. Prepare Paak on mild 
fire. Strain it with cloth. This is Peya Saarkar.
Satadhoutaghrit: Take ghee or butter in a bell metal
226
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

vessel (bronze). Pour water with a spoon made of Neem 
wood. Stir it well. When it is well stirred take it out. Repeat 
this process 100 times. This is called Satadhoutaghrit.
Seethakashaya: Take water six times the quantity of 
medicine. Water may be hot or cold. Put the medicine in it. 
Keep it for a whole night. In the early morning churn it well 
and strain. This is Seethakashaya.
Silatoya: Take a mud pot full of water. Add one fourth 
quantity of sulphur and Hartaal. Boil it well. When the 
bubbles come out during boiling bring it down from there. 
Strain it. This is Silatoya.
Snehapaak: Take Sneha one fourth quantity of medicine 
Kalka and four times water. Put it on fire and prepare Sneha 
Siddhi. This is called Snehapaak.
Srita: This is observed in Kwath Paribhasa. Heating the 
object with water over fire is called Srita.
Suklavarna: Lime, the Kachuprishta, Sankha (conch 
shell), mother of pearl and Koudi (enamel) are the five 
Suklavarna.
Svaras: Fresh herbs put in mortar and well pounded gives 
out fresh juice. This is called Svaras.
Takra: Take some quantity of curd and half the quantity 
of water. Churn it well. Take away the butter. The watery 
buttermilk which is sweet, slightly sour and Kashaya is called 
Takra.
Tandulodak: Take one tola of rice uncooked. Put it in 8 
tolas of water. Keep it for four or five hours. Churn it well. 
This water is called Tandulodak.
Telvarg: Sesame (Til), mustard, Dhatura seed, Bhallatak, 
castor seed, Neem seed and Alsee —oil of all these is called 
Telvarg.
Trigandh: Gandhak, Hartaal, Manahsina—these three 
are Trigandh.
DEFINITIONS IN AYURVEDA
227

Trijaat: Dalcheeni, Ilachee (cardamom), Tejpatra — these 
three are called Trijaat or Trisugandh.
Trikatu: Pippal, Sonth (dry ginger) and pepper are called 
Trikatu.
Trilavan are Saindhav, Souvarch and Bid.
Trimad: Vidang, Motha and Chitrak are called Trimad.
Trina Panchamool: Kusa, Kaans, Sarkanda, Daabh, 
sugarcane root—these are called Trina Panchamool.
Triphaladwaya: 
Harra, 
Baheda, 
Amla —these 
are 
Mahatee Triphala. Kambhari fruit, Khajoor, Phaalsaa — these 
are Swalpa Triphala.
Trisiraa is sesame, rice and black gram all the three 
cooked together.
Trivrit: Ghee, oil, Basa and Majja —any three of these is 
called Trivrit.
Tushodak: Take barley with husk. Pour four times water 
in a pot. Put the barley in it. Close the mouth. Allow it to 
remain and become sour. When it becomes sour the water is 
called Tushodak.
Upadhaatu: Senamaahki, Roopamaakhi, Tutiya, Kaansa, 
Peetal, Sindhur and Silajit—these are called Upadhaatu.
Uparasa: Gandhak, Geru, Kasees, Phitkari (alum), 
Hartaal, Manasila, Anjan, Kankush — these are the Uparasa.
Upavisha: Kalihari, Kuchala, Kaner, Bhang, Bhilaava, 
Dhatoora, Aak, Sehund, Gunja, Apheem —all these are 
Upavisha.
Ushnodak: Boil water. When one-eighth, one-fourth or 
half the quantity remains in the boiling pot, bring it down. 
This 
is 
Ushnodak. 
This 
is 
one 
of the 
items 
of 
Pathyaprakarana.
Yamak: Ghee, oil, Basaa, Majja —mixing any two of these 
is called Yamak.
Yavaagu is a kind of Kalpa. There is a mixture of three
228
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

kinds of Kalpa. They are Mand, Peya and Vilepi. Yavaagu is 
particular diet in a particular disease (Pathya). One fourth 
the quantity of the Yavaagu is taken and mixed with the 
quantity of rice that he takes and Yavaagu is prepared.
RAJO DHARMA
(Menstruation)
In Ayurveda menstruation is known as Rajodharma. 
Rajodharma is described in Sushruta-Samhita by Sri 
Sushrutacharya in the chapter dealing with Saareera-sthana. 
He describes the subject in the following words:
“Tadvarshat dwaadaastkacde varthamaanamasruk punah,
Jara pakva sareeraanaam yaati panchasatha kshayam. ”
Beginning with the twelfth year, Rajodharma is seen in 
women to continue till the fiftieth year except during the 
time of pregnancy and after delivery for about six months. In 
women generally the menstrual flow is seen to exist till the 
50th year only. But in the case of women born in aristocratic 
families and who take rich and nutritious diet this is seen to 
continue up to the age of 60.
In the opinion of Kasyapa Rishi, the author of Kasyapa- 
Samhita, the venus blood has the natural quality of 
discharging Rajas periodically. But in the opinion of 
Sushrutacharya this takes place on account of a peculiar 
quality of the phlegmatic contents of the blood.
Menstruation is a flow of reddish fluid consisting of blood 
and other substances. This occurs in women every month, 
and hence called the monthly course or menstrual flow. Mens 
means month in Latin.
These changes in the womb take place in response to 
some functional changes in the ovaries. One or the other of 
the two ovaries produces an ovum every month.
A woman is considered nubile during the menstrual
RAJO DHARMA
229

period, which lasts generally from the twelfth to about the 
fiftieth year.
In every woman the menstrual cycle is repeated every 
month from puberty to menopause, the stage at which the 
reproductive capacity is lost due to old age. The menopause 
takes place at the age of 45 or 50.
During the period of lactation there is no ovulation and 
no menstruation in many cases. But this is not a rule. Some 
women begin to menstruate during lactation also.
In hot countries the girls mature earlier and also the boys. 
The girls of rich families who are well-nourished mature 
sooner than the girls of poor families.
The female sexual parts should be kept scrupulously 
clean during menstruation.
Unclean organs may become a seat of disease. The ladies 
should use sanitary towels or napkins to absorb the menstrual 
discharge. This napkin is held by a belt round the waist and a 
suspensory bandage.
Healthier women begin earlier and menstruate up to a 
more advanced age than weak ones.
In some women menstruation takes place in 26 days, in 
some others in a little over one month. The usual period is 28 
days. It may vary a little in different women and in the same 
women at different times.
The flow lasts 4 or 5 days usually. In some women it may 
last only 2 days and in some others as long as a week without 
any disease. In some women after 3 or 4 days, the flow stops 
for a day or so. Then again it manifests and lasts for a day or 
so. Slight variation should not cause any worry or anxiety.
Normally the flow is of dark red colour. The quantity 
varies in different women. Generally weaker women lose 
more blood than the stronger.
Shortly before the period is to begin usually there is some
230
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

pain and discomfort in the abdomen and the back. There is a 
general feeling of being unwell. The women may feel 
exhausted, tired and heavy. There is headache. Digestion and 
appetite may be upset.
During the menstrual flow, a woman is strictly prohibited 
from intercourse with her husband. She is enjoined to sleep 
on a grass bed, to shed no tears, and to take no bath. She 
should not pare her nails and should neither run or speak 
loudly.
She should not apply oil or sandal to her body. She should 
not. expose herself to inclement weather. Any disregard of 
these rules is injurious to the offspring.
If she cries during the monthly period, the child will 
contract an eye disease. If she sleeps during the day, the child 
will become dull and sluggish.
The menstrual blood can have defects similar to semen. 
Nutritive and sweating remedies, specific diet, pastes and 
douches are recommended for cure.
The menstrual blood is pure if it has the colour of lac and 
leaves no stains in washed clothes. Excessive flow of blood 
during and after the menses is called Asrgdhara, Pradara 
(menorrhagia).
At about 45 the functions of the ovaries begin to fail. 
They are not able to produce ova regularly. Menstruation 
also becomes irregular. This period in a woman’s life is 
known as climacteric or menopause.
At this period the woman is more excitable, impulsive 
and capricious. She feels a sudden wave of heat and 
perspiration with palpitation of heart and dizziness with a 
tendency to faint.
Embryology
In the first month the foetus is a collected small mass. In 
the second month it becomes a solid ball. In the fourth 
month all parts of the body and the heart take a definite
RAJO DHARMA
231

shape. In the sixth month hair on the head and body, nails, 
bones, sinews, arteries are formed. In the seventh month the 
foetus is provided with.all limbs. A child born in this month is 
capable of living.
When the mother sleeps it sleeps, when she rises it rises, 
because the foetus is not independent.
The foetus excretes neither urine nor faeces, because it 
does not take for itself any food except the blood of the 
mother. It does not cry because the throat is filled with 
phlegm.
From the mother are created the soft parts of the body, 
viz., the blood, flesh, marrow, navel, heart, liver, spleen, 
kidneys, bladder, rectum, intestines, anus, lungs, retina, 
peritoneum, omentum.
From the father are created the hard parts of the body 
viz., the hair, nails, teeth, bones, vessels, sinews, nerves, 
sperm.
Semen is secreted by the testicles. It is stored in the 
seminal bags. It is discharged into the vagina during sexual 
intercourse.
The spermatozoa in the semen travel a distance of one 
inch in 10 minutes. The distance between the upper end of 
the vagina and the ovarian end of the fallopian tube is 8 
inches. The spermatozoa will take 80 minutes to reach the 
newly discharged ovum. The spermatozoa can live for 7 days 
in the female organs.
A new growth composed of blood-vessels develops on the 
wall of the womb where the embryo has attached itself. It 
takes the shape of a disc. It is over an inch thick. It is called 
the placenta. The embryo is connected with this soft and 
supple mass by a tube through which it sucks its nourishment 
and discharges its waste products. This tube is called the 
umbilical cord. It contains some veins and arteries.
The heart of the embryo begins to beat in the fifth week.
232
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

After some time it can be felt by the stethoscope. The 
movements of the foetus can be felt after the fourth month.
A thin membrane forms a sac or bag round the foetus and 
is filled with liquid. It is called amniotic sac. This water 
cushion saves the foetus from external shock and hard 
pressure in case some thing strikes or presses against the 
woman’s abdomen.
The foetus develops its human face by the 4th month.
The child is 1.5 inches long at the end of the second 
month and 6 inches at the end of 4 months. During the ninth 
month it measures 20 inches. The weight of the average child 
at birth is over 3 seers.
In the first month, the foetus has a jelly like form. The 
second month, it becomes hard. The male foetus is spherical; 
the female foetus is elliptical. In the third month five special 
eminences are seen and also the eight differentiation of 
limbs. In the fourth month the differentiation of the limbs is 
much more definite and well-manifested. In the sixth month 
intelligence begins to develop. In the seventh it becomes 
complete with all its limbs.
According to Kumarasiras and Saunaka the head appears 
first, because it is the -seat of the senses; according to 
Kritaveerya the heart appears first because this is the seat of 
consciousness, and of intellect and mind.
The sex harmone secreted by the testes gives man his 
male characteristics, viz., larger stature than the female, 
stronger muscles, deeper voice, hair on the face etc. This 
harmone is the cause of the characteristic male feelings viz., 
attraction towards the female, desire for intercourse, love, 
etc. The development, growth and healthy functioning of the 
male sex organs depends on this harmone.
The clitoris in the female is the seat of sexual feeling and 
sensitive nerves and experiences erection being engorged
RAJO DHARMA
233

with blood when the woman is sexually aroused. Bartholin’s 
glands in women are the Cowper’s glands in men.
You will understand now that the whole sexual apparatus 
of the man and woman is based on a common design. It is 
only the sex harmone that causes it to develop into male or 
female form by checking the growth of breasts in men and 
penis in women and encouraging the growth of scrotum in 
men and womb in women.
In the beginning the sexual urge is not noticeable. It is 
latent and dormant. It manifests itself vaguely and then more 
and more clearly. Finally it asserts itself with all its intensity. 
In old age it gradually wanes and vanishes. But the craving 
remains till death.
The definite sexual feeling first appears in a child in his 
eighth year. This impulse is weak till he attains his fourteenth 
year. At puberty the sexual urge begins to assert itself from 
within even if there are no external causes to arouse it. Even 
after puberty it takes 4 years for the organs to mature or 
develop properly. In hot countries puberty is reached a year 
or so earlier than in cold countries.
Thymus situated over the heart has an internal sexual 
secretion and retards sexual development and allows children 
to grow in stature. When puberty approaches, thymus 
degenerates and gradually vanishes altogether.
Conception and Pregnancy
Spermatozoon is a very minute worm-like structure with a 
tiny head and a comparatively long tail. It can be seen only 
with the help of a microscope. It is about l/500th inch long.
Though a single spermatozoon is only needed to 
impregnate a woman, a man discharges 20 crores of them at a 
time.
Ovarian harmone, an internal secretion of the ovary gives 
the characteristic feminine appearance. This secretion 
prevents the growth of hair in her face and helps a woman to
234
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

develop a broader pelvis, larger hips. The development of 
breasts and other sex-organs is due to this harmone.
The stature, fatness or thinness, growth of hair on the 
head, and temperament in a man or a woman is due to the 
internal secretion or harmone.
Both male and female sex organs have a common basis. 
When a child in the womb is only a few weeks old, it has sex 
organs that resemble those of both sexes. At this stage 
ovaries and testicles have not been differentiated.
Gonad is a common name for an ovary or testicle. Gonad 
of a young embryo are neither male nor female. The ducts of 
the gonads resemble both fallopian tubes and casa 
deferentia. The whole sexual apparatus is of a common 
design.
The first sign of maleness or femaleness appears in the 
gonads, when the embryo is six weeks old. The tissues of the 
gonads produce their secretion and pour them into the blood 
stream. If it is to be a boy, the gonads produce male 
secretions and begin to develop into testicles; if a girl they 
produce female harmone and begin to develop into ovaries.
The harmone gives a male or female nature to the type of 
sexual apparatus and it develops into male or female organs. 
But either sex even when fully developed retains the original 
rudiments of the opposite sex or of the common sex.
Even the perfect male retains the original rudiments of 
the female sex organs. There is a very small womb in his 
abdomen. There are nipples in place of breasts.
When the gonads lean towards the form of testicles, they 
begin to descend from up in the abdomen, from the position 
of the ovaries into the scrotum shortly before birth which is 
formed as if by stitching the lips of the vagina together.
Puberty
A boy attains his puberty at the age of sixteen. He is virile 
till he attains seventy. A young man of 21 can marry a girl of
RAJO DHARMA
235

18 years. At the age of 25 he can bring forth a son. They are 
fully developed now and can create strong progeny.
The semen is the product of six kinds of fluids (Rasa). 
The foetus cannot be produced simply by the union of the 
semen of the father and the blood (Shronita) of the mother. 
Such a union can produce the foetus only when the Atman 
with its subtle body becomes connected with it by means of 
its Karma.
After taking bath after the course of three days, she must 
wear new clothes and ornaments, she must immediately see 
her husband, because her son will resemble the first man she 
sees after her bath.
The sperm and the menstrual fluid must be clean and of 
normal condition in order to create a normal foetus. The 
sperm is not capable of creating a foetus, if it is thin, frothy, 
brown, scanty, if it does not sink in water.
The ovulation usually occurs on the 12th day from the 
beginning of the last menstrual flow. An ovum ripens and is 
discharged by the ovary. This is ovulation. The cavity left by 
the ovum is filled up and this rounded solid body is called 
corpus luteum.
The ovum is waiting for a sperm to fertilise it. If a sperm 
does not reach the ovum within 15 days, it dies on the 27th 
day from the beginning of the last menstrual flow.
The semen that is capable of generating is fluid, sticky, 
heavy, sweet, whitish. It has the smell of honey and the colour 
of butter.
The secretion of the Pituitary gland has a power to make 
the womb contract itself and expel its contents.
The period for impregnation is the first sixteen days after 
the appearance of the menses. The first four days are not 
recommended. The best period for conception is from the 
fifth to the sixteenth day.
Conception takes place by the union of the fecundating
236
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Retas (sperm, Shukla) of the male with the Rajas or Shronita 
of the female.
Sex of the Child
If the conception be on even days —that is to say on the 
6th, 8th, 10th or 12th day —the sex of the infant will be male, 
if on an odd day, the sex will be female.
Some are of the opinion that a male child is formed when 
the mixture has a stronger element of semen and that when 
‘Rajas’ of a female predominates a female child is formed.
If the semen is divided into two by the local wind twins 
develop.
The sex of the infant in the womb can be determined by 
certain signs. The form of the uterus is round in the case of a 
male foetus; the right eye appears larger than the left; the 
right breast begins to secrete milk before the left; the right 
thigh becomes more plump; the countenance look bright and 
cheerful; the woman desires food of a masculine kind and 
dreams of mangoes and water lilies. She starts walking with 
the right leg.
In the case of a female foetus the form of the uterus is 
void.
There is a medium depression alone the abdomen if it is a 
case of twins.
When the sides of the abdomen become full and the belly 
protuberant, 
and when the form of the womb is 
hemispherical, the womb contains an impotent foetus or 
child.
If semen and Shronita exist in equal quantity a 
Napumsaka or a creature incapable of generating is born.
After the period of Ritu, the womb does not allow the 
semen to penetrate. The mouth closes.
If the conception takes place on one of the first three
RAJO DHARMA
237

days, the child dies at or after the birth. Or it becomes 
crippled or short-living.
The child becomes blind if the mother uses eye-ointment. 
It becomes a leper if she anoints her body with oil, becomes 
deaf if she hears a loud noise.
Care in Pregnancy
Vomiting in the morning (morning sickness), loss of taste 
for certain foods, special taste for some other foods, swelling 
of the abdomen and the breasts are the signs of pregnancy.
It is desirable to gratify a woman during pregnancy with 
everything she wishes to have. If her wishes are not granted 
the child may probably become deformed and defective. 
There will be abortion. She should be kept happy and 
contented. She should wear nice clothes and ornaments. She 
should avoid disagreeable sights and smells, and sexual and 
other excitements. She should take easily digestible food. She 
should neither remain hungry nor eat too much.
She should not touch a dirty, ugly or defective woman. 
She should not live in a lonely house. She should not have 
her bed very high.
After pregnancy is sure, the ceremony Pumsavana is 
performed in order to get a son according to the Grihya 
Sutras under the Pushya constellation when four drops of 
milk mixed with an extract of Ficus Indica and other herbs 
are dropped in the right-nostril of the woman as a snuff. She 
should not allow the fluid flow out. If the husband desires a 
daughter, he puts the fluid in the left nostril of the woman.
Food
A woman in her confinement should be very particular 
about her food. She should abstain from all bodily exertion, 
from sexual intercourse and from anger. She should eat 
moderately.
A woman can improve her milk by taking green gram
238
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

gruel for food and a decoction of Patol, Nimba, Asana, Daru, 
Patha, Murvya, Guduchi, Katukarohini and dry ginger.
She may take with advantage milk mixed with black 
pepper. This will promote the secretion of milk.
Powdered long pepper, dry ginger and Hareetaki with 
clarified butter and treacle, taken in the form of an electuary 
or confection will assist the formation of milk considerably.
A preparation of dry ginger, long pepper, black pepper, 
the three myrobalams, dhana, Yavani, Satavari, Vacha, 
Brahmi and Bharsi, given with honey to the child, will 
accelerate the power of speech and improve the voice.
The memory and intelligence of the child can t»e greatly 
improved by giving it an electuary of Guduchi, Apamerga, 
Vidanga, Sankapushpi, Vacha, Hareetaki, dry ginger and 
Satavari with clarified butter.
NOMENCLATURE OF DISEASES
English
Sanskrit
Hindi
Abdominal tumour
Gulma
Havagola
Abortion
Garbhasrava
Garbhpatam
Abscess
Vidradhi
Purana phoda
Achylis Dyspepsia or 
Indigestion
Ajeernaroga
Badhajmi
Acidity
Amla Pitta
Acne
Mukhadooshika
After pains
Makkal sool
Ague
Joodi
Albino
Soorajmukhi
Albuminuria
Laalaameha
Prameha Vikar
Alcoholism
Madatyaya
Alkaline urine
Ksharameha
Anaemea
Panduroga
Kamla
Anorexia
Arochaka
Arochaka
Anychea
Tilkalak
Aphasia
Mookatwa
Goongapan
Ascites
Jalodara
Jalodara
Asthma
Swaasaroga
Dama
NOMENCLATURE OF DISEASES
239

Atony of bladder
Vastikundal
Atrophy
Kunchan
Bald
Ganja
Belch
Dakar
Benign tertian fever
Tritiya Jwar
Black or necrosed tooth
Syavadanta
Blepharsposm
Nimesha
Breath
Saas
Breathlessness
Kshudraswas
Bronchitis
Kaas
Bubo
Vidarika
Calculus
Asmaree
Patharee
Cancer-Palatal
Talvarbuda
Carbuncle
Pramehapidka
Caries of teeth
Krimidantak
Catalepsy
Sannyas
Cataract
Linganaasa
Motiabindu
Catarrah of nose
Pratishyaya
Cellulitis
Kardamavisarpa
Cellulitis
Mahapadma visarp
Chancre hard, syphilis
Phirangopadamsa
Chancre soft
Upadamsa
Chicken pox
Laghumasoorika
Matarog
Chlorisis
Halimaka
Cholera
Vishoochika
Haija
Choluria (Bile in urine)
Haridrameha
Chronic diarrhoea
Atisara
Chronic fever
Jeernajwar
Chylurea
Pishtameha
Colic
Sool
Sool
Coma
Conjunctivitiss
Aank aana
Constipation
Koshabaddhata
Kabj
Consumption
Raja Yakshma
Kshaya rog
Continuous fever 
Convulsions
Akshepaka
Corn
Alasa, Kadar
Mamsa Ganthi
Corneal ulcer
Sukla
Coryza
Jukaam
Cough
Kaasa
Khansi
Cracks of lip
Proshta bheda
Hont katna
240
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

NOMENCLATURE OF DISEASES
241
Cyncope
Murcha
Behoshi
Cystitis
Mootrasada
Day blindness
Pithavidagdhadrishti
Deafness
Badhirya
Delirium
Pralapa
Bakvaas
Dermatoses
(diseases of skin)
Kustha
Diabetes Insipidus
Udakameha
Bahumootra
(polyuria)
Diabetes Mellitus
Madhumeha
Sarkaraprameh
Diarrhoea
Athisara
Dasth
Diarrhoea (bloody)
Raktatisaara
Khoonidasth
Diplegia
Sarvanga vatha
Diptheria
Mamsatan
Disease of vagina
Yonivyapada
Diseased milk
Sthanya dushya
Diseases x>f children
Balarog
Dislocation
Sandhi vislesha
Double quartan fever
Kathurtha kaviparyay
Double quotidian fever
Satatajwara
Drowsiness
Tandri
Jagomeeti
Dumb
Gunga
Dyschezia or intestinate obstruction
Dysentery
Pravaathikaa
Peches
Dyspnoea
Swasarog
Dama
Dyspnoea of failing
Mahaswasa
heart or respiration
Dysuria
Mootrakrischra
Peshab ka lagke aana
Eczema
Paamaa
Khujlee
Elephantiasis
Medoja vriddhi
Pheelapav
Elongated uvula
Kandhasunti
Emprosthotonus
Antaraayaam
Enlarged
Granthi
lymphatic gland
Enlargement of
Ashteelaa
prostate
Epidemic parotitis
Paashanagardabha
Epilepsy
Apasmaara
Mrigee
Erysipelas
Visarspa
Erythema nodozum
Granthi visarpa
Excoriated wound
Ghruta

242
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA
Exenthymeta
Visphoda
Extra tooth
Khalivardhan
Akladad
Facial paralysis
Aarditha
Lakua
Fatty tumour
Medorbuda
Fever (emotional)
Kama-bhaya-krodha-soka Jwara
Fever (Hayfever)
Obshadhicandhaajwara
Fever (pyrexia)
Jwara
Bukhar
Fever Chronic
Jeerna jwara
Purana bukhar
Fever Hectic
Pralepaka jwara
Fever inflammatory
Vidaha jwara
Fever malaria
Vishama jwara
Kaamboo taap
Fever malarial 
(intermittent)
Santata jwara
Fever Malignant tertian
Tritiyaka Viparyaya
Fever of evil spirits
Bhootabhishana
Bhootna taap
Fever of lactation
jwara
Sthanyottha jwara
Fever puerperal
Sootikaa jwara
Prasoota jwar
Fever quarton
Chaturthaka jwara
' Chothia taap
Fever quotadian
Anyedyu jwara
Vaari daa taap
Fever Traumatic
Abhighata jwara
Fever typhoid
Saannipatika jwara
Sirsam
Fistula
Bhagandhara
Fracture
Asthibhagna
Fracture green stick
Asthichallika
Fracture Impacted
Majjageda
Fracture spiral
Aswakarna
Gastralgokenosis,
Hungerpain
Parinaamasoola
Gastritis
Gulma
Giddiness
Bhramaroga
Chakkar
Glycosuria
Ikshumeha
Goitre
Galaganda
Kantamala
Gonorrhoea
Ushnavaatha
Sujak
Gout
Vaatharakta
Granular conjunctivitis
Vartmarsha
Gravel
Sarkara
Ret
Gray hairpremature
Palita
Guinea worm
Snayuk
Gum boil
Danta pupped shoushir
Haematemesis
Oordhwaga rakta pitta

NOMENCLATURE OF DISEASES
243
Haematocele
Raktaja vriddhi
Haematuria
Raktameha
Khooni prameha
Haemoptysis
Moukhikaratkapitta
Haemorrhoids
Bhavaseer
Headache
Sirassoola
Hemicrania
Ardhavabhed
Hemiplegia
Parshavata
Paasa mama
Hepatitis
Yakrudvikar
Peelya
Hernia- Inguinial
Antra vriddhi
Herpes Zoster
Kaksha
Kachraili
Hiccup
Hikkaa
Hichkee
Hoarseness
Svarabhanga
Gala Bhaitna
Hunchbacked
Kubja
Hurt
Chot
Hydrocele
Hypochlorhydrea
Andavriddhi
Hysteria
Yusaapasmara
Sthriyonki mrigee
Idiopathic ulcer
Sareera vrana
Impetigo
Visphotaka
Incontinence
Mootrateet
Indigestion 
Infantile erythema of
Ajeerna
Badhajmi
jacquet
Ahipootana
Inflammation
Vrana shodha
Inflammation of the ear
Karnashodha
Inflammed knee
Kroshtu ka seersha
Influenza
Sleshmakajwara
Kaphkajwar
Insanity
Unmada
Paagalpan
Insomnia
Nidranaash
Neend na aana
Jaundice 
Kala azar
Kaamalaa
Kamlaa
Lachrymal fistula
Netranadi
Lechen
Alsaka
Leprosy
Mahakushta
Leucoderma
Kilasaa
Swetakustha
Leucorrhoea
Raktapradara
Lipuria
Lala, Vasaa
Lock jaw
Dant Baitna
Long sight 
Loss of sensibility
Dooradrishti
to taste
Rasajnana

244
PRACTICE OF AYURVED
Loss of appetite
Agnimandya
Ajeerna
Loss of smell
Ghraananaasa
Malignant tumour 
Malpresentation of 
the Foetus
Arbuda
or difficult labour
Moodhagarbha
Mammory abscess
Sthanaroga kopa
Mastitis or inflammation of breasts
Measles
Romanthika
Peet
Melcna
Ad hog raktapitta
Menstruation
Metiarism
Aartava
Metrorrhagia
Raktpradara
Mico-colitis
Aamaatisaara
Kachcha dast
Miscarriage
Garbhapaata
Mixed calculus
Pittasmari
Mole
Mashaka
Mucus in urine
Sandrameha
Mumps (fever) 
Muscular spasm of
Karnamoolikajwara
Hachappu
hand and feet
Khalli
Khalli
Myoma
Mamsarbuda
Night blindness
Sleshma vidagdha
Numbness of feet
Paadaharsha
Pyeronka sona
Nyctalopia
Drishti
Obesity
Medovriddhi
Obstructed micturition
Mootraghata
Mootra band hona
Odontitis
Dantaharsha
Onychia
Nakhabhed
Nakoon phatna
Ophthalmia
Abhishyanda
Ophthalmia in children
Kukoonaka
Opistonos
Baakyayaama
Orchitis-Acute
Pittaja vriddhi
Orchitis-Chronic
Vaataja vriddhi
Osteoarthritis of the
shoulder
Amsasosha
Otitis, otalgia
Karnasoola
Kan ka dard
Ovarian tumour
Rakta gulma
Ovaritis
Pratyashteela
Ozaena
Peenasa
Naakadurgandhi
Palpitation
Hridkampa
Hridapa dhataken

NOMENCLATURE OF DISEASES
245
Pappiloma of skin
Padmini kantak
Paralysis agitans
Kampavaat
Kamban vaa
Paralysis of the tongue
Jihvasthambha
Javaan bandi
Paraphimosis
Parivartika
Paraplegia
Pangu
Lulapan
Parasitis
Kimigranthi
Peritonitis due to perforation of the bowel
Pestilence
Mahamari
Phimosis
Niruddhaprakasa
Phlegm
Kaph
Phthisis, consumption
Rajayakshma
Tapedik
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Piles
Arga
Bavaseer
Piles (bleeding)
Raktarsa
Khooni bavaseer
Pining
Parigarbhika
Plague fever
Granthikajwara
Mahamaari
Plenosthotonos
Dandapatanaka
Pneumonia
Sannipaathika
Polypus
Talukantaka
Ponnus
Sirotpat
Presentation
Gati
Presentation of the head with two hands
Prolapsins or head
with both hands
Pratikhura
Prolapsus
Gudabhamsa
Psoriasis
Kitibha
Pterigium
Arm
Ptosis
Vatahata vartma
Ptyriasis versicolor
Sidhma
Puerperal fever
Soothikaajwara
Pulmonary cavitation
Urakshata
Urakshat
Pustule in the nose
(Suppurative rhinitis)
Nassapak
Pyorrhoea
Pooyadantha
Peep daant
Quarten fever
Chaturthajwara
Quotidian, Double
Sathata jwara
Quotidian fever
Anyodyauksha jwara
Dusredin ka bukar
Radio ulcer paralysis
Viswachee
Rats bite fever
Aakhuish
Renal calculus
Asmari (stone in kidneys)
Retention of urine
Vaatavasthi

246
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA
Rhagades 
(crack in the sole)
Vaipadaik kusth
Rheumatic fever
Sandhikajwara
Rheumatism
Amovaatha
Gatiyaa
Ring worm
Dadru
Daad
Scabies, itch
Kachhu
Dad visesh
Sciatica
Grudhrasee
Dadrasie
Scorpion poisoning
Vrischikavisha
Scrofula
Gandamaalaa
Scrotal enlargement
Virddhi
Scurvy
Raktapitta
Seminal calculus
Sukrasmaree
Short-sight
Alpadrishti
Sinus, fistula
Naadi vrana
Sinus
Nassoor
Sinus in the gums
Dandanaadi
Sleeping sickness
Nidraavyadhi
Smallpox
Seethala, Masoorikaa
Snake poisoning
Sarpavisha
Sneezing
Kshavadhu
Cheenk
Soft Chancre
Upadamsa
Sore buttocks 
Spasmodic stricture
Vaatakundalikaa
Spermatorrhoea
Prameha
Spiral fracture
Aswakarna
Spittle
Thook
Spongy gums
Seetada
Sprain
Nas chatakna
Sprue
Samghrani
Pechis
Squint-eyed
Aincha
Sterility, barrenness
Vandhyatwa
Stiffneck
Manyastambh
Stomatitis
Mukharoga
Stone
Patthari
Stone of phosphotes
Slaishmikasmaree
Stricture of rectum
Sanniruddha guda
Stricture of urethra
Mootrotsangh
Stye
Anjananaka
Sublingual abscess
Allas
Sunstroke
Athapavyaapad Amshughata
Suppression of urine
Mootrakshaya

Suppuration of the ear 
Suppurative gingivitis
Karnapaak
Synocope
Morrchcha
Behoshi
Syphilis
Phirangopadamsa
Gharme
Tartar
Tarticolis
Dantasarkara
Tear in the prepuce
Avapathikaa
Tertian fever
Thriteeyaka jwara
Tetanus
Dhanushtambha
Thirst
Trishnaa
Pyas
Tinea tarsi
Pakshmasaat
Trachoma
Pothakee
Kukre
Transverse
Parigha
Traumatic erysipelas
Visarpa
Traumatic fever
Abhigatajwara
Traumatic wound
Sadyovrana
Trichiasis *
Pakshmakop
Trismus (Lock jaw)
Hanugrah
Hanuka jakdahat
Tubercle Testes
Kaphaja Vriddhi
Tumour
Arbuda
Nasvikar
Tumour of the bladder
Mootragranthi
Tympanitis
Aadhmaan
Aphaara
Typhilitis
Vaatasheetla
Typhoid fever
Sannipaathikaanthrika jwara
Ulceralion of the bowel
Kshatodar
Urates in urine
Sikatameh
Urinary anomalies
Prameha
Prameha
Vomiting
Chherdi
Ulti
Warts
Lingarsha
Karmakeela
Wax in the ear
Karnaguthak
Whitlow
Chippala
Chhipki
Worms
Krimi
Worms in the ear
Krimikarnaka
Wound contused
Katha
Wound crushed 
Wryneck
Pinchata
Yawning
Jhrimbha
Jambhayi
Zerodirma
Charmakushta
NOMENCLATURE OF DISEASES
247

DISEASES OF THE EYES
248
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA
Eyelids
Sanskrit
English
A njananaka
Stye
Artm a K ardam a
Swelling of lids with m ucoid d isch arg e 
(conjunctivitis)
Arvuda
Tum our of lid
A shruvartm a
Trachom a
B ahala vartm a
V egetation of small pustules on ey e lid
Kiishtavartm a
Inflam m atory swelling of lid
Kumbhika
Blepharitis
Lagana
Big cyst
N im esha
B lepharospasm
P akshm akopa
Trichiasis, Entropion, Ect'rapion
Parvani Alaji
Small Phylectanular Keratitis 
Bigger Phylectanular Keratitis
Pathaki
H erpes Z oster (a num ber of red pustules 
resem bling red m ustard seed s)
Pitta Srava, Rakta Srava
Ephiphora, w atering
Puyaalasa, Puya Srava
C hronic dacryocystitis
S hleshm a-Srava
D acryocystitis with m ucoid d isch arg e
S honitarsa
Soft and fleshy grow th on inner lid
S h u sk rsas
Follicles
Utsangini
Syphilis of eyelid, suppurative chalasion
V aatahata vartm a
Ptosis
V artm a-B andha
O ed em a of th e lid
V artm asharkara
A large pustule surrounded by other 
small pu stu les covering th e entire lid
Visha vartm a
Eczem a-sw elling with m inute holes in it, 
carbuncle
Diseases of Sclera and Conjunctive
(White part of the eye)
A dhim aanasarm a
Pterygium  sym blepherdu
Arjuna
Selaritis
Lohitarm a
Fleshy grow th
P rastaryaarm a
Early Pterygium
Pishtaka
Vesicle on conjunctiva
S hirapidaka
Phylectanular conjuctiva
S huklaarm a
Z erosis conjunctiva w hite-pterygium

DISEASES OF THE EYES
249
Sirajala
Snavarma
Suktikaa
Extensive redness 
Pinguicula
Sub conjunctival haemorrhage
Diseases of Cornea
A-vrana sukra 
Ajaka
Akshipaakaatyoga 
Sa-vrana sukra
Keratitis, opacity cornea 
Staphyloma 
Panophthalmitis 
Ulcer cornea
Disease of the Whole Eye-ball
A-sopha Akshipaaka
Abhishyanda
Adhimantha
Amladhyashita Orishti
Anyato vata 
Hataadhimantha
Sasopha Paaka
Shiraaharsha
Shirotapaata
Shushkaakshipaaka
Dhuma Drishti 
Gambhirikta
Hrasa Jaadya
Linga-maasha 
Nakulaandhya 
Pitta Vidagdha Drishti 
Shleshma Vidagdha 
Drishti
Without swelling opaque-cornea 
Ophthalmia
Ch. Ophthalmia, excruciating pain deve­
lops, headache, reflex pain, Hemicrania 
Swelling of eye due to acid fruits or 
acid reaction 
Neuralgic pain
Loss of sight, silent glaucoma,
Optic Atrophy, etc.
Acute iritis, Acute inflammatory 
glaucoma, Early Panophthalmitis 
with swelling
Redness in the eye with complete loss 
of vision, higher grade of Paunus 
Deep inflammation, iritis, Cyctitis,
Uveitis
Vision cloudy and difficulty in opening 
the eyelids, lids dry and hard
Diseases of Pupil
Smoky vision
Contracted, deformed pupilno reaction 
pupil, Anterior Synechia,
Posterior Synechia
Small things dim in daytime while
clearer in night or cold atmosphere
Cataract-glaucoma
Multicoloured objects in daytime
Objects appear yellow
Night blindness

INDEX TO DISEAES AND TREATMENT
Abscess: Apply hot water fomentation in the early stage. 
If there is pus apply rice or wheat flour poultice.
Amenorrhoea (Menstrual Discharge, Suspension or 
irregularity): 
Aloes. 
Hip 
bath with sesamum 
seeds. 
Asokamritam.
Appetite, loss of: Chiretta, sweet flag root, Neem bark or 
Gulancha, capsicum, cloves, cinnamon, country sarsaparilla.
Asthma: Camphor, asafoetida, inhalation of the fumes of 
nitre paper or Datura, a cup of hot, strong coffee, careful 
regulation of diet.
Bites: Venomous and stings of scorpion, wasps and 
centipedes. Apply vinegar or alum or a strong solution of salt 
and water. Apply a thick ipecacuantia paste. External 
application of brown sugar is useful in scorpion sting and 
wasp sting. Soda also is beneficial. Liquor Ammonia is useful.
Bladder, painful affection and irritable states: Decoction 
of Abelmoschus, isafgul seeds or rice conjee; hot bath. 
Extracts of Gulancha is useful in chronic inflammation of the 
bladder.
Bowel Lower, descent of: Wash the protracted part. 
Replace it by gentle pressure with the hand. Lubricate the 
fore-finger with some oil and push the protracted part into 
anus. Remain in the recumbent posture. Apply cloth 
saturated with decoction of galls or Babul bark with some 
alum powder. Avoid all straining when you pass motions. 
Wear a pad in the anus.
Breathing Difficulty: Camphor and asafoetida pills, 
turpentine stupes or mustard poultice to the chest; external 
application of a bag of heated salt or betel leaves smeared 
with some oil.
Bronchitis, chronic: Decoction of sweat flag, country 
ipecacuantia, asafoetida, internally. Externally rice poultice,
250
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

turpentine stupes, croton liniment. Inhale the vapour of hot 
decoction of abelmoschus.
Burning of feet: Apply Henna or Mehandi (Maruttani) 
poultice.
Burns and Scalds: Apply lime liniment or carron oil, 
honey or soda-bi-carb solution soon after the accident has 
occurred. Apply gingily oil. Dust rice flour thickly over the 
skin. Prevent access of air to the burnt surface. Carbolic oil is 
beneficial.
Catarrh or cold: Take hot infusion of ginger, decoction of 
Abelmoschus, country ipecacuantia. Inhale the fumes of 
burning turmeric.
Children, debility of: Milk, orange juice, country 
sarsaparilla.
Cholera: Omum water, infusion of sweet flag, ice to suck 
if there are vomiting and thirst. Turpentine stupes to the 
abdomen, hot water bottle to the feet and hands, diligent 
friction of the hand and feet. Infusion of Jatamansi.
Colic: Omum water, infusion of ginger, dill seeds or 
cloves, asafoetida, hot water fomentation on the abdomen; 
turpentine stupes to the belly; enema of turpentine or 
asafoetida, a dose of castor oil.
Constipation: Castor oil and Senna for children and 
delicate females. Aloes for women suffering from irregularity 
or suspension of the menstrual discharge; myrobalans and 
Kaladana for healthy persons. Croton pills or Croton oil 
when strong and quick purgation is indicated. Habitual 
constipation is treated by Aloes and sulphur. Constipation of 
hysterical females is best treated by Aloes and asafoetida 
pills.
Cough: Country ipecacuantia, cubebs, syrup of liquorice.
Debility: Chiretta, sweet flag root, country sarsaparilla, 
Kariyat, Neem bark, Gulancha.
INDEX TO DISEAES AND TREATMENT
251

Diarrhoea: Isafgul seeds with a dose of castor oil. 
Catechu, alum, decoction of Babul hark, infusion of sweet 
flag, bael, Butea gum, galls, decoction of pomegranate, 
omum water, capsicum.
Dropsy: Purgatives like Kaladana in the young and strong 
persons. Then give medicines as infusion of Pedalium, 
decoction of Asteracantha which increase the flow of urine.
Drunkenness: To allay the craving for alcohol give omum 
water.
Dysentery: Hot fomentation or turpentine stupes to the 
abdomen. In the early stage give country ipecacuantia, isafgul 
seeds or sesamum leaves. In chronic dysentery give bael, 
infusion of Kariyat, decoction of pomegranate rind, 
dccoction of sweet flag, galls, Mudar, soups containing 
mucilage of Abelmoschus.
Fever: Commence treatment with a purgative, castor oil 
or myrobalans. Give Tulasi tea with a little black pepper, a 
little dried ginger. During convalescence give one of the 
following tonics, Chiretta, Atees, bonduc, Kariyat, Neem bar, 
Gulancha or cinchona febrifuge. A -combination of Chiretta 
or sweet flag root is very beneficial.
Flatulence: Give omum water, infusion of ginger or 
Jatamansi. Give turpentine stupes externally. Give an enema 
of asafoetida.
Gleet (Chronic gonorrhoea): Give cubebs, galls, sandal 
wood oil, gurjan balsam. Alum injection externally.
Gonorrhoea: Give decoction of Abelmoschus, isafgul. 
Rice conjee for allaying the pain and burning in passing 
urine. Pedalium is useful. When the inflammation subsides, 
give cubebs, gurjan balsam, sandal wood oil or galls. To 
relieve chordee (painful erection at night) give camphor 2 or 
3 grains with a glass of milk.
Gums, ulceration and sponginess: Decoction of Babul 
bark, alum, Catechu, or lime iuice for gargling.
252
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Haemorrhage or bleeding from cuts: Apply cold water, 
ice, alum solution. Apply pressure with finger.
Hoarseness of voice: Inhalation of the vapour of hot 
vinegar, or decoction of Abelmoschus, gargles containing 
capsicum, black pepper or moringa root, chewing ginger or 
Catechu.
Hysteria: 
Asafoetida, 
aloes 
and 
asafoetida 
pills, 
Jatamansi, omum water, Kariyat.
Indigestion or dyspepsia: Chiretta, Sweet Flag root, 
country sarsaparilla, and Gulancha with cloves or cinnamon, 
capsicum and omum water, Kariyat.
Kidney irritable state: Plenty of diluents as decoction of 
Abelmoschus, isafgul seeds or rice conjee, hot hip bath.
Leprosy: Internally chaulmugra oil, gurjan balsam, 
Hydrocotyle, Mudar; externally, poultice of Hydrocotyle or 
Neem leaves.
Leucorrhoea (Whites): Cubebs, gurjan balsam; externally 
vaginal injections containing Babul bark, alum, galls.
Lice on the hair: Paste of veronia seeds.
Milk, for increasing the secretion: leaves of castor oil 
plant or of physic nut plant. For diminishing or arresting the 
secretion betel leaves or jasmine flowers.
Mosquito Bites, to relieve irritation: Lime juice or 
vinegar.
Piles: Enema of decoction of Babul bark or galls, alum.
Ringworm: Apply borax, vinegar, cassia, alata ointment, 
unripe Papaya fruit.
Salivation: Use gargles of alum or borax or Catechu.
Scurvy: Lime juice, orange, tamarind.
Skin Diseases: Country sarsaparilla, Mudar. Externally, 
cassia alata, chaulmugra lime ointment, myrobalan ointment, 
sulphur ointment, turpentine, kerosene oil or petroleum.
INDEX TO DISEAES AND TREATMENT
253

Spermatorrhoea: Camphor in milk at bed time. Remove 
thread worms and constipation. The discharge may be due to 
irritation set up by thread worms and constipation.
Spleen Enlargement: Papaya juice. Extract of Gulancha.
Syphilis: Country sarsaparilla, Hydrocotyle, Mudar.
Throat, dry and irritable state: Inhale vapour of hot 
decoction of Abelmoschus. For relaxed or ulcerated sore 
throat use gargle of alum, capsicum, moringa, black pepper 
or pomegranate rind, Catechu, ginger, omum seeds, 
inhalation of hot vinegar or simple hot water.
Tongue fissures or cracks: Use borax or alum gargle.
Urine, to relieve pain and burning: Rice conjee, 
decoction of Abelmoschus or of isafgul seeds, barley water. 
Give hip bath.
Vaginal Discharges: Give injection of alum, decoction of 
Babul bark, galls.
Worms: For tape worm give Kamala, pomegranate root 
bark, or turpentine. For round worm give Butea seeds, 
veronia seeds or papaya juice. For thread worm give enema 
of lime water, asafoetida, salt or turpentine.
AYURVEDIC QUOTATIONS
Ayurveda is said to be endless and to have three main 
branches. Ayurveda has two purposes. (Charaka Sutra)
A physician who cannot enter into the innermost Soul of 
the patient with the aid of the bright lamp of his own 
knowledge (of Yoga according to a different reading) cannot 
successfully treat any disease. (Charaka Vimana)
The fragrance of a garland of flowers or a handkerchief 
impregnated with certain drugs is made use of as a purgative 
for a king with soft bowels. (Charaka Kalpa Sthanam, Sudha 
Kalpam)
On account of the multifarious complex combinations of
254
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

the three Doshas the methods of medical treatment may also 
become complicated. (Charaka Vimana, Charaka Sutra)
Good health is the vital cause for the practice of Dharma 
(virtue), Artha (wealth), Kama (desires) and Moksha 
(liberation). (Charaka)
The essential constituents of the human body consists of 
Doshas, Dhatus and Malas.
The constituting elements of the human body are 
innumerable because they consist of minute particles 
(minute cells) which are so numerous and so minute that 
they cannot be seen by the naked eye or other sense organs. 
(Charaka Sareera)
The action of Vayu, again, is due to the Eternal Energy 
(Karma) Which by its own nature causes the changes of 
integration and disintegration. (Charaka Sareera)
Having first made the Doshas exhibit themselves as loose 
and fit for easy elimination by the previous administration of 
suitable Sneha (lubrication), massage etc., and Sneha 
(sweating and fomentation etc.) the Pancha Karmas are to be 
administered after carefully studying the appropriate time 
and the suitable dose. (Charaka Sutra)
A good bath improves appetite, generates vigour, 
prolongs life, creates enthusiasm and gives strength. It 
destroys itching, dirt, fatigue, sweat, sleepiness, thirst, 
burning sensation and sin, which, is considered as an impurity 
of the heart or mind. (Vagbhata)
Bathing the head with hot water is injurious to eye-sight 
and that bathing the head with cold water improves eyesight.
Physicians who practice Ayurveda for making a living only 
give up the heap of gold and run after the heap of dust. 
(Charaka).
Langhanam Param Oushadham — Fasting is foremost of 
all medicines.
AYURVEDIC QUOTATIONS
255

AYURVEDIC JOTTINGS
1. No hot drink or warm water should be taken either 
before or after taking honey.
2. Health according to Ayurveda indicates a normal 
condition of the Doshas, Agni (digestive fire), Malas, Dhatus, 
as well as a serene state of the body, mind and sense-organs.
3. Vata, Pitta and Kapha are the causes of all bodily 
diseases. The qualities of Rajas and Tamas are the causes of 
mental diseases.
4. The three Doshas, the seven Dhatus and the various 
Malas such as stool and urine and the 6 Rasas —these in the 
normal state hold together the corporal frame.
5. The minimum age of a girl and a man for a conceivable 
coitus is 16 and 20 respectively.
Bones in the Body
Sushrutha considers the number of the bones in the 
body to be three hundred. Charakacharya holds them to be 
three hundred and sixty. The difference is perhaps due to 
the counting of teeth and nails.
Just as the trees exist by the strength of the main stem 
and roots, so also man exists in health by the strength of 
the bones. It is a known fact that even when the skin and 
fleshy part of the body is dried up or injured accidentally, 
it is seen that man gets back his original strength by the 
strength of the bones in course of time. Flesh and skin are 
seen to grow once again.
Bones are of five kinds. They are Kapal, Ruchak, Tarun, 
Valaya, Nalak. Kapal bones are those above the feet, lower 
jaw, upper jaw, Sankh (bones by the side of the ears), and 
bones of the head. Ruchak are those of the teeth and those 
on which teeth are set. Tarun bones are those of the nose
256
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

and ear, gullet and eyes. Valaya are bones of the ribs and 
the back. Nalak pervades the remaining parts of the body.
Ayurvedic Doctors
At the time of Atharva Veda there were hundreds of 
physicians and an elaborate pharmacopoeia. Akasagotto, a 
surgeon made surgical operations (Sattha Kamma) on 
fistula in anus (Bhagandara).
Jivaka studied medicine in the Taksh'asila University 
under Atreya.
Ayurveda can cure certain diseases for which the 
Allopathic Pharmacopoeia has no remedy.
Mirapagandha is a very good substitute for quinine.
The Ayurvedic physician of yore knew ages ago many 
things which are nowadays being brought to light as new 
discoveries.
Classification of drugs
In Ayurveda drugs and edible articles are classified 
under five heads according to their food value, chemical 
and physical properties. They are Guna, Rasa, Veerya, 
Vipaka and Prabhava. Great emphasis is laid on the 
heating and cooling properties, specific and remote action 
after digestion. This classification helps the physician very, 
much in the treatment of diseases. The action of the food 
materials depends largely upon the taste (Rasa) and 
Prabhava, the specific or dynamic action of the drugs.
Modern scientists too have acknowledged the efficacy of 
certain drugs like Piinarnava, Kutaja and Sarpagandha by 
scientific analysis. A large number of drugs used in 
Ayurveda are still awaiting research and discovery. In these 
days when great importance is given to organo-therapy, 
vitamins, antibiotics, bacteriophages and shock therapy, a 
critical study of Ayurvedic preparation will be highly useful.
AYURVEDIC JOTTINGS
257

Yeast and Penicillin
Yeast and penicillin enter into the preparation of a 
large number of Ayurvedic drugs both for internal and 
external use.- Powdered lac (Laksha) with goat’s milk has 
been strongly recommended in consumption.
Some Useful Remedies
1. Seeds of the marking nut (Bhallataka — semicorpus 
anacardium) soaked and ground well in cow’s urine and the 
milk of Snuhi (Euphorbium) is strongly recommended 
internally and externally in leucoderma.
2. In cough with a predominance of Pitta i.e., increased 
metabolism,' the juice of the dung of an infant calf of a cow 
(drinking its mother’s milk) has to be administered with 
honey.
The above samples of treatment show the power of 
observation and the spirit of research of the Ayurvedic 
scholars.
Surgery in Ayurveda
The scientific attitude of Sushruta as a surgeon is 
astounding. The instruments used for operation were made 
of best steel. They were very sharp. They could split even a 
hair. Sushruta’s antiseptic precautions during and after a 
surgical operation cannot fail to excite the admiration of 
the present-day surgeons.
Laparotomy was performed for the removal of foreign 
bodies from the intestines. Operation was performed very 
successfully for taking out a living child from the uterus of 
pregnant mother in distress by skilfully operating the 
abdomen. Grafting of skin and live flap of a tissue as in 
plastic surgery are described in detail. Dissection of the 
dead human body was very systematically conducted.
In surgical operation Anaesthesia was used. Bhoja
258
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Prabandha refers to a cranial operation performed on King 
Bhoja in 927 A.D. He was rendered insensible by a fine 
powder called Sammohini. Jeevaka, the personal physician 
of Buddha, practised cranial surgery with success. It is said 
that Emperor Bimbisara sent Jeevaka, the brain surgeon, to 
Ptolomy, the King of Egypt. The principle of neuro-surgery, 
namely of cutting the nerve at its root for a quick and 
radical cure of the disease, was recognised.
Some Important Herbs
India abounds in herbs. The uses of herbs are 
many-sided and highly effective in curing diseases. They are 
called Moolikas. The following are some of the commonly 
seen herbs in India particularly near about the city of 
Chennai-(Madras) —1. Jeevanti, 2. Bala, 3. Apamarga, 4. 
Punarnava, 5. Changeri. 6. Matyakshi, 7. Kuppakoora and 
8. Mudakathan. The last mentioned of them is reputed to 
be a remedy for rheumatic pains by internal use. They 
check Vata, Pitta and Kapha. A curry prepared from a 
mixture of these leaves is very tasty at the same time. They 
are very good for health.
Even if all the books of Ayurveda are lost today, the 
practical utility of Ayurveda is so deeply rooted in the soil 
that the science cannot be rooted out of the country. 
Elderly women of the village are keen observers of nature 
and its various useful gifts. It is they who supply traditional 
information for research workers today.
Broad Principles in Ayurveda
According to the science of Ayurveda, there is not a 
substance which is not a medicine in the broadest sense of 
the term. Every substance has some property of the five 
elements called Bhutas. Heaviness or lightness, heating or 
cooling and such other qualities are pointers in practical 
treatment.
AYURVEDIC JOTTINGS
259

Ayurvedic scientists formulated certain theories based 
on their observations. They framed laws by the aid of 
which the herbs, articles of diet apd the factors of time and 
space exhibiting dissimilar properties may be grouped into 
several 
categories. They 
deal with their effect on 
Tridoshas — Vata, Pitta and Kapha. These constitute the 
physical and mental basis of man.
To explain certain definite factors observed by the 
authors 
of Ayurveda, 
they 
have 
enunciated certain 
hypotheses. One of the purposes of science is to classify the 
accumulated knowledge. It consists of a number of 
disconnected observations. They are to be systematised and 
laws framed which are applicable to them generally. Some 
of these hypotheses are shared in common with allopathy. 
Some of them are not yet adopted by the modern 
scientists. Their gross materialistic and mechanistic attitude 
do not allow them to do so. Modern science, with all the 
delicate apparatus handled by the scientists, is unable to 
evaluate 
the 
subtle 
theories 
of 
Ayurveda. 
These 
instruments can only measure the properties of inert 
objects with accuracy. But when they have to deal with 
living matter, perhaps they fail to give correct information. 
The delicate processes of life are very likely to alter by the 
very existence of light or even the gentlest pressure exerted 
by the manipulation of the instruments.
Ayurvedic Dictionary
The power of the special senses, such as taste and 
smell, has not been so finely developed in the West as is in 
the East. The ancient Ayurvedic physicians have been able 
to differentiate very delicate differences in tastes and smell. 
They were able to classify almost all the articles of diet 
according to the taste and smell, their heating and cooling 
properties. They actually published dictionaries called 
Nighantus codifying the results of their observations.
260
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Pitta-prakriti (constitution) is diagnosed by raw meatish 
smell and pungent and acid taste and so on. Sweet 
fragrance (Sugandha) improves the digestive power. In 
olden days in certain cases purgatives and emetics were 
administered through smell or the fragrance of a medicated 
flower or a medicated handkerchief.
Refined Methods
Usually a garland of flowers was fully saturated with 
powerful purging agents. When the patient happens to be 
of a very delicate constitution such as a king with soft 
bowels these methods are resorted to. History says that 
Buddha was given a lotus to smell when his physician 
wanted to administer a purgative to him.
Modern science has not reached such a stage of 
perfection that different tastes and fragrances may be 
analysed by the chemistry or measured by any instrument 
devised by science.
It is stated in the Ayurvedic texts and we know by 
clinical experience that drugs having bitter taste (Tikta 
Rasa), are Jwara Hara or capable of relieving suffering due 
to fever. The bitter substance may be Chirata, Guduchi or 
Nimba. It may be also quinine or such other drugs. Mere 
bitterness, let it be of any drug or even of an article of 
food, is recognised, according to Ayurveda, as having the 
property of reducing fever. This is an acknowledged clinical 
observation. Unless modern science advances further, so as 
to analyse taste and smell, we have to be guided only by 
Ayurvedic observations.
Combination of Tastes (Rasa)
Ayurveda is more than a science. It is a fine art. 
Ayurvedic experts found that there is some order in the 
apparently dissimilar substances having different tastes. 
They found that substances having a sweet taste are
AYURVEDIC JOTTINGS
261

generally more nutritious than sour and saltish substances. 
They have also found that sub^ances which are bitter, 
pungent and astringent in taste are the least nutritious.
Let us take the analogy of the mango in the various stages 
of its development. We observe that in the very tender stage, 
the mango is at first tasteless. Then it is astringent. It is then 
slightly bitter and then gradually develops a sour taste and 
finally a sweet taste. Even the bitter Neem brings forth a 
sweet fruit in the end. We thus notice a progressive evolution 
in nature culminating in sweetness. The fruit utilises more 
and more of the sun’s rays and more nourishment from the 
soil and air from day to day and so on.
It is no surprise therefore, that mango as a fruit with 
sweet taste has more energising elements in it than in early 
stages of astringency, bitterness and sourness.- Modern 
chemical, biological or pharmacological experiments may or 
may not throw light on this subject, but these facts are well 
known. Experience is a better guide in such matters.
Chiaraka is of the opinion that an able physician who 
can plan the combinations of Rasas (articles having 
different tastes) in suitable proportions and who can 
correctly 
estimate 
the 
correct 
proportions 
of 
the 
combinations of the Doshas and who can apply the suitable 
Rasas in such a way as to bring about the harmony of the 
Doshas, cannot fail to determine the causes, symptoms or 
treatment of the several diseases.
The Tridoshas
Individual constitution, Sareera-prakriti, is an inherited 
condition that can hardly be altered. It is a life-long 
concern. It is of very great significance in determining the 
conditions of health and disease in man.
From the moment of conception some are equi- 
balanced in respect of the Tridoshas — Vata, Pitta and
262
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Kapha. Those who have an equilibrium of the Doshas 
enjoy perfect health. Others have delicate health and are 
ever easily liable to disease.
Those who have the equilibrium of the Doshas may use 
any article having any of the six Rasas. But, those in whom 
any one of the Doshas is predominant have to keep up the 
Tridosha equilibrium. In so doing, they have to take care to 
use such of the articles having Rasas which are the 
antidotes of the predominant Dosha that is natural to them.
The future constitutional type of an individual is thus 
determined for him even at the time of fertilisation of 
ovum in the mother’s womb.
Constitutional Tendencies
Charaka holds the view, that those who live a hard life 
generally keep good health in spite of certain irregularities 
that occur in their life. Their very mode of life keeps the 
Doshas in a subdued state.
The difficulty of the use of purgatives etc., to keep up 
health arises in the case of the lazy and ease loving. 
Medicine is a double-edged sword with its own injurious 
effects affecting the particular system.
The constitutional tendencies of the Tridoshas which are 
natural to every man do not ordinarily harm an individual 
because they are habituated to the changes of increase or 
decrease of these Doshas from birth. For example we see 
that the poison in which an insect lives all its life does not 
. injure it, although it may be a deadly poison to others. But 
when the time of death comes those Doshas exhibit 
themselves in a disproportionate manner and cause his end. 
They subsist with his life and end with his life.
Diet
Those who are used to regular manual labour have a 
keen appetite and their food is also not fatty (Rooksha).
AYURVEDIC JOTTINGS
263

They keep good health. The good effects of manual labour 
keeps their Doshas subdued by their exposure to sun, air 
and heat. Thev do not suffer from diseases ordinarilv even 
if they take wrong food, excessive food. Their power of 
digestion is very good due to their physical exertion. They 
are not affected by diseases to which others of sedentary 
habits easily fall a prey to. The usual purificatory processes 
such as purgatives, etc., are not necessary for them. They 
need only the use of oils occasionally to protect them for 
the exposure to heat and air.
Four Important Constitutions
A knowledge of the constitution or the personality 
factors is very important both in physiology as well as 
pathology. All the traits and qualities of the individuals are 
due to these inherited tendencies. This can be said to be 
the result of Poorva Samaskaras of the individual. These 
constitutional 
factors 
affecting 
one’s 
personality 
are 
classified into four types in Ayurveda. They are: 1. Sama 
constitution or balanced-type; 2. Predominantly Vata 
constitution or nervous type; 3. Predominantly Pitta 
constitution or catabolic type; 4. Predominantly Kapha 
constitution or anabolic type. In this there are innumerable 
permutations and combinations. In fact, every man or 
woman is a type of his or her own. Their mental factors 
depend upon their Sattvic, Rajasic and Tamasic natures 
which go to make up their constitutional make-up. Sattva is 
light or purity. Rajas is emotion or activity and Tamas is 
depressing bewilderment or stupefication.
Doctor’s Personality
The physician should develop to a high degree his 
personality by steady concentration and by the acquisition 
of the superior knowledge. This will enable him to 
command the respect and confidence of his patients. The
264
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

success of the physician depends mainly on this. The same 
medicine which works very effectively in the hands of an 
able doctor does not do so well in the hands of his 
assistants. The patients develop a superior faith and 
confidence in the doctor which they cannot in the case of 
others who might be equally qualified. It is here the faith 
and confidence of the patients work. This faith goes a long 
way in the curing of a disease. Instances of such cures are 
numerous. Every doctor will know this for himself. If the 
experience of such doctors and patients are recorded, it 
will cover the pages of big volumes.
The Patient’s Confidence
One may argue that the gastro colic reflex was 
responsible for causing the action. How is the reflex 
produced? The patient’s mind has been influenced by the 
personality of the doctor. One may like to term this as 
personal magnetism. It removes fear and infuses faith. Such 
an unshakable faith can cause even organic changes in the 
patient’s body. It has the power to control the vasomotor 
system of the patient. It can raise or reduce blood-pressure. 
It is said that a paralytic patient could be made to walk in 
the state of what is called hypnotic trance. If at the present 
moment it is not functioning so efficiently now the doctor 
is not developing his superior personality by training his 
mind and senses. A doctor with a working knowledge of 
the Yoga system of the ancient seers can do this more 
effectively than others who merely place more confidence 
in mere personality. In the present the doctor depends 
more on his instruments, laboratories and drugs than the 
development of his intuition and soul-force. Ancient 
Ayurvedic doctors were highly advanced in soul-force. They 
were very regular in their daily Sandhya, Pooja and 
Svadhyaya.
AYURVEDIC JOTTINGS
265

Glamour of Science
Influenced by the glamour of the Western science many 
doctors look down upon the ancient system of Ayurveda. 
They are blinded by the modern scientific researches and 
scientific inventions. Of course the help of science can be 
taken to a certain extent for certain observation. The 
instruments that we use should be our servants but not our 
masters. We should realise that the science of Ayurveda is 
Adhyatmic in effect. In other words it points to the science of 
the soul through the upkeep of the physical body in perfect 
order. It is the science of sciences. When one develops the 
power of intuition, diagnosis and treatment become very, 
very easy. When one realises the importance of the 
equilibrium of the Doshas i.e., the harmony of the body and 
the mind, he is able to find many ready-made prescriptions 
with the few drugs that he has at hand. He may succeed in 
treating many diseases with nominal medicines or even no 
medicines.
In the Yoga science we have what is called Pranic healing 
and Sakti-sanchar. The doctor or the Guru sends Pranic 
currents by his mere Sankalpa and effects a cure for many 
diseases. Only advanced Yogins can do this.
MAHARSHI CHYAVANA AND CHYAVANAPRASH
Those devoted to the Science of Ayurveda and followers 
of this great science look upon Maharshi Chyavana with great 
respect and adoration. It was he who invented the unrivalled, 
unprecedented tonic Chyavanaprash for the good of 
humanity. This tonic is one of the excellent gifts of Rishi 
Chyavana unto mankind.
Once Maharshi Chyavana practised severe unbroken 
penance for a very long time. At one stage he found that his 
body was weak due to the great penance. His desire for 
penance was still fresh in him. So he thought of finding out
266
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

some method by which he could improve his health. With this 
object in view he invoked the divine Aswini Kumaras.
Pleased with the invocation of the Rishi, the Aswini 
Kumaras appeared before the Rishi and enquired him of the 
reason for his summoning them. The Rishi paid homage to 
the Kumaras and said, “O Divine healers! I did great penance 
and acquired great mental powers but my body is weak. 
Kindly prescribe for me some such medicine by taking which 
my body will resume its original strength and may live long to 
pursue the purpose of my life.”
Hearing this the Aswins after deep thought replied, “O 
great one of excellent virtues and unrivalled penance! We 
shall give you a prescription for a rare tonic. By .this the 
entire humanity will be benefited. This medicine will acquire 
world-fame and will be famous by your name. By taking this 
medicine your body will be rejuvenated in 30 days. There will 
be new flow of blood. You will be filled with new vigour and 
vitality. You will be free from old age.” So saying the 
Kumaras disappeared.
The time for the preparation of this Rasayana is winter 
and spring seasons. During these seasons the medicines will 
be fresh and highly beneficial in their effects. Fresh 
Myrobalan (Amla) forms the prominent ingredient in 
Chyavanaprash. This keeps- the three humours in equili­
brium. Pure sugar, pure honey, ghee, Vamsaksheeri, Pippali, 
cardamom, Nagakesar, Darusita, kishmish, Ashtavarga, 
Dashamool, sandal, etc., form the important ingredients in 
this tonic. This is a wonderful preventive tonic. It wards off a 
number of diseases. It keeps the person in good health. It is 
very useful in Asthma, difficulty in breathing, bronchitis and 
consumption. It wards off debility and builds the body 
wonderfully.
Maharshi Chyavana prepared this tonic as per the 
instructions of the Aswins. After administering the
MAHARSHI CHYAVANA AND CHYAVANAPRASH
267

medicine on himself the great Rishi regained his health. 
He became a youth once again.
The Charaka Samhita (1-22) says: “Asya Prayogat 
Chyavanah Suvriddho’bhoot Punaryuva.” “By the use of 
this, Rishi Chyavana, though old, once again regained his 
youth.”
By the use of this wonderful drug Chyavana never 
became old. By the spreading of the knowledge of this 
wonderful tonic, Chyavana did a great service to humanity. 
A detailed description of this tonic can be had from 
Charaka Samhita.
THE BILWA TREE: ITS PROPERTIES AND USES
The Bilwa (Bael) tree grows in almost all parts of India 
irrespective of the nature of the soil.
Properties: The Bilwa is bitter, astringent and dry, causes 
constipation but promotes digestion. It cures all diseases 
caused by Vata (wind) and gives strength to the body.
Though the above-mentioned are some of the general 
properties of the Bael, certain portions of the tree possess 
special properties. The unripe fruit cures Vata, Kapha, 
indigestion, stomach-ache and dyspepsia. This is stomachic 
to a higher degree and causes constipation more than the 
root. The leaves possess the excellent property of 
alleviating diseases caused by Vata and Kapha. The flowers 
of the tree are found to cure diarrhoea, vomiting and thirst.
Parts Used: The root of the tree is the most important. 
The fruit, flowers and the leaves are also medicinal. In 
Kerala, the roots are used for medicine after casting away 
the bark on it.
Uses: There are various medicinal preparations making 
use of the root, leaves, fruits and flowers out of which 
some of the simple preparations may be enumerated.
268
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

A decoction made out of the root of Bael with dried 
ginger and roasted paddy if taken in small doses will cure 
vomiting. A decoction made out of the root of Bael with 
the tuberous root of Padha (cissempelos pereira) will be 
efficacious in persons suffering from piles. The very same 
preparation is found to be useful in cases of dysentery and 
diarrhoea. Take a well cleaned root of Bael and at one of 
its tips roll a piece of silk and after dipping that portion in 
oil, set fire to the tip of the root holding it in such a way 
as to allow drops of the oil from the burning part to fall 
down. Such drops of oil, if collected, cooled and poured 
into the ears will cure ear-ache. Eight ounces of oil mixed 
with 32 ounces of the express juice of Bilwa leaves, the 
mixture .boiled till the water is completely evaporated and 
the oil got out of it, will have splendid results if applied on 
the head of persons suffering from nasal catarrah and 
diseases of the ear. The same oil warmed and poured into 
the ear will cure earache, suppuration that is caused in the 
ear and deafness. The decoction of the root is useful in 
intermittent fever. The fresh juice of the leaves is given 
with the addition of black-pepper in anasarca with 
costiveness and jaundice; and when diluted with water or 
honey, it is a highly-praised remedy in catarrah and 
feverishness.
There are many preparations that could be made out of 
the fruits also. Though in almost all cases the fruits of the 
plants are found to be with the best results while they are 
ripe, the unripe are more medicinal. The unripe fruits, if 
sun-dried will be far better. The pulp inside the fruit taken 
and a confection made out of it in combination with Amrita 
(Tensopora cordifolia) with a little honey will suddenly stop 
vomiting. Milk boiled with the pulp of the fruits taken in 
according to digestion will cure dysentery.
THE BILWA TREE: ITS PROPERTIES AND USES
269

KUPPAMANI
( Indian Acalypha, Cat’s Struggle)
Telugu: Kuppi chettu 
Malayalam: Kuppamani 
Sanskrit: Arittamanjaree 
Hindi: 
Kuppi 
Canarese: Kuppigida 
Latin: Acalypha Indica
There are many indigenous drugs which will work 
wonders and of which we are quite ignorant. They possess 
very many medicinal properties which are astonishing.
One of the very commonest and very useful drugs which 
grows in abundance everywhere is Acalypha Indica. It is a 
valuable laxative, Laghu Sodhanam. Its root is cathartic (that 
which causes violent purge).
Therapeutic Uses: The juice of the fresh leaves is a 
reliable emetic and is used in Group (cough with guru, guru). 
It can be used as Varthi for a free motion to children. The 
Varthi is to be made out of the leaves, i.e., the leaves are to 
be turned into a cigarette and to be inserted into the anus of 
the child. When the juice is used as Nasyam it relieves 
insanity. Mix rock salt (Saindhava Namak) with one 
teaspoonful of this juice and put it into the nose or ear of the 
patient. This possesses hypnotic effect.
It cures snake-bite or insect poison. This was for a long 
time a Yogic secret.
The important thing to note is its effect on scorpion 
poisons. Apply the juice of the leaves with Ananthavairava 
and Seethamsurasa (both Ayurvedic Preparations) and take 
three or four fresh leaves internally. You will have a radical 
cure.
CANCER
(Rakta Janya Arbud)
Cancer is a very painful disease. This is called Sanghatika 
or Raktajanya Arbud. This is caused by the impurity of blood
270
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

and various, other diseases. There are six kinds of cancers. 
This is seen to affect mostly the private parts, the tongue, the 
breasts of women and the armpit.
When cancer affects the fatty portion of the body it is 
known by the name Fatty Tumour and when the flesh is. 
affected it is called Myoma. It is also called Malignant 
tumour when it is acute.
Acharya Sarangadhara, one of the foremost exponents of 
Ayurveda describes it thus:
On account of the unbalancing of the three humours in 
the body (Vata, Pitta and Kapha—wind, bile and phlegm) 
and by the contraction (Sankocha) of blood there arises a 
kind of stiff fleshy growth in the particular place. This boil 
remains stiff as well as soft. In the latter case there is 
bleeding." The bleeding continues and it assumes a serious 
condition giving rise to enormous pain.
Thus the cancer patient loses much of his blood and 
gradually he becomes pale in colour.
Susrutacharya has described cancer thus:
The patient whose sex organ is covered by boils of black 
colour and small pimples of red colour attended with severe 
pain then it should be known that he is suffering from cancer.
Treatment
It is advisable to treat the disease in the early stages. At 
first the patient should be given a purgative.
The cancer should be cleaned at first with a decoction of 
Triphala. In the absence of Triphala the juice of Bringaraj can 
also be used for cleaning. Take one tola of Rasanjan 
(Rasaut), one tola of seed of sirees, one tola of Harad 
(Myrobalan). Powder these well. Mix it in 5 tolas of honey. 
Keep it in a glass vessel and apply it to the cancer twice daily.
Darwee tel is also very useful. It is prepared as follows. 
Take 4 tolas of Daru Haldi, 4 tolas of Tulasi leaves, 4 tolas of
CANCER
271

Mulati and 4 tolas of Haldi. Powder them well. Prepare 
decoction in 64 tolas of water. When the decoction is 
reduced to 16 tolas get it down from the fire. Filter it. Mix 4 
Chataks of pure gingily oil. Heat it in slow fire. When the 
water is evaporated bring it down and preserve it in glass 
vessel. Apply this oil twice or thrice daily with cotton wool.
Chandanadi lepan is also another effective medicine. 
Take half a tola Mulati, Sariva, Doorva, and Raktachandan 
each. Make a fine powder of all these. Take 22 tolas of honey 
and mix the powder well. This will become an ointment. 
Clean the cancer with Triphala water first. Then apply the 
above ointment twice daily morning and evening.
A decoction of Triphala or margosa leaves (Neem) if 
drunk both morning and evening is very useful. It kills germs. 
There will be no pus in the wound.
Diet
Great care should be taken in respect of diet. It should be 
pure and Sattvic. Take barley, old rice, moong (green gram), 
fresh mooli, parval, karela, Sendanamak, kakdi, anar, apple. 
Avoid jaagery (gud), oil, chillies, arbi, pickles, onions, garlic, 
meat, wine, curd, black gram. Do not sleep in day time, do 
not wake at night. Do not suppress calls of nature.
Bhallataka with milk and ghee and with grape juice as 
diet has been found to be very useful in cases of inoperable 
cancer.
LUMBAGO
Of the three humours Vata, Pitta and Kapha, Vata (wind) 
sets the first place. Eighty different types of diseases are seen 
to arise out of Vata alone. In the development and growth of 
the body, Vata functions by dividing itself into five different 
branches. They bestow health 
and longevity. 
Every 
movement of the body is related to the vibration of Vata. 
Vyana (one of the five branches) takes a prominent part in
272
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

the development and growth of the organs. Lumbago is one 
of the eighty diseases due to Vata.
Lumbago is seen to affect the back hip portion of the 
body where there is a combination of several Nadis, This 
particular part is called Trikasthan. Three different bones 
join at this point. Here, the Nadis carrying the different kinds 
of air (Vata) are disturbed in their normal function and cause 
the pain, Lumbago.
Cause
Irregular and wrong diet and living cause the disturbance 
of the three humours and rheumatic pain takes hold of the 
body.
By excessive fasts, by taking in stale and cold foods, by 
excessive vigil, by restraining calls of nature, by loss of semen, 
by constant sitting in one and the same posture, by cares, 
worries and anxieties, by over-exertion, by exposure to 
cold-draughts, by accidental hits on vital parts, by excessive 
jumping and activity, by old age, by cold water baths and by 
excessive fat in the body, lumbago is caused.
This trouble is seen to be aggravated in rainy season and 
winter and autumn as well. It is also caused by carelessness 
after the cure of any chronic disease. The condition of a 
convalescing person after a particular disease becomes very 
delicate. By wrong diets, change of climate etc., the digestion 
gets impaired and this is followed by rheumatic disorders. 
Lumbago is an immediate effect of this. This annoying 
disease gives more trouble in old age.
Symptoms
General pain all over the body, laziness, aggravation of 
pain in the hip region, mild pain as the limbs move, a 
decrease in the vigour of the senses, sleeplessness, 
tastelessness are some of the common symptoms.
Treatment
The patient should avoid exposure to cold and excessive
LUMBAGO
273

walking. Regular sleep at night and ample sweating gives 
relief. Cold and sour articles that have a tendency to 
aggravate rheumatism should be avoided. Fresh fruits and 
light and easily digestible food should be taken. The patient 
should have good rest and maximum relaxation.
Wheat bread, Dalia, green gram, peas, massor gram, 
arhar dal, parval, palak, tomato, dry fruits like grapes and 
dates, honey, ghee, milk, and old jaggery can be given. 
Drinking cold water during meals is harmful.
External Treatment: Apply ‘Mahanarayana Taila’ to the 
affected part and massage thrice daily. After massage, the 
affected part should be well wrapped with a woolen cloth. 
Hot fomentation with cotton pad can also be given, thrice 
daily. During this treatment the patient should completely 
relax in bed.
Alternate Treatment: Vishagarbha Oil 9 tolas, and 
Mahanarayana oil 2 tolas, both mixed together can be used 
for massage, twice a day, in the morning and at bed time. 
Massaging at bed time is very effective, since only at night, 
the patient gets severe attacks of lumbago.
Simha Vasa Treatment: Warm half to one tola of Simha 
Vasa (Lion’s Fat) over a gentle fire. Massage the affected part 
and wrap it as before preventing exposure.
Vapour treatment: Boil to three-fourth 8 ozs. of fresh 
Akasavalli herbs in one and half seers of water in a 
lead-coated vessel. Ask the patient to lie down with the 
painful part facing downwards. Cover the lead vessel (after 
removing from fire) with another clean vessel and make the 
steam, coming out of the boiled leaves to strike the affected 
parts. Two such decoctions can be prepared so as to keep the 
vapour treatment continuous. Repeat the process once in 
three hours.
Treatment by sea-salt: Powder half a seer of sea-salt and 
heat it in an iron pan. Tie the hot salt in a woolen cloth and
274
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

foment the affected part slowly. Continue the treatment for 
two to three days. This is useful in all pains arising out of 
rheumatism and phlegm.
Internal Treatment: Administer Mahayograj Guggulu, 
morning and evening, three hours prior to food. Give one pill 
each time with one pav of hot cow’s milk. It can also be given 
with two tolas of fresh cow’s butter or one ounce of pure 
honey. This cures the eighty different types of diseases arising 
out of Vata. This should be continued for at least a week
Pure Shilajit Treatment: Administer 4 to 8 rattis of pure 
Shilajit, morning and evening, with one pav of pure, cow’s 
milk. Apply a coating of Shilajit over the affected part. 
Shilajit quickly reduces pain. Shilajit is powerful enough to 
cure the, rheumatic affections of the bones even. This is a 
very effective remedy.
Fomentation with Castor-leaves: Collect old and new 
leaves and apply fresh cow’s ghee on them. Mildly heat 
them over a gentle fire in an iron pan. When the leaves 
become hot enough, apply them to the affected part. Have 
a number of leaves and continue the fomentation for half 
an hour. Tie the hot leaves over the affected part. Then 
apply cotton fomentation over it. Cover the part well with 
a blanket.
Milk Treatment: Heat on a mild fire three seers of fresh 
goat’s milk. Add to the boiling milk a tola of Pippal 
powder, half a tola of Kesar and half a Masha of Sont 
powder. Remove the boiling milk from the fire and filter. 
Add sugar. Keep the milk in a lead coated vessel. Take this 
instead of the usual food, little by little, for the whole day. 
Do not take any other food. Continue this treatment for 
two weeks. This rejuvenates the tired nerves. It brings fresh 
strength to the body and cures lumbago without a trace.
LUMBAGO
275

SALTLESS DIET
The Pathvam or saltless diet was intended by our old 
doctors of antiquated ages for men of robust constitution, 
good physique, and an enduring frame, who were like 
Rakshasas, The Pathyam is no doubt of much use and 
advantage in certain cases. To cite an instance, in gout and 
rheumatism certain salts as urea and uric acid accumulate in 
the blood in enormous quantities. How to get rid of these 
excess of salts? Reduce your daily allowance of common salt, 
withhold it. Let the patient be put on saltless diet. The excess 
will be appropriated and made use of in the economy of 
nature. In these cases Pathyam is an incalculable boon and a 
blessing.
The native doctors of the present age have entirely failed 
to comprehend the spirit underlying it and as a routine 
treatment they prescribe Pathyam invariably in almost all 
cases. The men of this age, we all know, are puny, lifeless, 
living skeletons. To prescribe a saltless diet for a long period 
for men of such nature is really a torture. You must know that 
salt is an indispensable requisite to keep up a healthy 
condition of the body and the absence of it in food soon leads 
to a morbid state of the body. These native doctors are 
practicing the ancient Dutch custom of killing prisoners 
guilty of capital offenses by feeding them on food which 
contained no salt. But these poor innocent persons have not 
committed any serious crime at all, save that of contracting a 
disease, serious or otherwise.
CAUSES OF DISEASES
Immoderate drink, excessive venery, sleep by day and 
wake by night, overloading the stomach, putting off 
answering Nature’s call, these are the causes of illness.
Alcohol is a poison and proves highly deleterious to
276
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

health by its injurious action on the liver, nerves, blood 
vessels and stomach.
Sexual excess shatters the nervous system altogether. The 
passion wastes the nervous powers.
Sleeping in the day-time is unnatural and it interferes 
with the sleep that naturally supervenes after day’s hard 
labour.
Being aware at night is a strain on the nervous system.
Overloading the stomach upsets digestion and causes loss 
of tone.
Failure to answer the calls in time poisons the system and 
exerts as bad an effect on the health of man as an obstructed 
drain or a sewer and retention of solid refuse of a town on 
the health of the community at large.
When the Dhatu and Rasa are disturbed,
When their equilibrium is upset,
Disease manifests.
The seven Dhatus support this body;
They are blood, chyle, semen, etc.
  Rasa is chyle;
Vaishamya is disturbance.
When Vatha (wind), Pitta (bile)
And Sleshma (phlegm) are disturbed,
When their equilibrium is upset,
Disease manifests.
Pitta is Sattwa (fire); Vatha is Rajas;
Sleshma (Kapha) is Tamas.
This is according to Ayurveda.
THE THREE PILLARS IN AYURVEDA
Rishi Charaka has drawn our special attention to the 
three important pillars of the body. They are food, sleep and 
Brahmacharya. All the three are very important for health.
Food is very important for the growth and maintenance of
THE THREE PILLARS IN AYURVEDA
277

the body. For a child there is the mother’s milk to live upon. 
Some months after birth the child begins to take solid food in 
addition to mother’s milk. There are many schools of thought 
regarding diet. But simple, juicy, sweet, easily digestible food 
builds up the body and bestows long life. Rajasic and Tamasic 
foods like meat, eggs, etc., make the body weak and an easy 
prey to diseases.
Measured food maintains the body in good condition. It is 
said, “Ya eva dehasya samaavivriddhyaista eva doshaa 
vishamaa vadhaaya” — those articles of food which go to 
build up the body when taken in abnormal quantities become 
cause for its destruction. The Sruti says, “Yuktaahara 
viharasya” — the food and recreation should be moderate. 
Food has very great connection with the building of body. In 
fact a man’s nature itself is dependent on his food.
Rishi Charaka says: Those foods, which do not upset the 
working of the organs and do not give room for diseases to 
make their appearance, they are fit to be taken. They build 
up the body and supply the necessary vitamins, and keep the 
body strong. The digestive fire remains active. The food is 
converted into blood and then to what is called the Ojas 
Shakti. It is this Ojas Shakti that is the greatest treasure of 
man. He can make himself strong and full of vigour and 
vitality. Such a man becomes famous in his life. He works 
wonders with the strength of Ojas or the power of 
Brahmacharya.
Sleep
The second most important pillar of the body is sleep. 
Sleep is considered to be evolved out of the power of Vishnu 
Maya. Sleep confers joy and happiness and the much needed 
rest. It acts as a tonic to the tired nerves. You derive new 
strength, vigour and rest in sleep. It removes the weariness of 
the hard day’s labour.
In old age, it is advisable to rest for half an hour after
278
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

food, because the digestive fire is weak at this age. By sleep 
the old man finds it easier to digest his food. Much of the 
digestive process takes place in sleep at night.
Those who are not regular in their sleep, who go to bed at 
very irregular hours, they are subject to sorrow, and various 
other diseases. They suffer from Prajagar, torpor, swoon, 
fear, forgetfulness, head-ache, reeling of the head, etc. They 
also suffer from tastelessness, excessive flow of tears, weak 
digestion, pain in the eyes, pain in limbs, breaking of voice, 
pain in the body, etc.
Brahmacharya
The preservation of the vital energy (semen) is 
Brahmacharya. In Veerya there is a predominance of Sattva 
Guna (purity). With the preservation of Veerya, man attains 
power, glow in the face and keen memory. Veerya is the 
subtlest essence of food. By Veerya you can increase your 
life-span. Bhishma, a Naishtika Brahmachari (throughout his 
life), had death under his control.
By the preservation of Veerya, you can keep up youth. 
You can have, mastery over old age. You will be free from 
diseases. Loss of Veerya is the cause of many diseases, early 
death, loss of vigour, power and vitality. Such a man leads a 
miserable existence. He becomes unfit for this world and also 
for the other world beyond.
The power to contract and expand in the various parts of 
the body, digestion of food and all such functions of the body 
divine strength from Veerya. There is no part of the body 
where Veerya is absent. Just as butter is pervading the entire 
milk, just as sugar (sweetness) pervades the entire sugarcane, 
just as oil pervades in seasamum seeds, in the same way 
Veerya pervades the whole body. Pervading the entire body, 
strengthening it from within, Veerya protects it from all 
diseases.
THE THREE PILLARS IN AYURVEDA
279

AYURVEDA
ALTHOUGH ANCIENT IT CAN BE EVER NEW
Source of Knowledge
In addition to the methods of experiment and 
observation, which are the sources of knowledge in the 
Modern 
Sciences, 
Ayurveda 
accepts 
concentrated 
meditation and intuition (Yoga) as a method of acquiring 
knowledge. He who relies solely on observation, thinks 
more of differences than of similarities. The methods of 
investigation in Ayurveda are more synthetic leading to 
oneness, Adwaita, whereas the tendency in Modern 
Medicine is more analytical leading to dissipation of ideas.
The mechanistic view of man prevailed progressively 
during the last two or three centuries, and any disease was 
considered to be a breakdown in the machine, which 
should be set right by adjusting or repairing the damaged 
parts. The attention to the part or organ assumes greater 
importance than the consideration of the whole man. 
Ayurveda considers man as a complex and inseparable 
combination of the material body, the senses, the mind and 
the soul.
Happiness in life depends upon the control of the 
senses and contentment. (Charaka Sutra-I)
The Factor of Personality
Unlike the machine, man has mind, Manas. Manava is 
one who has a mind. He has the power of thinking and 
deciding his future conduct. The decision depends upon the 
personality of every individual, which is unborn in all living 
creatures and persists as long as the organism lives. It is 
often transmitted to the offspring.
280
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

Triguna Theory
Constitutional traits or inborn tendencies or qualities 
are classified in Ayurveda into three categories called 
Trigunas. The constitutional factors leading to emotions are 
due to Rajoguna. The constitutional factors leading to 
inertia are due to Tamoguna. The constitutional factors 
leading to equilibrium or harmony are due to Sattwaguna. 
The mental and physical characteristics of every individual 
in health and disease are determined by the predominance 
of one or the other of these three qualities, Trigunas.
Tridosha Theory
Vata, Pitta and Kapha are the nutritive fluids that feed 
the living organisms through the nervous, digestive and 
lymphatic 
systems 
respectively. 
Vata 
is 
constituted 
predominantly of Rajas, Pitta of Sattwa and Kapha of 
Tamas. Their equilibrium is health and imbalance is 
disease.
Clinically, these theories are very helpful to the 
diagnosis and successful treatment of the multifarious 
diseases of the mind and the body. These theories 
represent the synthetic psychosomatic conception of man, 
which deals with his mental and physical states including 
the effects of the vitamins, hormones, toxins, antibodies 
and all factors relating to the self and the environments of 
time and place. The physiology of Ayurveda begins where 
the physiology of Modern Science ends. This means that 
the Ayurveda deals with both the known and the unknown 
as well, through its philosophy.
The theories of Ayurveda have not been so far verified 
by modern research, because the instruments of Science 
have their own limitations, when they have to deal with 
living matter. Further research is sure to establish the truth 
of these assumptions, which are like axioms as Ayurveda is
AYURVEDA
281

concerned. Even the illiterate people and particularly 
women in India understand theories which they apply in 
their daily life. The practitioner of Modern Medicine 
refuses to understand them, because he has lost his 
moorings in the Indian Culture on account of the bias that 
he has been taught to acquire by his new education.
Domestic Medicine
It is not always that the aid of the physician is sought in 
our country immediately after the appearance of the first 
symptoms of disease. The people are able to classify the 
symptoms of the predominance of Vata, Pitta and Kapha 
respectively and apply some domestic remedies such as 
ginger, pepper, garlic, Neem, asafoetida and musk, whose 
properties are well-known to them, to check the respective 
fault in the earliest stage (Kriyaakaala) of the disease. This 
brings about the equilibrium which makes the invading 
agent powerless to grow in the unsuitable soil. Immunity is 
thus acquired in many instances. Modern Research should 
help to enlighten us on the rationale of these domestic 
remedies, some of which are not yet recorded in the text 
books on Ayurveda.
According to Ayurveda, there is nothing in this world 
which may not be used as a medicine — Na Jagati 
Anoushadham (Charaka). It all depends upon the capacity 
of the physician to discover and utilise the available 
material as a medicine or as an article of diet or otherwise. 
Modern 
Medicine 
appears 
to 
be 
concerned 
with 
advertisement of more and more medicines of doubtful 
value to cure diseases, whereas the long term purpose of 
the medical science should be to empty the hospitals. For 
this reason, Ayurveda was traditionally taught to every man 
and woman in India. Valuable aids to health such as 
massage, sweating, oil baths, regulated exercises and walks, 
Asanas, manual labour, games, recreation and prayer are,
282
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

in Ayurveda, included in the daily routine (Dinacharya) of 
every citizen. Physiotherapy which promotes positive health 
is badly neglected in modern hospitals.
Colossal Ignorance and Pride
Even after the advance of Science, our ignorance of the 
secrets of nature is colossal. Many medical practitioners do 
not seem to realise the vastness of their ignorance. Instead 
of feeling humilitated by his utter powerlessness in many 
situations in his daily life, the proud young doctor is full of 
egoism (Ahamkara), due to his materialistic mentality.
Emotions Cause Disease
Emotions like anger, greed and hurry are potent 
sources of disease. Desire produces anger. Anger results in 
infatuation; both have their origin in Rajas (Gita). The 
senses, mind and intellect are the seats for these emotions. 
Therefore one should develop control over these emotions 
which are the worst enemies of man. Otherwise, all 
material and spiritual knowledge will be useless— Jnana 
Vijnana Nashanam. In Ayurveda prevention of disease is. 
effected through strict discipline of man to develop 
self-control. Ayurveda teaches not only how to live a happy 
life, but also how to die a happy death with detachment, 
contentment and peace.
Ayurveda advocates Varnashrama Dharma, a system of 
organisation of the whole human life into definite self- 
adjusting socio-economic units, so that, all people may be 
happy without any strife for selfish ends and may reach the 
supreme goal of spiritual progress— Paramaartha. Every man 
has to strive his best for the full attainment of the four values 
or aspirations of life namely, Dharma —Virtue or duty to self 
and society, Artha — acquisition of wealth or power, 
Kama —satisfaction of desires and Moksha — liberation from 
the bondage or attachment. Life has thus the great purpose 
of progressive spiritual evolution.
AYURVEDA
283

I have great respect for the truly scientific research 
worker, untouched bv commercial interests. But, I shudder
' 
mf 
"
to think, that a third-rate practitioner of Modern Medicine 
spreads into the villages of India, to replace the ennobling 
system of Ayurveda by materialistic and outlandish ideas 
quite unsuitable to our habits. It is the spirit of Ayurveda 
that saves the Indian civilisation.
Diagnosis
The physician should develop an inquisitive outlook 
towards the less obvious signs of ill-health so as to warn 
the patients from getting ill.
The causes of diseases are beautifully summarised in 
Ayurveda into three groups, viz., (i) Unsuitable use of the 
senses —Asaalmya 
Indriyaartha 
Samyoga, 
(ii) 
faulty 
judgement — Prajnaa Aparaadha and (iii) The effects of 
time — Parinaama. Research should be conducted on the 
incidence of the seasons (Ritus) in India and their 
influence on the onset of diseases and of the pharmaco­
logical properties (Rasa, Guna, etc.) of food-materials and 
drugs. Today, the methods of investigation of diseases are 
lop-sided giving no real attention to the man as a whole. 
The physician who depends too much on instruments and 
laboratories is unable to develop the most valuable faculty 
of intuition. Charaka says:
“A physician who cannot enter into the innermost soul 
of the patient with the bright light of the lamp of his own 
knowledge cannot successfully treat any disease.” (Charaka 
Vimana IV-14)
Methods of Research
We should conduct research in Ayurveda in order to
284
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

make it the best system of treatment in the world. As the 
word Ayurveda implies, it is the Science of Life. It has no 
limitation of race, climate or country. Its door is open to all 
true knowledge from any source. The application of 
Modern Methods of Pharmacological technique conducted 
in collaboration with experienced Ayurvedic scholars is sure 
to result in the advancement of both Ayurveda and Modern 
Medicine. Literally, pharmacological, biochemical, clinical, 
psychological and philosophical research should all be 
conducted side by side.
The methods of research in Ayurveda should not be to 
imitate what is done in other countries. The research 
should be based upon the fundamentals assumed by 
Ayurveda. Ayurveda has a good working hypothesis which 
has helped the successful practice of Ayurveda through the 
centuries and it is still a living force today with the 
Ayurvedic physician and the patient.
The Siddha and Unani systems also follow the same 
fundamental principles and are popular with certain 
sections of the people.
Conclusion
Herein, I have laid emphasis on four points which are 
fundamental to the study of Ayurveda.
(i) Ayurveda is superior to modern science in some 
respects and can incorporate all the advances of Modern 
Science, but Modern Science, cannot adopt all that 
Ayurveda teaches, unless it accepts the existence of the 
soul in man as the Director of the several processes of life.
(ii) Man is not to be treated as machine. The factor of 
personality is greatly responsible for the happiness or 
misery of the individual.
(iii) Modern Medicine should not be extended into the
AYURVEDA
285

villages, unless it is integrated with Ayurveda by adopting 
its basic principles of self-control to prevent disease
(iv) Research in Ayurveda should be conducted by 
adequate personal of the right type, proficient in Ayurveda, 
with the co-operation of modern Scientists.
The scope of Ayurveda is endless. Although ancient, it 
has the capacity to grow and be ever new, Puranama cha 
Punarnavam (Charaka Siddhi).
286 
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA
PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA

PRACTICE OF AYURVEDA
Ayurveda is the Veda or knowledge of Ayus or life. It 
has been classified as the fifth Veda. There are three main 
branches of Ayurveda and they deal with the causes, 
symptoms and treatment of diseases. Ayurveda serves as 
the best guide for the healthy as well as for the sick.
Charaka, Sushruta, Vagbhata, Madhava and Sarang- 
dhara were the great Rishis or Fathers of Ayurvedic medi­
cine. They were Yogis and had great power of observation, 
generalisation and analysis. Their students made wonder­
ful researches. India's fertility for medicinal herbs and 
plants contributed a great deal to the prosecution of their 
study of medicine.
c :
The principles of Ayurvedic treatment, in the main, are 
the same as that of allopathic treatment. They consist of 
removing the injurious agent, soothing the injured body 
and mind, eradicating the cause. The difference lies in the 
methods of detail adopted by different systems. Besides, in 
Ayurveda great importance is given to the study of the 
various stages of variation of the three Doshas or humours 
of the body-Vatha, Pitta and Kapha.