Sri Isopanisad

Founder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness

Çré Éçopaniñad
The knowledge that brings one nearer to the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.
With original Sanskrit text,
Roman transliteration
English equivalents,
and elaborate purports
His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedänta Swämé Prabhupäda
Founder-Ãcärya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
(Original 1969 ISKCON BOOKS edition)
For more free downloadable original books visit 
www.Krishnapath.org

Table of contents with clickable chapter links:
INTRODUCTION!
4
INVOCATION!
10
Mantra One!
13
Mantra Two!
17
Mantra Three!
20
Mantra Four!
23
Mantra Five!
26
Mantra Six!
30
Mantra Seven!
33
Mantra Eight!
36
Mantra Nine!
40
Mantra Ten!
44
Mantra Eleven!
48
Mantra Twelve!
53
Mantra Thirteen!
57
Mantra Fourteen!
63
Mantra Fifteen!
67
Mantra Sixteen!
71
Mantra Seventeen!
75
Mantra Eighteen!
82

INTRODUCTION
(Teachings of the Vedas)
[Delivered as a lecture by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedänta Swämé Prabhupäda on 
October 6, 1969, at Conway Hall, London, England.]
Ladies and gentlemen, today's subject matter is the teachings of the Vedas. What are 
the Vedas? The Sanskrit verbal root of Veda can be interpreted variously, but the 
purpose is finally one. Veda means knowledge. Any knowledge you accept is Veda, for 
the teachings of the Vedas are the original knowledge. In the conditioned state, our 
knowledge is subjected to so many deficiencies. The difference between a conditioned 
soul and a liberated soul is that the conditioned soul has four kinds of defects. The 
first defect is that he must commit mistakes. For example, in our country, Mahätmä 
Gandhi was considered to be a very great personality, but he committed many 
mistakes. Even at the last stage of his life, his assistant warned, "Mahätmä Gandhi, 
don't go to the New Delhi meeting. I have some friends and I have heard there is 
danger." But he did not hear. He persisted on going and was killed. Even great 
personalities like Mahätmä Gandhi, President Kennedy—there are so many of them— 
make mistakes. To err is human. This is one defect of the conditioned soul.
Another defect: to be illusioned. Illusion means to accept something which is not: 
mäyä. Mäyä means what is not. Everyone is accepting the body as the self. If I ask you 
what you are, you will say, "I am Mr. John; I am a rich man; I am this, I am that." All 
these are bodily identifications. But you are not this body. This is illusion.
The third defect is the cheating propensity. Everyone has the propensity to cheat 
others. Although a person is fool number one, he poses himself as very intelligent. 
Although it is already pointed out that he is in illusion and makes mistakes, he will 
theorize: "I think this is this, this is this." But he does not even know his own 
position. He writes books of philosophy, although he is defective. That is his disease. 
That is cheating.
Lastly, our senses are imperfect. We are very proud of our eyes. Often, someone will 
challenge, "Can you show me God?" But do you have the eyes to see God? You will 
never see if you haven't the eyes. If immediately the room becomes dark, you cannot

even see your hands. So what power do you have to see? We cannot, therefore, expect 
knowledge (Vedas) with these imperfect senses. With all these deficiencies, in 
conditioned life, we cannot give perfect knowledge to anyone. Nor are we ourselves 
perfect. Therefore we accept the Vedas as they are.
You may call the Vedas Hindu, but Hindu is a foreign name. We are not Hindus. Our 
real identification is varëäçrama. Varëäçrama denotes the followers of the Vedas, those 
who accept the human society in eight divisions of varëa and äçrama. There are four 
divisions of society and four divisions of spiritual life. This is called varëäçrama. It is 
stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, "These divisions are everywhere, because they are created 
by God." The divisions of society are brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra. Brähmaëa 
refers to the very intelligent class of men, those who know what is Brahman. Similarly, 
the kñatriyas, the administrator group, are the next intelligent class of men. Then the 
vaiçyas, the mercantile group. These natural classifications are found everywhere. This 
is the Vedic principle, and we accept it. Vedic principles are accepted as an axiomatic 
truth, for there cannot be any mistake. That is acceptance. For instance, in India, cow 
dung is accepted as pure, and yet cow dung is the stool of an animal. In one place 
you'll find the Vedic injunction that if you touch stool, you have to take a bath 
immediately. But in another place it is said that the stool of a cow is pure. If you smear 
cow dung in an impure place that place becomes pure. With our ordinary sense we 
can argue, "This is contradictory." Actually, it is contradictory from the ordinary point 
of view, but it is not false. It is fact. In Calcutta, a very prominent scientist and doctor 
analyzed cow dung and found that it contains all antiseptic properties.
In India if one person tells another, "You must do this," the other party may say, 
"What do you mean? Is this a Vedic injunction that I have to follow you without any 
argument?" Vedic injunctions cannot be interpreted. But ultimately, if you carefully 
study why these injunctions are there, you will find that they are all correct.
The Vedas are not compilations of human knowledge. Vedic knowledge comes from 
the Spiritual World, from Lord Kåñëa. Another name for the Vedas is çruti. Çruti refers 
to that knowledge which is acquired by hearing. It is not experimental knowledge. 
Çruti is considered to be like a mother. We take so much knowledge from our mother. 
For example, if you want to know who your father is, who can answer you? Your 
mother. If the mother says, "Here is your father," you have to accept it. It is not 
possible to experiment to find out whether he is your father. Similarly, if you want to 
know something beyond your experience, beyond your experimental knowledge, 
beyond the activities of the senses, then you have to accept the Vedas. There is no 
question of experimenting. It has already been experimented. It is already settled. The 
version of the mother, for instance, has to be accepted as truth. There is no other way.
The Vedas are considered to be the mother and Brahmä is called the grandfather, the

forefather, because he was the first to be instructed in the Vedic knowledge. In the 
beginning the first living creature was Brahmä. He received this Vedic knowledge and 
imparted it to Närada and other disciples and sons, and they also distributed it to their 
disciples. In this way, the Vedic knowledge comes down by disciplic succession. It is 
also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, that Vedic knowledge is understood in this way. 
If you make experimental endeavor, you come to the same conclusion, but just to save 
time you should accept. If you want to know who your father is and if you accept your 
mother as authority, then whatever she says can be accepted without argument. There 
are three kinds of evidences: pratyakña, anumäna and çabda. Pratyakña means direct. 
Direct evidence is not so good because our senses are not perfect. We are seeing the 
sun daily, and it appears to us just like a small disc, but it is actually far, far larger 
than many planets. Of what value is this seeing? Therefore we have to read books, 
then we can understand about the sun. So direct experience is not perfect. Then there 
is inductive knowledge: "It may be like this," hypothesis. For instance, Darwin's 
theory says it may be like this, it may be like that, but that is not science. That is a 
suggestion, and it is also not perfect. But if you receive the knowledge from the 
authoritative sources, that is perfect. If you receive a program guide from the radio 
station authorities, you accept it. You don't deny it; you don't have to make an 
experiment because it is received from the authoritative sources.
Vedic knowledge is called çabda-pramäëa. Another name is çruti. Çruti means that this 
knowledge has to be received simply by aural reception. The Vedas instruct that in 
order to understand transcendental knowledge we have to hear from the authority. 
Transcendental knowledge is knowledge from beyond this universe. Within this 
universe is material knowledge, and beyond this universe is transcendental 
knowledge. We cannot even go to the end of the universe, so how can we go to the 
Spiritual World? Thus to acquire full knowledge is impossible.
There is a Spiritual Sky. There is another nature that is beyond manifestation and non- 
manifestation. But how will you know that there is a sky where the planets and 
inhabitants are eternal? All this knowledge is there, but how will you make 
experiments? It is not possible. Therefore you have to take the assistance of the Vedas. 
This is called Vedic knowledge. In our Kåñëa Consciousness Movement, we are 
accepting knowledge from the highest authority, Kåñëa. Kåñëa is accepted as the 
highest authority by all classes of men. I am speaking first of the two classes of 
transcendentalists. One class of transcendentalist is called impersonalist, Mäyä-vädé. 
They are generally known as Vedäntists, led by Çaìkaräcärya. And there is another 
class of transcendentalist, called Vaiñëavas, like Rämänujäcärya, Madhväcärya, 
Viñëusvämé. Both the Çaìkara-sampradäya and the Vaiñëava-sampradäya have 
accepted Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Çaìkaräcärya is supposed to

be an impersonalist who preached impersonalism, impersonal Brahman, but it is a fact 
that he is a covered personalist. In his commentary on the Bhagavad-gétä he wrote, 
"Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is beyond this cosmic 
manifestation." And then again he confirms, "That Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Näräyaëa, is Kåñëa. He has come as the son of Devaké and Vasudeva." He has 
particularly mentioned the names of His father and mother. So Kåñëa is accepted as 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by all transcendentalists. There is no doubt about 
it. Our source of knowledge in Kåñëa consciousness is directly from Kåñëa, Bhagavad-
gétä. We have published Bhagavad-gétä As It Is, because we accept Kåñëa as He is 
speaking without any interpretation. That is Vedic knowledge. Since the Vedic 
knowledge is pure, we accept it. Whatever Kåñëa says, we accept. This is Kåñëa 
Consciousness. That saves much time. If you accept the right authority or the source 
of knowledge, then you save much time. For example, there are two systems of 
knowledge in the material world, inductive and deductive. From deductive, you 
accept that man is mortal. Your father says man is mortal, your sister says man is 
mortal, everyone says man is mortal—but you do not experiment. You accept it as fact 
that man is mortal. If you want to research to find out whether man is mortal, you 
have to study each and every man, and you may come to think that there may be some 
man who is not dying, but you have not seen him yet. So in this way your research 
will never be finished. This process is called in Sanskrit, äroha, the ascending process. 
If you want to attain knowledge by any personal endeavor, by exercising your 
imperfect senses, you will never come to the right conclusions. That is not possible.
There is a statement in the Brahma-saàhitä: Just ride on the airplane which runs at the 
speed of mind. Our material airplanes can run 2,000 miles per hour, but what is the 
speed of mind? You are sitting at home, you immediately think of India, say 10,000 
miles away, and at once it is in your home. Your mind has gone there. The mind-
speed is so swift. Therefore it is stated, "If you travel at this speed for millions of years, 
you'll find that the Spiritual Sky is unlimited." It is not possible even to approach it. 
Therefore, the Vedic injunction is that one must approach—the word "compulsory" is 
used—a bona fide spiritual master, a guru. And what is the qualification of a spiritual 
master? He has rightly heard the Vedic message from the right source. Otherwise he is 
not bona fide. He must practically be firmly established in Brahman. These are the two 
qualities. This Kåñëa Consciousness movement is completely authorized from Vedic 
principles. In the Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa says, "The actual aim of Vedic research is to 
find out Kåñëa." In the Brahma-saàhitä it is also stated, "Kåñëa, Govinda, has 
innumerable Forms, but they are all one." They are not like our forms, which are 
fallible. His Form is infallible. My form has a beginning, but His Form has no 
beginning. It is ananta. And His Form—so many multiforms—has no end. My form is 
sitting here and not in my apartment. You are sitting there and not in your apartment.

But Kåñëa can be everywhere at one time. He can sit down in Goloka Våndävana and 
at the same time He is everywhere, all- pervading. He is Original, the Oldest, but 
whenever you look at a picture of Kåñëa you'll find a young Boy of 15-20 years old. 
You will never find an old man. You have seen pictures of Kåñëa as a charioteer from 
the Bhagavad-gétä. At that time He was not less than 100 years old. He had great-
grandchildren, but He looked just like a boy. Kåñëa, God, never becomes old. That is 
His Supreme power. And if you want to search out Kåñëa by studying the Vedic 
literature, then you will be baffled. It may be possible, but it is very difficult. But you 
can very easily learn about Him from His devotee. His devotee can deliver Him to you: 
"Here He is, take Him." That is the potency of Kåñëa's devotees.
Originally there was only one Veda, and there was no necessity of reading it. People 
were so intelligent and had such sharp memories that by once hearing from the lips of 
the spiritual master they would understand. They would immediately grasp the whole 
purport. But 5,000 years ago Vyäsadeva put the Vedas in writing for the people in this 
age, Kali-yuga. He knew that eventually the people would be short-lived, their 
memories would be very poor and their intelligence would not be very sharp. 
"Therefore, let me teach this Vedic knowledge in writing." He divided the Vedas into 
four: Åg, Säma, Atharva and Yajur. Then he gave the charge of these Vedas to his 
different disciples. He then thought of the less intelligent class of men, stré, çüdra and 
dvija-bandhu. He considered the woman class and çüdra class (worker class) and dvija-
bandhu. Dvija-bandhu refers to those who are born in a high family but who are not 
properly qualified. A man born in the family of a brähmaëa, who is not qualified as a 
brähmaëa is called dvija-bandhu. For these persons, he compiled Mahäbhärata, called 
the history of India, and the eighteen Puräëas. These are all Vedic literatures: the 
Puräëas, the Mahäbhärata, the four Vedas and the Upaniñads. The Upaniñads are part of 
the Vedas. Then Vyäsadeva summarized all Vedic knowledge for scholars and 
philosophers in what is called the Vedänta-sütra. This is the last word of the Vedas. 
Vyäsadeva personally wrote Vedänta- sütra under the instructions of Närada, his Guru 
Mahäräj, spiritual master, but still he was not satisfied. That is a long story, described 
in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Vedavyäsa was not very satisfied even after compiling 
many Puräëas, Upaniñads, and even after Vedänta-sütra. Then his spiritual master, 
Närada, instructed him, "You explain Vedänta." Vedänta means Ultimate Knowledge, 
and the Ultimate Knowledge is Kåñëa. Kåñëa says that throughout all the Vedas one 
has to understand Kåñëa. Vedänta-kåd, veda-vid eva cäham. Kåñëa says, "I am the 
compiler of Vedänta, and I am the Knower of the Vedas." Therefore the Ultimate 
Objective is Kåñëa. That is explained in all the Vaiñëava commentaries on Vedänta 
philosophy. We Gauòéya Vaiñëavas have our commentary on Vedänta philosophy, 
called Govinda-bhäñya by Baladeva Vidyäbhüñaëa. Similarly, Rämänujäcärya has a 
commentary and Madhväcärya has one. The version of Çaìkaräcärya is not the only

commentary. There are many Vedänta commentaries, but because the Vaiñëavas did 
not present the first Vedänta commentary, people are under the wrong impression that 
Çaìkaräcärya's is the only Vedänta commentary. Besides that, Vyäsadeva himself wrote 
the perfect Vedänta commentary, Çrémad- Bhägavatam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam also begins 
with the first words of the Vedänta-sütra: janmädyasya yataù. And that janmädyasya 
yataù is fully explained in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The Vedänta-sütra simply hints at 
what is Brahman, the Absolute Truth: "The Absolute Truth is that from Whom 
everything emanates." This is a summary, but it is explained in detail in Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. If everything is emanating from the Absolute Truth, then what is the 
nature of the Absolute Truth? That is explained in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The Absolute 
Truth must be conscious. Svaräö. He is Self-effulgent. We develop our consciousness 
and knowledge by receiving knowledge from others, but for Him it is said that He is 
Self-effulgent. The whole summary of Vedic knowledge is the Vedänta-sütra, and the 
Vedänta-sütra is explained by the writer himself in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. We finally 
request those who are actually after Vedic knowledge to try to understand the 
explanation of all Vedic knowledge from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and the Bhagavad-
gétä.

INVOCATION
oà pürëam adaù pürëam idaà
pürëät pürëam udacyate
pürëasya pürëam ädäya
pürëam evävaçiñyate.
oà—the Complete Whole; pürëam—perfectly complete; adaù—that; pürëam—perfectly 
complete; idam—this phenomenal world; pürëät—from the all-perfect; pürëam—
complete unit; udacyate—produced; pürëasya—of the Complete Whole; pürëam—
completely all; ädäya —having been taken away; pürëam—the complete balance; eva—
even; avaçiñyate—is remaining.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete. And because He is completely 
perfect, all emanations from Him, such as this phenomenal world, are perfectly 
equipped as a complete whole. Whatever is produced of the Complete Whole is 
also complete by itself. And because He is the Complete Whole, even though so 
many complete units emanate from Him, He remains the complete balance.
PURPORT
The Complete Whole, or the Supreme Absolute Truth, is the complete Personality of 
Godhead. Impersonal Brahman forms an incomplete realization of the Absolute 
Complete, and so also does the conception of Paramätmän, the Supersoul. The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead is sac-cid-änanda-vigraha: impersonal Brahman 
realization is the realization of His sat, or eternity aspect, and Paramätmän, Supersoul 
realization, is the realization of His sat and cit, eternity and knowledge aspects. But 
realization of the Personality of Godhead is realization of all the transcendental

features, sat, cit and änanda, or bliss. In the Personal concept, this is realized in 
complete form (vigraha). And so the Complete Whole is not formless. If He is 
formless, or if He is less than His creation in any other thing, He cannot be complete. 
The Complete Whole must have everything, both within our experience and beyond 
our experience. Otherwise He cannot be complete.
The Complete Whole Personality of Godhead has immense potencies, and all of them 
are as complete as He is. Therefore this phenomenal or material world is also complete 
by itself. The twenty-four elements of which this material universe is a temporary 
manifestation are completely adjusted to produce complete things necessary for the 
maintenance and subsistence of this universe. No extraneous effort by any other unit 
is required for this maintenance. The universe has its own time, fixed by the energy of 
the Complete Whole, and when that time is complete this temporary manifestation 
will be annihilated by the complete arrangement of the Complete.
There is complete facility for the small complete units, namely the living beings, to 
realize the Complete; and all forms of incompleteness are experienced only on 
account of incomplete knowledge of the Complete. The human form of life is a 
complete manifestation of the consciousness of the living being, which is obtained 
after evolving through 8,400,000 species of life in the cycle of birth and death. If a 
human being does not realize his completeness within the Complete in this life full of 
consciousness, he loses the chance of realizing, and is put again into the cycle of 
evolution by the law of material Nature.
Because we do not know that there is a complete arrangement in Nature for our 
maintenance, we make efforts to utilize the resources of Nature to create a so-called 
complete life of sense enjoyment. This misleading life of sense enjoyment is called 
illusion, because the living entity cannot enjoy the life of the senses without being 
dovetailed with the Complete Whole. For example, the hand of a body is a complete 
unit as long as it is attached to the complete body. When the hand is detached from 
the body, it may appear like a hand, but actually it has none of the potency of a hand. 
Similarly, living beings are parts and parcels of the Complete Whole; and as long as 
the parts and parcels are detached from the Complete Whole, the illusory 
representation of completeness is not enough to bring the desired result.
The completeness of human life can only be realized when the human form of life is 
engaged in the service of the Complete Whole. Any service in this world, whether 
social, political, communal, international or even interplanetary, will remain 
incomplete unless and until it is dovetailed with the Complete Whole. And, when 
everything is dovetailed with the Complete Whole, the attached parts and parcels also 
become complete in themselves.



Mantra One
éçäväsyam idam sarvaà
yat kiïca jagatyäà jagat
tena tyaktena bhuïjéthä
mä gådhaù kasya svid dhanam.
éçä—by the Lord; väsyam—controlled; idam—this; sarvam—all; yat—whatever; kim—it 
(is); ca—and; jagatyäm—within the universe; jagat—all that is animate or inanimate; 
tena—by Him; tyaktena—set apart quota; bhuïjéthäù—must you accept; mä—do not; 
gådhaù—make into use; kasya svid—whom does it belong; dhanam—things necessary.
TRANSLATION
Everything animate or inanimate that is within the universe is controlled and 
owned by the Lord. One should therefore accept only those things necessary for 
himself, which are set aside as his quota, and one must not accept other things, 
knowing well to Whom they belong.
PURPORT
The Vedic knowledge is infallible because it comes down through the perfect disciplic 
succession of spiritual masters beginning with the Lord Himself. The Vedic knowledge 
is received from the transcendental sources, and the first word was spoken by the Lord 
Himself. The words spoken by the Lord are called apauruñeya, not delivered by any 
person of the mundane world. A living being of the mundane world has four defects, 
which are: 1. that he must commit mistakes, 2. he must sometimes be illusioned, 3. he 
must try to cheat others, and 4. he is endowed with imperfect senses. With these four 
principles of imperfection one cannot deliver perfect information in the matter of all-

pervading knowledge. The Vedas are not known like that. The Vedic knowledge was 
originally imparted into the heart of Brahmä the first created living being, and Brahmä 
in his turn disseminated the knowledge to his sons and disciples, who have continued 
the process down through history.
The Lord being pürëam, or all-perfect, there is no chance of His being subjected to the 
laws of material Nature, while the living entities and inanimate objects are all 
controlled by the laws of Nature, and thus, ultimately, by the potency of the Lord. 
This Éçopaniñad is a part of the Yajur Veda, and as such it contains information as to 
the proprietorship of all things that exist within the universe.
This point is confirmed by the Bhagavad-gétä, in the Seventh Chapter, where parä and 
aparä prakåti are discussed: The elements of Nature—earth, water, fire, air, sky, mind, 
intelligence and ego—all belong to the inferior or material energy of the Lord, whereas 
the living being, the organic energy, is the superior energy, the parä prakåti, of the 
Lord. Both the prakåtis or energies are emanations from the Lord, and ultimately He is 
the Controller of everything that exists. There is nothing in the universe which does 
not belong either to the parä or the aparä prakåti, and therefore everything is under 
proprietary right of the Supreme Being.
The Supreme Being, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, being the complete Person, 
has the complete and perfect intelligence to adjust everything by His different 
potencies. The Supreme Being is often compared with fire, and everything—organic 
and inorganic—is compared with the heat and light of the fire. The fire distributes 
energy in the form of heat and light, and likewise the Lord displays His energy in 
different ways. And He remains the ultimate Controller, Sustainer and Dictator over 
everything. He is full of all potencies, the Knower of everything, the Benefactor of 
everyone, and is full of all inconceivable opulences: power, wealth, fame, beauty, 
knowledge and renunciation.
One should therefore be intelligent enough to know that except for the Lord no one is 
the proprietor of anything; one should accept only the things which are set aside by 
the Lord as his quota. The cow, for example, gives milk, but she does not drink the 
milk. Her milk is designated as food for the human being. The cow eats grass and 
straw but does not drink her own milk. Such is the arrangement of the Lord, and we 
should be satisfied with the things that have been very kindly set aside for us by Him. 
We should always consider to Whom the things that we possess actually belong.
Take, for example, our dwelling house, which is made of earth, wood, stone, iron, 
cement, and so many other material things. If we think in terms of Çré Éçopaniñad, then 
we must know that we cannot produce any of the above-mentioned building materials

ourselves. We can simply bring them together and transform them into different 
shapes by our labor. A laborer cannot claim to be the proprietor of a thing just 
because he has worked hard to manufacture it.
There is always this great quarrel between the laborers and the capitalists in present- 
day society. The quarrel has now taken an international shape, and the world is in 
danger. Men face one another in enmity just like cats and dogs snarling. Çré Éçopaniñad 
cannot give advice to the cats and dogs, but It delivers the message of Godhead to man 
through the bona fide äcäryas, or holy teachers. And the human race may take this 
Vedic wisdom from Çré Éçopaniñad: that no one should quarrel over material 
possessions. One must be satisfied by whatever privileges are given to him by the 
mercy of the Lord. There can be no peace if the communist or the capitalist or any 
other party claims to be the proprietor of the resources of Nature, which are entirely 
the property of the Lord.
The capitalist cannot curb down the communist simply by political maneuvering, nor 
can the communist defeat the capitalist simply by fighting for the stolen bread. If they 
do not recognize the proprietorship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then all 
the property they claim to be their own is stolen, and therefore they shall be liable to 
punishment by the laws of Nature. The Bomb is in the hands of both the communists 
and the capitalists, and if both do not recognize the proprietorship of the Supreme 
Lord, it is sure and certain that, ultimately, the Bomb will ruin both parties. Therefore, 
in order to save themselves, both must follow the instruction of Çré Éçopaniñad, and 
thus bring peace to the world.
Human beings are not meant for quarreling like cats and dogs. They must be 
intelligent enough to realize the importance of human life, and to realize the aim of 
human life. The Vedic literature is meant for humanity and not for cats and dogs. Cats 
and dogs can kill other animals for food and for that there is no question of sin on 
their part. But if a man kills an animal for the satisfaction of his uncontrolled taste 
buds, he is responsible for breaking the laws of Nature, and therefore he must be 
punished.
There is a standard of life for human beings which cannot apply to the animals. The 
tiger does not eat rice, wheat or cow's milk because it has been given its quota of 
foodstuff in the shape of animal food. There are many animals and birds who are 
either vegetarian or non- vegetarian, but none of them transgress the laws of Nature as 
they have been ordained by the will of the Lord. Amongst the living beings—whether 
animals or birds or reptiles—there is strict adherence to the laws of Nature, and 
therefore there is no question of sin for them, nor are the Vedic instructions meant for 
them. Human life alone, then, is a life of responsibility.

It is also wrong to consider that simply by becoming a vegetarian one can save himself 
from transgressing the laws of Nature. Vegetables also have life. One life is meant to 
feed another living being, and that is the law of Nature. One should not be proud of 
being a strict vegetarian. The animals have no developed consciousness to recognize 
the Lord, but a human being is sufficiently intelligent to take lessons from the Vedic 
literature, and thereby know how the laws of Nature are working, and derive profit 
out of such knowledge. If a man neglects the instructions of the Vedic literature, his 
life is very risky. The human being is therefore required to recognize the authority of 
the Supreme Lord. He must be a devotee of the Lord. He must offer everything to the 
service of the Lord and partake of only the remnants of foodstuff offered to the Lord. 
That will make him able to discharge his duty properly. In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord 
directly states that He accepts the vegetable foodstuffs from the hands of a pure 
devotee. Therefore a human being should not only become a strict vegetarian, but he 
should also be a devotee of the Lord, and offer to the Lord all his food, and only then 
partake of the prasädam, or mercy of God. Such a devotee can properly discharge the 
duty of human life. Those who do not do so are eating only sins, and thus will be 
subjected to the different types of distress, which are the result of the various sins.
The root of sin is deliberate disobedience to the laws of Nature, through not 
recognizing the proprietorship of the Lord. Disobedience to the laws of Nature or 
disobedience to the order of the Lord will bring ruin to the human being. On the other 
hand, if one is sober and knows the laws of Nature, without being influenced by 
unnecessary attachment or abhorrence, he is sure to be recognized again by the Lord, 
and thus become eligible to go back to Godhead, back to the eternal Home.

Mantra Two
kurvann eveha karmäëi
jijéviñec chataà samäù
evaà tvayi nänyatheto 'sti
na karma lipyate nare.
kurvan—doing continuously; eva—thus; iha—during this span of life; karmäëi—work; 
jijéviñet—one should desire to live; çatam—one hundred; samäù—years; evam—so 
living; tvayi—unto you; na—no; anyathä—alternative; itaù—from this path; asti—there 
is; na—not; karma—work; lipyate—can be bound; nare—unto a man.
TRANSLATION
One may aspire to live for hundreds of years if he continuously goes on working in 
that way, because that sort of work will not bind him to the law of karma. And 
there is no alternative to this way for man.
PURPORT
No one wants to die, and everyone wants to live for as long as he can drag on. This 
temperament is not only visible individually, but also it is visible collectively in the 
community, society and nation. There is a hard struggle for life in every class of living 
entities, and the Veda says that this is quite natural for the living being. The living 
being is eternal by nature, but due to his bondage in the material existence he has to 
change his body from one to another. This process is called transmigration of the soul. 
This transmigration is also called Karma-bandhana, or being bound by one's own 
work. The living entity has to work for his livelihood because that is the law of 
material Nature, and if he does not act according to the prescribed duties of his 
particular life, he transgresses the law of Nature, making himself bound more and 
more in the cycle of birth and death.

The cycle of birth and death is present in life other than the human form. When the 
living entity gets the chance for human life, however, it is his chance to get free from 
the chain of the law of karma. Karma, akarma and vikarma are principles very clearly 
described in the Bhagavad-gétä. Actions which are done in terms of the prescribed 
duties mentioned in the revealed Scriptures are called karma. Actions which make one 
free from the cycle of birth and death are called akarma. And actions which are 
performed by the misuse of one's freedom, thereby direct oneself toward the lower 
regions of life, are called vikarma.
Of these three categories of activities, the one which makes one free from the cycle of 
further bondage to karma is preferred by intelligent men. Ordinary men want to 
perform good work in order to be recognized and to achieve some status of life in this 
world or in heaven, but more advanced men want to be free altogether from the 
actions and reactions of work. Intelligent men know well that both good and bad 
works are equally causes of the material miseries of life. They therefore seek to do 
work which will free them from the reactions of good and bad work. This freedom 
from good and bad work is ascertained herewith in Çré Éçopaniñad.
The instruction of Çré Éçopaniñad is better explained in the Bhagavad-gétä, sometimes 
called the Gétopaniñad, the cream of all the Upaniñads. In the Bhagavad-gétä, the 
Personality of Godhead says that no one can attain the state of naiñkarma or akarma 
without beginning the prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedic literature. The Vedic 
literature can regulate the working energy of a human being in such a way that he can 
gradually realize the authority of the Supreme Being. When one realizes the authority 
of the Personality of Godhead, it is to be understood that he has attained the stage of 
positive knowledge. At this purified stage of life, where the modes of Nature—namely 
goodness, passion and ignorance—cannot act, one is enabled to work on the basis of 
naiñkarma, or work which does not bind one to the cycle of birth and death.
Factually, no one has to do anything more than to render devotional service to the 
Lord. In the lower stage of life, however, one can not at once adopt the activities of 
devotional service, nor can one completely stop reactionary work. A conditioned soul 
is accustomed to working for sense gratification, for his own selfish interest, 
immediate or extended. An ordinary man wants to work for his own sense enjoyment, 
and when the principle of sense enjoyment is extended from the individual to include 
the collective society, nation or humanity in general, it assumes various attractive 
names such as altruism, socialism, communism, nationalism, humanitarianism, etc. 
These isms are certainly very attractive forms of Karma-bandhana, the bondage of 
one’s own work, but the Vedic instruction of Çré Éçopaniñad is as follows: if you 
actually live for any of the above isms, make them God-centered. There is no harm in 
becoming a family man, an altruist, socialist, communist, nationalist or humanitarian

—provided all such activities are executed in relation with éçäväsya, the God-centered 
conception.
God-centered activities are evaluated in the Bhagavad-gétä as being so rich that even a 
little bit of them can save one from the greatest danger. The greatest danger of life is to 
glide down again into the evolutionary cycle of birth and death. If some way or other a 
man misses the spiritual opportunity offered by his human form of life, and thus 
glides down again into the evolutionary cycle, it must be considered the most 
regrettable incidence, although foolish man cannot see this, due to his defective 
senses. Çré Éçopaniñad advises us, therefore, to exert our energy in the éçäväsya spirit, 
and in that engagement we may wish to live for many, many years. Otherwise, one’s 
long life is no better than that of a tree, which is also a living being, and which lives 
for hundreds and hundreds of years. There is no point in living a long time like trees, 
or breathing like the bellows, or begetting children like the hog and the dog, or eating 
like the camel. Even a humble life, with God-centered activities, is more valuable than 
the colossal hoax of so-called altruism or socialism without any relation to God.
When activities such as altruism are executed in the spirit of Çré Éçopaniñad, every one 
of them becomes a form of karma-yoga, as is recommended in the Bhagavad-gétä. And 
that guarantees the executor against the dangers of the evolutionary process of birth 
and death. Such God-centered activities, even though half-finished, are still good for 
the executor, because they will guarantee him the human form of life in his next birth. 
In this way he can have another chance to improve his position on the path of 
liberation.

Mantra Three
asuryä näma te lokä
andhena tamasävåtäù
täàs te pretyäbhigacchanti
ye ke cätma-hano janäù.
asuryäù—meant for the asuras; näma—famous by the name; te—these; lokäù—planets; 
andhena—ignorance; tamasä—darkness; ävåtäù—covered by; tän—there; te—they; 
pretya— after death; abhigacchanti—do enter into; ye—anyone; ke—everyone; ca—and; 
ätma-hanaù— the killer of the soul; janäù—persons.
TRANSLATION
The killer of the soul, whoever he may be, must enter into the planets known as the 
worlds of the faithless, full of darkness and ignorance.
PURPORT
A human life is distinguished from animal life on account of its heavy responsibilities. 
Those who are cognizant of these responsibilities and work in that spirit are called 
suras, the godly. And those who are either neglectful of the responsibilities or who 
have no information about them are called the asuras or demons. There are only these 
two kinds of human beings all over the universe. In the Åg Veda it is stated that the 
suras always aim at the Lotus Feet of the Supreme Lord Viñëu, and act accordingly. 
Their ways are as illuminated as the path of the Sun.
Intelligent human beings must always remember that this particular form of body is 
obtained after an evolution of many millions of years of transmigration of the soul. 
This material world is sometimes compared with an ocean, and this human body is 
compared with a solid boat, designed to cross over the ocean. The Vedic scriptures 
and the äcäryas, or saintly teachers, are compared with the expert boatman, and the

facilities of a human body are compared with favorable breezes, which can help the 
boat smoothly ply to the desired destination. If, with all these facilities, a person does 
not fully utilize his human life for self-realization, such an asura must be considered 
ätma-hana, a killer of the soul. The killer of the soul is destined to enter into the 
darkest region of ignorance to suffer perpetually, and here is a warning by Çré 
Éçopaniñad in clear terms.
There are swine, dogs, camels, asses, etc. whose economic necessities are just as 
important as ours. But the economic problems of these animals are solved under nasty 
conditions, while the human being is given all facilities for a comfortable life by the 
laws of Nature, because the human form of life is more important than animal life. 
And why is man given a better life than the swine and other animals? Why is a highly 
placed servant given all the facilities of comfortable life, rather than an ordinary clerk? 
The answer is that the highly placed officer has to discharge duties of a higher nature. 
Similarly, the human being has higher duties in life than the animals who are engaged 
always in the business of feeding their hungry stomachs. Yet the modern soul-killing 
civilization has only increased the problems of the hungry stomach.
The modern soul-killing civilization has only increased the problems of a hungry 
stomach. We approach some polished animal, a modern civilized man, and he says 
that he wants to work for the satisfaction of the stomach and there is no necessity for 
self realization. But the laws of Nature are so cruel that in spite of his eagerness to 
work hard for his stomach, there is always the question of unemployment, even after 
denouncing the prospect of self- realization.
We are given this human form of life not to work hard like the ass, the swine and the 
dog, but to attain the highest perfection of life. If we do not care for self-realization, it 
is by the law of Nature that we have to work very hard even though we do not want to 
do so. In this age the human being has been forced to work hard like the ass and the 
bull, pulling carts. These are some of the examples of the regions where an asura is 
sent to work, revealed by this verse of Çré Éçopaniñad. If a man fails to discharge his 
duties as a human being, he is forced to transmigrate to the planets called asurya in 
the degraded species of life, to work hard in ignorance and darkness.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is also stated that the half-self-realized men who in their 
previous lives could not complete the process of approaching Godhead but had 
sincerely tried for it—in other words, those who failed to attain success in realizing 
their relation with God—are given the chance of appearing in the family of çuci or 
çrémata. Çuci means a spiritually advanced Brähmaëa, and çrémata means a Vaiçya, or 
member of the mercantile community. This means that such fallen candidates are 
given a better chance for culturing self-realization on account of their sincere efforts in

past lives. If the fallen candidates are given the chance of taking birth in respectable 
noble families, we can hardly imagine the state of those who have completely achieved 
success in the attempt.
Simply to make an attempt for realizing God is to guarantee that the next birth will be 
in a noble family. But those who do not make any such attempt at all, and who want 
to be covered by illusion, too materialistic and attached to material enjoyment, must 
enter into the darkest region of hell, as is confirmed in all the Vedic literature.
Such materialistic asuras sometimes make a show of religiousness with the ultimate 
aim of material prosperity. The Bhagavad-gétä, however, rebukes them as men called 
great on the strength of false perfection, empowered by the votes of the ignorant and 
by material wealth. Such asuras, devoid of self-realization and the conception of 
éçäväsya, the Lord, are sure to enter into the darkest regions.
The conclusion is that as human beings we are not meant only for solving economic 
problems on a tottering platform, but we are also meant for solving the problems of 
the material life into which we have been placed by the conditions of Nature.

Mantra Four
anejad ekaà manaso javéyo
nainad devä äpnuvan pürvam arñat
tad dhävato 'nyän atyeti tiñöhat
tasminn apo mätariçvä dadhäti.
anejat—fixed up; ekam—one; manasaù—more than the mind; javéyaù—speedy; no—not; 
enat —this Supreme Lord; deväù—the demigods like Indra, etc.; äpnuvan—can 
approach; pürvam —the first of all; arñat—one who knows everything; tat—that; 
dhävataù—those who are running; anyän—others; atyeti—surpasses; tiñöhat—although 
placed; tasmin—in one place; apaù—water; mätariçvä—the gods who control air and 
rains; dadhäti—execute.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, although fixed in His Abode, is more swift than the 
mind, and can overcome all others running. The powerful demigods cannot 
approach Him. Although in one place, He has control over those who supply the air 
and rain. He surpasses all in excellence.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, Who is the Absolute Personality of Godhead, is not knowable 
even to the greatest philosopher through mental speculation. He can be known only 
by His devotees through His mercy. In the Brahma-samhitã it is said that the non-
devotee philosopher who can travel at the speed of the mind, or at the velocity of the 
air, and who can travel in space for hundreds of years, will find the Absolute still far, 
far away from him. As described in the Upaniñads, the Absolute Personality of 
Godhead has His transcendental Abode, known as Kåñëa-loka, where He remains, 
engaged in His Pastimes. But by His inconceivable potency He can simultaneously

reach every part of the creative energy. In the Viñëu Puräëa this potency is compared 
with the light and heat of the fire. The fire can distribute its light and heat from one 
place, and similarly the Absolute Personality of Godhead, although fixed up in His 
transcendental Abode, can diffuse His different energies everywhere.
Such energies are innumerable, but principally they are classified into three: the 
internal potency, the marginal potency, and the external potency. In each and every 
one of them, there are hundreds and millions of sub-headings. The dominating 
demigods who are empowered to have control over the administration of natural 
phenomena such as the air, light, rain, etc. are all classified within the marginal 
potency of the Absolute Person. The living beings, including humans, are also 
products of the marginal potency of the Lord. The material world is the creation of the 
external potency of the Lord, and the spiritual sky, where the Kingdom of God is 
situated, is the manifestation of His internal potency.
The different energies of the Supreme Lord are represented everywhere by His 
different potencies. Although there is no difference between Him and His energies, 
still one should not wrongly conclude that the Supreme Lord, being thus distributed 
everywhere, has His Personal existence solely in the impersonal Brahman. Men are 
accustomed to reach conclusions only according to their own capacity to understand. 
But the Supreme Lord is not subject to our limited capacity to understand Him. It is 
for this reason that the Upaniñads warn us: no one can approach the Lord by his own 
limited potency.
In the Bhagavad-gétã, the Lord says that no one, not even the great åñis and suras, can 
know Him. So what is there to say of the asuras, who are not even qualified to 
understand the ways of the Lord? All these words mentioned in Mantra Four of Çré 
Éçopaniñad suggest very clearly that the Absolute Truth is ultimately the Absolute 
Person; otherwise there would have been no necessity of mentioning so many varied 
things in support of His Personal features.
Individual parts and parcels of the potencies of the Lord, although having all the 
symptoms of the Lord Himself, have limited spheres of activities, and therefore are all 
limited. The parts and parcels are never equal to the whole. Therefore the parts and 
parcels cannot appreciate the full potency of the Lord. Foolish and ignorant living 
beings who are parts and parcels of the Lord, under the influence of the material 
energy, try to make a conjecture on the transcendental position of the Lord. Çré 
Éçopaniñad warns them not to make any mental speculation about the identity of the 
Lord. Try to know the Transcendence from the superior source of the Vedas, which is 
already in knowledge of the Transcendence.

Every part of the Complete Whole is endowed with some particular energy to act, and 
forgetfulness by that part of his particular activities is called mãyã, illusion. Çré 
Éçopaniñad has therefore, from the very beginning, warned us that we should be careful 
to play the part designated for us by the Lord. This, however, does not mean that the 
individual soul has no initiative of his own. Because he is the part and parcel of the 
Lord he must have the initiative of the Lord as well. Proper use of one's initiative, 
active nature, with intelligence to understand that everything is but the potency of the 
Lord, can lead one to the revival of his original consciousness, which was lost on 
account of association with mãyã, the external energy.
All power is obtained from the Lord, and therefore each particular power must be 
utilized to execute the will of the Lord, and not otherwise. The Lord can be known by 
one who has adopted a submissive attitude. Perfect knowledge means to know the 
Lord in all His features, to know about His potencies and how such potencies are 
working by His will. These things are exclusively described by the Lord in the 
Bhagavad-gétä, which is the essence of all the Upaniñads.

Mantra Five
tad ejati tan naijati
tad düre tad v antike
tad antar asya sarvasya
tad u sarvasyäsya bähyataù.
tat—this Supreme Lord; ejati—does walk; tat—He; na—not; ejati—does walk; tat—He 
(is); düre—far away; tat— He (is); u—also; antike—very near; tat—He (is); antar—
within; asya— of this; sarvasya—all; tat—He (is); u—also; sarvasya—all; asya—of this; 
bãhyatah—external to.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord walks and does not walk. He is far away, but He is very near as 
well. He is within everything, and again He is outside of everything.
PURPORT
Here is an explanation of the Supreme Lord's transcendental activities by His 
inconceivable potencies. There are two sets of contradictory words mentioned herein 
to prove the inconceivable potency of the Lord. He walks, and He does not walk. 
These two phrases are contradictory. If someone can walk then it is improper to say 
that he cannot walk. These contradictions show the inconceivable power of God. With 
our limited fund of knowledge we cannot accommodate such things, and therefore the 
Lord is conceived in terms of our limited powers of understanding. The impersonalist 
philosophers of the mãyã-vãda school accept only the impersonalist part of the Lord's 
activities, and refute His Personal feature. The Bhãgavata school, however, accepts the 
Lord in both ways, i.e., as Personal and impersonal. And the Bhãgavatas also accept 
His inconceivable potencies. Without inconceivable potency there is no meaning to 
the words Supreme Lord.

We should not take it for granted that because we cannot see God before our eyes 
there is therefore no personal existence of the Lord. To refute this sort of argument, 
Çré Éçopaniñad warns us that the Lord is far away from us, but He is very near to us 
also. The Abode of the Lord is beyond the material sky. We have no means to measure 
even the material sky. If just the material sky is so far, far away from us, then what of 
the spiritual sky, which is beyond the material sky altogether? That the spiritual sky is 
situated far, far away from the material world is further confirmed in the Bhagavad-
gétä. But, in spite of the Lord's being so far away, He can at once, within less than a 
second, descend before us with a speed more powerful than the mind or the air. He 
can walk so quickly that no one can surpass Him. This fact has already been described 
in the previous verse.
When the Personality of Godhead thus comes before us, however, we neglect Him. 
This negligence on the part of the foolish people is condemned by the Lord in the 
Bhagavad-gétä. The Lord says that the foolish deride Him, taking Him to be one of the 
mortal beings. But He is not a mortal being, nor does He come before us with a body 
produced of material Nature. There are many so-called scholars who say that when 
the Lord descends, He does so in a body of matter, just like an ordinary living being. 
Such foolish men place the Lord on a level equal to that of the ordinary man, not 
knowing His inconceivable power.
Because He is full of inconceivable potencies, God can accept our service through any 
sort of medium, and He can convert His different potencies according to His own will. 
The unbelievers argue that the Lord cannot incarnate Himself, or if at all, He descends 
in a form of material energy. This argument is nullified if we accept His in- 
conceivable potencies as realities. Even if He appears before us in the form of material 
energy, it is quite possible for Him to convert the material energy into spiritual energy. 
The source of the energies being one and the same, the energies can be utilized 
suitably according to the will of that energetic Source. For example, the Lord appears 
in the Form of Arca, or Deities supposedly made of earth or stone. These forms, 
engraved from wood or stone or any other matter, are not idols, however, as is held by 
the iconoclasts.
In the present state of our imperfect material existence we cannot see the Supreme 
Lord on account of our imperfect vision. But still, those devotees who want to see Him 
by means of material vision are favored by the Lord, Who appears in so-called material 
form to accept the devotees' service. This does not mean that such devotees, who are 
in the lowest stage of devotional service, are worshiping an idol. In fact, they are 
worshiping the Lord, Who has agreed to appear before them in a particular way which 
is approachable by them. This Arca Form is not fashioned in terms of the order or

whim of the worshiper. It is eternally existent with all Its paraphernalia. This can be 
actually felt by a sincere devotee, but not by an atheist.
In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that He treats His devotee in proportion to the 
degree of surrender made by the devotee. He reserves the right not to expose Himself 
to anyone and everyone, except those who surrender unto Him. Therefore, for the 
surrendered soul, He is always within reach, whereas for the non-surrendered soul, He 
is far, far away, and cannot be approached.
There are two words in the revealed Scriptures which are important in this 
connection: saguëa and nirguëa— with qualities and without qualities. Saguëa does 
not mean that the Lord becomes subject to the laws of material Nature when He 
appears, although He has qualities and appears in the material form. For Him there is 
no difference between material and spiritual energies, because He is the Source of such 
energies. He is the Controller of the different energies, and as such He cannot at any 
time be under their influence, as we are. The material energy works according to His 
direction, and therefore He can use the material energy for His purpose, but without 
ever being influenced by any of the qualities of His energies. Nor for this purpose does 
He become a formless entity at any time. Ultimately He is the eternal Form, the 
Primeval Lord. And the impersonal representation, or Brahman effulgence, is the glow 
of His Personal rays, as the Sun's rays are the glow of the Sun god.
When the boy saint Prahlãda Mahãrãj was in the presence of his atheist father, his 
father asked him, "Where is your God?" The child Prahlãda replied that God resides 
everywhere. The father then angrily asked whether his God was within the pillar of 
the palace, and the child said yes. At once the atheist king broke the pillar in front of 
him into pieces, at which the Lord appeared as Nåsiàha (the half-man, half-lion 
Incarnation) from within the pillar, and killed the atheist king. This means that the 
Lord is within everything, which is created by His different energies. And by His 
inconceivable power He can appear at any place in order to favor His sincere devotee. 
Lord Nåsiàha appeared from within the pillar not at the order of the atheist king, but 
by the wish of the devotee Prahlãda. An atheist cannot order the Lord to appear, but 
to show mercy to His devotee the Lord can appear anywhere and everywhere.
The Bhagavad-gétä confirms this, in the statement that the Lord appears to vanquish 
the unbelievers and to protect the believers. To vanquish an unbeliever, of course, the 
Lord has sufficient energies and agents who can do the work, but to favor the devotee 
is a pleasing task for Him, and therefore He descends as an incarnation. He does so 
only to favor His devotees, then, and not for any other purpose.

In the Brahma-saàhitã it is said that Govinda, the Primeval Lord, enters everything by 
His plenary portion. He enters the universe as well as the atom of the universe. He is 
outside in the Virãta Form, and He is within as Antaryämé. As Antaryämé He is witness 
of everything that we are doing, and He gives us the result of our actions as karma-
phala. We ourselves may forget what we have done in previous lives, but because the 
Lord is the witness of our actions, the result of our actions is always there, and we 
have to undergo the reactions all the same.
In fact there is nothing except God within and without. Everything is manifested of 
His different energies, like the heat and light of fire, which means there is a oneness 
among the diverse energies. In spite of this oneness, however, the Lord enjoys in His 
Personal Form all that is enjoyable to the little senses of the little part and parcel 
living entities.

Mantra Six
yas tu sarväëi bhütäny
ätmany evänupaçyati
sarva-bhüteñu cätmänaà
tato na vijugupsate.
yah—a person; to—but; sarvãni—all; bhutãni—living entities; ãtmani—in relation with 
the Supreme Lord; eva— only: anupasyati—observes in a systematic way; sarva-bhütesu
—in every living being; ca—and; ãtmãnam—the Supersoul; tatah—thereafter; na—not; 
vijugupsate— hates anyone.
TRANSLATION
A person who sees everything in relation to the Supreme Lord, and sees all entities 
as His parts and parcels, and who sees the Supreme Lord within everything, never 
hates anything, nor any being.
PURPORT
Here is an explanation of the Mahãbhãgavata, the great personality who sees 
everything in relation to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are three stages 
of realizing the presence of the Supreme Lord: The kaniñöha adhikãré, the person who 
is in the lowest stage of realization of the Lord, goes to one place of worship, such as a 
temple, church, or mosque, in terms of his particular type of religious faith, and 
worships there in terms of the scriptural injunctions. Such devotees think that the 
Lord is there at the place of worship and nowhere else. Such devotees cannot 
recognize who is in what position in the devotional line, or in terms of realization of 
the Supreme Lord. They follow the routine formulas and sometimes quarrel among 
themselves, estimating one particular type of worship better than another. These

kaniñöha adhikãrés, in the lowest stage of devotion, are called materialistic devotees, or 
those just trying to transcend the material boundary to reach the spiritual plane.
Next above these kaniñöha adhikãrés are the madhyam adhikãrés, the devotees who are 
in the intermediate stage of devotional service. These madhyam adhikãrés observe four 
principles in relation to the Supreme Lord, which are as follows:
1.
They see, first of all, the Supreme Lord; 
2.
They see next the devotees of the Lord; 
3.
They see also the innocent, who have no knowledge about God; and at last, 
4.
They see the atheists who have no faith in the Lord, and who hate those in the 
devotional line. 
The madhyam adhikãré devotee behaves differently toward the different above-
mentioned four principles. He adores the Lord, considering Him the object of love, 
and he makes friendship with those who are in the devotional line. He tries to awaken 
the dormant love of Godhead in the hearts of the innocent people, but he does not 
approach the atheists who deride at the very Name of the Lord.
Above the madhyam adhikãri there is the uttama adhikäré devotee, who sees everything 
in relation to the Supreme Lord. He does not make any particular discrimination 
between the atheist and the theist, but sees in every one of them the part and parcel of 
God. He knows that there is no difference between a vastly learned Brãhmana and a 
dog in the street, because both of them are of the Lord, though in different 
embodiments due to the different qualities of material action. The Brãhmana particle 
of the Supreme Lord has not misused the little independence given him by the Lord, 
but the dog particle has misused his independence, and thus he has been punished by 
the law of Nature, being encaged in the ignorant form of a dog. Without considering 
the respective actions of the Brãhmana and the dog, the uttama adhikãré tries to do 
good to both. Such a learned devotee of the Lord is not misled by the material bodies 
of the Brãhmana and the dog, but he is attracted by the spiritual spark within the 
respective entities.
Those who imitate an uttama adhikãré in terms of the sense of oneness or fellowship, 
but who behave in terms of bodily relationships, are false philanthropists. Therefore 
the concept of universal brotherhood must be learnt from the uttama adhikãré devotee 
of the Lord, and not from a foolish person who has no proper vision of the individual

soul and of the Supersoul—the plenary expansion of the Supreme Lord, Which dwells 
every where.
In this mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad it is clearly mentioned that one should observe, or see. 
This means one must follow the previous ãcãrya, the perfected Teacher. Anupaçyati is 
the exact Sanskrit word used in this connection. Anu means to observe. One should 
not try to see things as he does with the naked eye. The naked eye cannot see anything 
properly, due to its material defectiveness. One cannot see properly unless one has 
heard from a superior source. And the highest source is the Vedic wisdom spoken by 
the Lord Himself. This truth is coming in disciplic succession from the Lord to 
Brahmã, from Brahmã to Nãrada, from Nãrada to Vyãsa, and from Vyãsa to many of 
His disciples. Formerly there was no necessity of recording the message of the Vedas 
because people of earlier ages were more intelligent and had sharper memories, and 
they could follow instructions simply by hearing once from the mouth of a bona fide 
spiritual master.
At present there are many commentaries on the revealed Scriptures, but most of them 
are not in the line of Srila Vyãsadeva, Who originally taught the Vedic wisdom. The 
final, most perfect and sublime work of Srila Vyãsadeva is the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 
Which is the correct commentary on the Vedãnta-sütra. Similarly, there is the 
Bhagavad-gétä, Which is spoken by the Lord Himself and Which was recorded by 
Vyãsadeva. These are the more important of the many revealed Scriptures, and any 
commentary which does not conform to the principles of the Gétä or the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam is unauthorized. There is complete symmetrical agreement between the 
Upaniñads, Vedänta, the Vedas, the Bhagavad-gétä and the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. 
Therefore, no one should try to reach any conclusion about the Vedas without being 
instructed by members of the line of Vyãsadeva, or at least those who believe in the 
Personality of Godhead and His diverse energies.
Only one who is already in the liberated status, according to the Bhagavad-gétä, can 
become an uttama adhikãré devotee, and can see everyone or every living being as his 
own brother. This cannot be seen by politicians who are always after some material 
gain. Imitation of this liberated status is to serve the outward body (for fame, or some 
such reward) but is not service to the spirit soul. Such imitators have no information 
of the Spiritual World. The uttama adhikãré sees the spirit soul of an entity, and serves 
him as spirit, which includes matter automatically.

Mantra Seven
yasmin sarväëi bhütäny
ätmaiväbhüd vijänataù
tatra ko mohaù kaù çoka
ekatvam anupaçyataù.
yasmin—in the situation; sarvãni—all; bhütãni—living entities; ãtmã—the spiritual 
spark; eva —only; abhüt—becomes a fact; vijãnatah—one who knows; tatra—therein; 
kah—what; mohah—illusion; sokah—anxiety; ekatvam— of the same quality; 
anupasyatah—one who sees through authority, or one who sees constantly like that.
TRANSLATION
One who always sees all living entities as spiritual sparks, in quality one with the 
Lord, becomes a true knower of things. What is there as illusion or anxiety for him?
PURPORT
Except for the two more advanced devotees described above, no one can correctly see 
the spiritual position of a living being. The living entities are qualitatively one with the 
Supreme Lord, as the sparks of the fire are qualitatively one with the nature of the fire. 
But sparks are not fie as far as quantity is concerned. The quantity of heat and light 
present in the fire is not equal to the quantity of heat and light in the sparks. The 
Mahã-bhãgavata, the great devotee, sees oneness in the sense that everything is the 
energy of the Supreme Lord. And as there is no difference between the energy and the 
energetic, there is the sense of oneness. Without heat and light there is no meaning of 
fire, and yet heat and light from the analytical point of view are different from fire. But 
in synthesis, heat, light, and fire are all the same one thing.

The Sanskrit words found here, ekatvam anupaçyataù, mean to see the unity of the 
living entities from the viewpoint of the revealed Scriptures. Every individual spark of 
the Supreme Whole has almost eighty per cent of the known qualities of the Whole, 
but they are not as good as the Supreme Lord. These qualities are present in minute 
quantity, as the living entity is but a minute part and parcel of the Supreme Whole. 
This is like the drop of water and the ocean: The quantity of salt present in the drop is 
never comparable to the quantity of salt present in the complete ocean. But the quality 
of the salt present in the drop is equal in quality, in chemical composition, with that 
present in the ocean.
If the individual living being were equal both in quality and in quantity, then there 
would be no question of the living entity's being submerged by the influence of 
material energy. It has already been discussed in previous mantras that no living 
being, even the powerful demigods, can surpass the Supreme Being in any respect. 
Therefore ekatvam does not mean that a living being is equal in all respects with the 
Supreme Lord. It means, in a broader sense, that there is one interest, just as in a 
family the interest of all the members is one. In a nation, although different individual 
citizens are there, the national interest is one. Therefore, the living entities being parts 
and parcels of the same Supreme family, the interest of the Supreme Being and that of 
the parts and parcels is not different. Every living being is the son of the Supreme 
Being. As it is said in the Bhagavad-gétä, all living creatures, including birds, reptiles, 
ants, aquatics, trees, and so on, all over the universe—all are emanations from the 
marginal potency of the Supreme Lord. And therefore all of them belong to the same 
family of the Supreme Being. There is no clash of interest in spiritual life.
The spiritual entities are meant for enjoyment. By nature, by constitution, every living 
being—both the Supreme Lord and each different part and parcel—is meant for 
enjoyment eternally. The living beings who are encaged in the material tabernacle are 
also seeking enjoyment always, but they are seeking their enjoyment on a platform 
which is not meant for them. Aside from this material world, there is the spiritual 
platform where the Supreme Being is enjoying with His innumerable associates, 
without any trace of material qualities. That platform is called nirguëa. On the nirguëa 
platform there is no clash of enjoyment. Here in the material world there is always a 
clash between different individual beings, because here the center of enjoyment is 
missed. The center of enjoyment is the Supreme Lord, Who is the center of the 
sublime and spiritual rãsa dance. We are all meant for joining Him, and for enjoying 
life with one transcendental interest and without any clash. That is the high platform 
of spiritual interest, and as soon as such a perfect form of oneness is realized there can 
be no question of illusion or lamentation.

Mäyä, or illusion, means a Godless civilization, the result of which is lamentation. The 
Godless civilization sponsored by the modern politicians is always full of anxieties, 
and that is the law of Nature. No one can surpass this law, as is stated in the 
Bhagavad-gétä. Only those who surrender at the Lotus Feet of the Supreme Lord can 
overcome the stringent laws of Nature. lf, therefore, we wish to get rid of all sorts of 
illusion and anxiety and create unity of all diverse interests, we must bring God into 
all our activities.
The results of our activities must be used to serve the interest of the Lord, and not for 
any other purpose, because only by serving the interest of the Lord can we feel the 
ãtma- bhüta interest mentioned here in Çré Éçopaniñad. This and the Brahma-bhüta 
interest mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä are one and the same thing: The Supreme 
Ãtman, or Soul, is the Lord Himself, and the minute ãtman is the living entity. The 
Supreme Ãtman or Paramãtman alone maintains all the individual minute beings, 
because the Supreme Lord wants to derive pleasure out of their affection. The father 
extends himself by his children and maintains them in order to derive pleasure. If the 
children of the father are obedient to his will, family affairs will run smoothly with 
one interest and a pleasing atmosphere. Exactly the same thing is transcendentally 
arranged in the Brahman, or Absolute family of the Param Brahman, the Supreme 
Spirit.
The Param Brahman is as much a Person as the individual entities are. None of them 
are impersonal. Such transcendental personalities are full of transcendental bliss, 
knowledge and life eternal. That is the real position of spiritual existence, and as soon 
as one is fully cognizant of this transcendental position he at once surrenders unto the 
Lotus Feet of the Supreme Being, Çré Kåñëa. But such mahãtmãs, Great Souls, are very 
rarely seen, because such transcendental realization is achieved only after many, many 
births. Once attained, however, there is no more illusion or distress, no more of the 
misery of material existence, and there is no birth and death as we experience in the 
present status of our life. That is the information we get from this mantra of Çré 
Éçopaniñad.

Mantra Eight
sa paryagäc chukram akäyam avraëam
asnäviram çuddham apäpa-viddham
kavir manéñé paribhüù svayambhür
yäthätathyato 'rthän vyadadhäc chäçvatébhyaù samäbhyaù.
sah—that person; paryagãt—must know in fact; sukram—the omnipotent; akãyam— 
unembodied; avranam— without any reproach; asnãviram—without any veins; 
çuddham— antiseptic; apãpa-viddham—prophylactic; kaviù—omni-scient; manéñé—
philosopher; paribhüh —the greatest of all; svayambhüh—self-sufficient; yãthãtathy-atah
—just in pursuance of; arthãn—desirables; vyadadhãt—awards; çäçvatébhyaù—
immemorial; samãbhyah—time.
TRANSLATION
Such a person must know in fact the Greatest of all, Who is unembodied, 
omniscient, beyond reproach, without veins, pure and uncontaminate, the self-
sufficient Philosopher Who is awarding everyone's desire since time immemorial.
PURPORT
Here is the description of the transcendental and eternal Form of the Absolute 
Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is not formless. He has His own 
transcendental Form Which is not at all similar to those of the mundane world. The 
living entities in this world have their forms embodied by the material Nature, and 
they work like any material machines. The physiological and anatomical structure of 
the body of a living being must have a mechanical construction, with veins and so 
forth in the embodiment. But in the transcendental body of the Lord there is nothing 
like veins. It is clearly stated here that He is unembodied. That means that there is no 
difference between His body and soul, nor does He accept a body by the law of Nature

as we do. In the material concept of bodily life, the soul is different from the gross 
embodiment and subtle mind. The Supreme Lord is apart from any such 
compartmentalized arrangement, however. There is nothing like a difference of body 
and mind in the Supreme Lord. He is the Complete Whole, and His mind and body 
and He Himself are all one and the same.
In the Brahma-saàhitä there is a similar description of the body of the Supreme Lord. 
He is described there as the sac-cid-ãnanda-vigraha. This means that He is the eternal 
Form fully representing transcendental Existence, Knowledge and Bliss. The Vedic 
literature states clearly that He has a completely different kind of transcendental body, 
and thus He is sometimes described as formless. This formlessness means that He has 
no form like ours, or that He is devoid of a form which we can perceive. In the 
Brahma-saàhitä it is further said that the Lord can do anything and everything with 
any one of the parts of His body. It is said there that with each and every one of the 
parts of His body, such as the hand, He can do the work of the other senses. This 
means that the Lord can walk with His hands, He can accept a thing by His legs, He 
can see by His hands and feet, and He can eat by His eyes. In the Çruti mantras it is 
said that He has no hands and no legs like us, but that He has a different type of hand 
and leg, by which He can accept all that we offer Him, and walk faster than anyone 
anywhere. These things are confirmed in this mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad by the use of 
words like omnipotent.
The Lord's Çré Vigraha, His worshipable form, Which is installed in the temples by 
authorized ãcãryas who have realized the Lord in terms of Mantra Seven, is also non-
different from the Original Form of the Lord. The Original Form of the Lord is that of 
Çré Kåñëa. Çré Kåñëa expands Himself by an unlimited number of Forms like Baladeva, 
Rãma, Nåsiàha, Varãha, etc.—and all of These are one and the same Personality of 
Godhead.
Similarly, the Arcã-vigraha Which is worshiped in the temples is also an expanded 
Form of the Lord. By worshiping the Arcã-vigraha of the Lord, one can at once 
approach the Lord, Who accepts the service of the devotee by His omnipotent energy 
without any reproach. The Vigraha of the Lord descends by request of the ãcãryas, the 
holy teachers, and works exactly in the original way by His omnipotent energy.
Foolish people who have no knowledge of these mantras of Çré Éçopaniñad, or of any 
other Çruti mantras, consider that the Çré Vigraha Who is worshiped by the pure 
devotees is made of material elements. To the imperfect eyes of the foolish people, or 
to the kaniñöha adhikärés, this Form is considered material. But such people with little 
knowledge do not know that the Lord, being omnipotent and omniscient, can 
transform matter into spirit and spirit into matter, as He desires.

In the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord regrets the fallen condition of men with little 
knowledge, who regard the body of the Lord as material because He descends like a 
man into this world. Such poorly informed persons do not know the omnipotence of 
the Lord. To the mental speculators, therefore, the Lord does not manifest Himself in 
fullness. He can be appreciated only in proportion to one's surrender to Him. And the 
fallen condition of the living entities is due entirely to forgetfulness of our relationship 
with God.
In this mantra, as well as in many others in the Vedas, it is clearly mentioned: from 
time immemorial, the Lord is supplying. The living being first of all desires, and then 
the Lord supplies the object of desire in proportion to the degree of qualification. If a 
man wants to be a high court judge he must not only have acquired the necessary 
qualifications, but he must also depend upon the disposition of the authority 
concerned, who can award the title of high court judge. Simple acquisition of the 
qualifications of a high court judge is not sufficient in order to occupy the post. This 
must be awarded by some superior authority. Similarly, the Lord awards enjoyment to 
the living being in proportion to his qualifications—in other words, by the law of 
karma. Those qualifications, however, are not sufficient without the mercy of the 
Lord.
Ordinarily the living being does not know what to ask for from the Lord or what post 
to qualify himself for. When the living being knows his constitutional position, 
however, he asks to be accepted into the transcendental association of the Lord, in 
order to render transcendental loving service unto Him. Instead of asking for this, the 
living being under the influence of material Nature asks for many other things, and his 
mentality is described in the Bhagavad-gétä as divided, or splayed, intelligence. 
Spiritual intelligence is one, but the opposite number is of many varieties. In the 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said that persons who are captivated by the temporary 
beauties of the external energy forget their real aim of life, which is to go back to 
Godhead. Forgetting this, one tries to adjust things by various plans and programs, 
which are compared with the process of chewing already chewed refuse. But the Lord 
is so kind that He allows the forgetful living being to do so without interfering in his 
activities. If a living being wants to go to hell, the Lord allows him to do so without 
interference, and if he wants to go back to home, back to Godhead, the Lord also 
helps him to do that.
God is described here as paribhüù, the greatest of all. No one is greater than, or equal 
to Him. Other living beings are described here as beggars who ask from the Lord, and 
the Lord supplies their desirables. If other entities were equal to the Lord in potency, 
or if they were omnipotent or omniscient, there would be no question of begging from 
the Lord even for so- called liberation. The real liberation of the living being is to go

back to Godhead. Otherwise, liberation as conceived by the impersonalist remains a 
myth, and the begging business for sense gratification has to continue eternally, unless 
the beggar comes to his senses and realizes his constitutional position.
The Supreme Lord is self-sufficient. When Lord Kåñëa appeared on Earth 5,000 years 
ago He displayed the full manifestation of Godhead by His various activities. In His 
childhood He killed many powerful demons, and there was no question of acquiring 
such power by any extraneous endeavor. He lifted Govardhana Hill without any 
practice of weightlifting. He danced with the gopés without any social restriction, and 
without any reproach. Although the gopés approached Him with feelings of amorous 
love, the mixing of the gopés and Lord Kåñëa has been worshiped even by Lord 
Caitanya, Who was a strict sannyãsin and rigid follower of disciplinary regulations. To 
confirm this, Çré Éçopaniñad says that He is "antiseptic" and "prophylactic," pure and 
uncontaminate. He is antiseptic in the sense that even an impure thing in the 
estimation of the mundane world can become purified just by touching Him. The 
word prophylactic refers to His association, and is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä. 
There it is said that a scrupulous devotee may appear in the beginning to be durãcãra, 
not well-behaved. Yet he is still to be accepted as pure because he is on the right path. 
That is the prophylactic nature of the Lord's association.
The Lord is apãpaviddham, that is, nothing like sin can touch Him. Even if He may do 
something which appears to be sinful, such actions are all good, as there is no 
question of the Lord's being affected by sin. In all circumstances He is çuddham, most 
purified, often compared to the Sun. The Sun exacts moisture from many untouchable 
places of the earth, and itself remains pure. In fact it purifies obnoxious things by its 
sterilizing effect. If the Sun is so powerful, although only a material object, we can 
imagine the purity and strength of the All-powerful Lord.

Mantra Nine
andhaà tamaù praviçanti ye 'vidyäm upäsate
tato bhüya iva te tamo
ya u vidyäyäm ratäù.
andham—gross ignorance; tamah—darkness; praviçanti—enter into; ye—those; avidyäm
— nescience; upãsate—worship; tatah—further; bhüyah-considered; iva—like; te—those; 
tamah —darkness; ye—those; u—also; vidyäyäm—in the culture of knowledge; ratah—
engaged in.
TRANSLATION
Those who are engaged in the culture of nescient activities shall enter into the 
darkest region of ignorance. Worse still are those engaged in the so-called culture of 
knowledge.
PURPORT
In this mantra there is a comparative study of vidyã and avidyã. Avidyã, or ignorance, 
is undoubtably dangerous, but vidyã, or knowledge, when mistaken or misguided, is 
even more dangerous. In modern human civilization this explanation of Çré Éçopaniñad 
is more applicable than at any other time in the past. Modern civilization has 
advanced considerably in the matter of mass education, and yet the result is that 
people are more unhappy than before on account of too much stress on material 
advancement, without any taste for the most important aspect of life, the spiritual 
aspect.
As far as vidyã is concerned, the first mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad has explained very 
clearly that the Supreme Lord is the Proprietor of everything, and forgetfulness of this 
fact is called ignorance. The more a man forgets this fact of life, the more he is in 
darkness; and in view of this, a Godless civilization directed toward the so-called 
advancement of education is more dangerous than a civilization in which the mass of 
people are less advanced.

There are different classes of men, called karmés, jïänéns and yogés. The karmés are 
those who are engaged in the activities of sense gratification. Almost 99.9 per cent of 
the people in modern civilization are engaged in the activities of sense gratification 
under the flags of various activities such as industrialism, economic development, 
altruism, political consciousness, and so on. But all these activities are more or less 
based on the satisfaction of the senses, without any reference to the sort of God 
consciousness described in the first mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad.
In the language of the Bhagavad-gétä, people who are engaged in gross sense 
gratification are müdhas—in darkness like the ass, the symbol of stupidity. People who 
are simply engaged in the pursuit of sense gratification, without any real profit in life, 
are in the estimation of Çré Éçopaniñad worshiping avidyã. And those who play the role 
of helping this sort of civilization in the name of educational advancement are doing 
more harm than those who are on the platform of gross sense gratification. The 
advancement of learning by the Godless people is as dangerous as a valuable jewel on 
the hood of a cobra. The cobra decorated with such a valuable jewel is quite as 
dangerous as one which is not so decorated.
Again, the advancement of educational activities by a Godless people is, according to 
the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, a decoration for a dead body. In India as in many other 
countries, some people follow the custom of leading a procession with a decorated 
dead body for the pleasure of the lamenting relatives. In the same sense, modern 
civilization is a patchwork of activities meant to cover the perpetual miseries of 
material existence. Such activities are targetted toward sense gratification, but above 
the senses there is the mind, and above the mind there is the intelligence, and above 
intelligence there is the soul. Therefore, the aim of education should be self 
realization, realization of the spiritual values of the soul. Any education which does 
not lead to such a realization of life must be considered avidyã, or nescience. And to 
culture such nescience means going down to the darkest region of ignorance.
Such mistaken educators are known in the Vedic language by four names:
1. veda-vãda-rata,
2. mãyayã apahrta- jñãna,
3. ãsuram bhãvam,
4. narãdhama.
The veda-vãda-rata people pose themselves as very learned in the Vedic literature, but 
unfortunately they are completely diverted from the purpose of the Vedas. In the 
Bhagavad- gétä it is said that the purpose of the Vedas is to know the Personality of 
Godhead, but these veda-vãda-rata men are not at all interested in the Personality of

Godhead. On the contrary, they are fascinated by such results as the attainment of 
heaven.
As is said in Mantra One of Çré Éçopaniñad, we should know that the Personality of 
Godhead is the Proprietor of everything, and we must be satisfied with our alloted 
portion of the necessities of life. The purpose of the whole Vedic literature is to 
awaken this God consciousness in the forgetful living being, and the same principle is 
presented in various ways in the world's various Scriptures for the understanding of 
foolish mankind. Thus the ultimate purpose is to bring one back to Godhead.
But the veda-vãda-rata people, instead of realizing the purport of the Vedas, take it for 
granted that side issues such as the attainment of heavenly pleasure for sense 
gratification— the lust for which is the very cause of their material bondage in the first 
place—is the ultimate end of the Vedas. Such people misguide others by 
misinterpreting the Vedic literature, and sometimes they condemn the Puräëas, which 
are authentic Vedic explanations for laymen. The veda-vãda-ratas make their own 
explanations of the Vedas, neglecting the authority of the great teachers, called 
ãcãryas; and they tend to raise some unscrupulous person from among themselves as 
the leading exponent of Vedic knowledge.
These men are especially condemned by this mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad with the very 
appropriate Sanskrit word vidyã-rata. Vidyã means Veda, because the Veda is the 
original in all knowledge; and rata means engaged. Vidyã-rata means engaged in the 
study of the Vedas. As such, the so-called vidyã-ratas are condemned here because 
they do not know what the purpose of the Vedas is, on account of disobeying the 
ãcãryas. Such veda-vãda-ratas are accustomed to finding meaning in every word of the 
Vedas to suit their own purposes. They do not know that the Vedic literature is not a 
collection of ordinary books and cannot be understood except through the chain of 
disciplic succession.
One must approach a bona fide spiritual master in order to understand the 
transcendental message of the Vedas. That is the direction of the Katha Upaniñad. But 
these veda-vãda-rata people have their own ãcãrya, who is not in the chain of 
transcendental disciplic succession. Thus they will progress into the darkest region of 
ignorance by misinterpreting the Vedic literature, even more so than those who have 
no knowledge of the Vedas at all.
The mãyayã apahåta-jïäna class of men are self-made "Gods." Such men think that 
they are themselves God, and there is no necessity of worshiping any other God. They 
will agree to worship an ordinary man if he happens to be rich, but will never worship 
the actual Personality of Godhead. Such foolish men cannot recognize their own

foolishness, regarding the question of how God can ever have been entrapped by 
illusion. If God were ever entrapped by illusion, then illusion would be more powerful 
than God. But they also say that God is all-powerful. If God is all-powerful, then how 
can He be overpowered by illusion? The self-made Gods cannot answer all these 
questions very clearly, but they are satisfied that they have become God themselves.

Mantra Ten
anyad evähur vidyayä
anyad ähur avidyayä
iti çuçruma dhéräëäà
ye nas tad vicacakñire.
anyat—different; eva—certainly; ähuù—said; vidyayã—by culture of knowledge; anyat
— different; ähuù—said; avidyayd—nescience; iti—thus; çuçruma—heard; dhéräëäm—
from the sober sect; ye—those; naù—to us; tat—that; vicacakñire —explained.
TRANSLATION
The wise have explained to us that one result is derived from the culture of 
knowledge, and it is said that a different result is obtained from the culture of 
nescience.
PURPORT
The culture, of knowledge can be practically conducted in the following way, as is 
advised in the Bhagavad-gétä (Thirteenth Chapter). There it is said that:
1. One should become a perfect gentleman himself, and learn to give proper respect to 
persons other than himself.
2. One should not pose himself as a religionist simply for name and fame.
3. One should not become a source of anxiety to others by the actions of his body, 
mind or words.
4. One should learn forbearance, even if there is provocation from others.
5. One should learn to avoid duplicity in his dealings with others.

6. One must have a bona fide spiritual master who can lead him gradually to the stage 
of spiritual realization, and to such an ãcãrya or spiritual master he must submit 
himself with service and relevant questions.
7. One must follow the regulative principles enjoined in the revealed Scriptures, in 
order to approach the platform of self realization.
8. One must be fixed up in the tenets of the revealed Scriptures.
9. One should completely refrain from practices which are detrimental to the interest 
of self realization.
10. One should not accept more than what he requires for the maintenance of the 
body. 11. One should not falsely identify himself with the material covering of the 
gross body nor consider as his own those who are related with his body.
12. One should always remember that so long as he has a material body, he must face 
the miseries of repeated birth, death, old age, and disease. There is no use in making 
plans to get rid of these miseries of the material body. The best thing is to find out the 
means by which one may regain his spiritual identity.
13. One should not be attached to more than the necessities of life required for 
spiritual advancement.
14. One should not be more attached to wife, children and home than is ordained in 
the revealed Scriptures.
15. One should not be happy or distressed in regard to the desirables and undesirables 
created by the mind.
16. One should become an unalloyed devotee of the Personality of Godhead, Çré 
Kåñëa, and serve Him with rapt attention.
17. One should develop a feeling for residing in a secluded place with a calm and quiet 
atmosphere favorable for spiritual culture, and thus avoid congested places where the 
non-devotees congregate.
18. One should become a scientist or philosopher, and make research into spiritual 
knowledge—not material knowledge—recognizing that spiritual knowledge is 
permanent, whereas material knowledge ends with the death of the body.
These eighteen items form a gradual process for developing real knowledge. Except 
for these eighteen items, all other items whatever are grouped within the category of 
nescience. Çrila Bhaktivinode Thãkur, a great ãcãrya, said that all the forms of material 
knowledge are merely external features of the illusory energy, and by culturing them 
one becomes no better than an ass. Here in Çré Éçopaniñad the same principle is 
repeated. Material advancement of knowledge means actually converting a human 
being to the status of an ass. Some materialistic politicians, under cover of spiritual 
garments, do decry the present system of civilization as satanic, but unfortunately they

do not care for the culture of real knowledge which is described in the Bhagavad-gétä, 
and therefore they cannot change the satanic situation.
In the modern setup of things, even a boy thinks himself self-sufficient, and pays no 
respect to elderly men. Thus, due to the wrong type of education imparted by our 
universities, boys all over the world have become the cause of headache to the elderly 
people. Therefore Çré Éçopaniñad warns very strongly that the culture of nescience is 
different from that of knowledge. The universities are, so to speak, centers of 
nescience only, and therefore the scientists are busy discovering lethal weapons to 
wipe out the existence of other countries.
University students today are not given instructions on the regulative principles of 
brahmacãrya, the spiritual process of life, nor do they have any faith in the respective 
scriptural injunctions. Religious principles are taught for the sake of name and fame 
only, and not for the matter of practical action. Therefore there is animosity not only 
in the social and political fields, but in the field of religion as well.
Nationalism in different parts of the world has also developed on account of this 
nescient education of the people. They have no information that this tiny earth is just 
a lump of matter floating in immeasurable material space along with many other 
lumps. In comparison to the vastness of space, these material lumps are like dust 
particles in the air. Because God has kindly made these lumps of matter complete in 
themselves, they are perfectly equipped with all necessary arrangements for floating 
on in space. Our sputnik drivers are very proud of their achievements, but they do not 
look to the Supreme Driver of these greater, more gigantic sputniks called planets.
There are innumerable suns occupying space, with innumerable arrangements of 
planetary systems. We small creatures, as the infinitesimal parts and parcels of the 
Supreme Lord, are trying to dominate these unlimited planets by repeated birth and 
death, but are generally frustrated by old age and disease. This span of human life is 
scheduled for about 100 years, although it is gradually decreasing to the limit of 20 or 
30 years of life. Thanks to the culture of nescient education, befooled men have 
created their own nationalisms within these planets in order to grasp at sense 
enjoyment for these few 20 or 30 years. Such foolish people are drawing up various 
plans to make some demarked portion of earth as perfect as possible, which is 
ultimately ridiculous. And for this purpose each and every nation has become a source 
of anxiety for the others. More than 50% of their energy is spoiled in defense 
measures, with no caring for the real culture of knowledge, and they are falsely proud 
of becoming advanced in both material and spiritual knowledge.

Çré Éçopaniñad warns of this faulty mode of education, and the Bhagavad-gétä gives 
instructions as to the development of real knowledge. In this mantra there is a hint 
that the instruction of vidyã, knowledge, must be gained from the dhéra. Dhéra means 
undisturbed, not disturbed by material illusion. No one can be undisturbed unless and 
until he has perfect spiritual realization. When one is perfectly spiritually realized he 
has no more hankering for anything acquired, nor does he lament for anything lost. 
Such a dhéra has realized that the material body and mind which he has acquired by 
chance material association are foreign elements, and therefore he simply makes the 
best use of a bad bargain.
The material body and mind are bad bargains for the spiritual living entity. The living 
entity has different functions in the living world, but this material world is dead. As 
long as the living spiritual sparks manipulate the dead lumps of matter, the dead 
world appears to be a living world. But actually it is the living souls, the parts and 
parcels of the Supreme Living Being, which move the world. The dhéras are those who 
have come to know all these facts by hearing of them from superior authorities, and 
who have realized them by following the regulative principles.
To follow the regulative principles, one must go under the shelter of a bona fide 
spiritual master. The transcendental message comes down from the spiritual master to 
the disciple with the regulative principles, and not in the hazardous way of nescient 
education. One can become a dhéra only by such submissive hearing from the 
Personality of Godhead. The perfect disciple must be like Arjuna, and the spiritual 
master must be as good as the Lord Himself. These are the processes of learning vidyã, 
knowledge, from the dhéra, the undisturbed.
Adhéra, one who has not undergone the training of a dhéra, cannot be an instructive 
leader. Modern politicians who pose themselves as dhéras are themselves adhéras. One 
cannot expect perfect knowledge from them. They are busy with their own 
remuneration in dollars and pounds. How can they lead the mass of people to the 
right path of self realization? One must hear submissively from the dhéra in order to 
get actual education in life.

Mantra Eleven
vidyäà cävidyäà ca yas
tad vedobhayaà saha
avidyayä måtyuà tértvä
vidyayämåtam açnute
vidyãm—knowledge in fact; ca—and; avidyãm—nescience; ca—and; yaù—a person; tad
— that; veda—knows: ubhayam—both; saha—simultaneously; avidyayã- culture of 
nescience; måtyum—repeated death; tértvä— transcending; vidyayã—by culture of 
knowledge; amåtam— deathlessness; açnute—enjoys.
TRANSLATION
Only one who can learn the process of nescience and that of transcendental 
knowledge side by side can tran- scend the influence of repeated birth and death, 
and enjoy the full blessings of immortality.
PURPORT
Since the start of the material world everyone is trying for a permanent life, but the 
law of Nature is so cruel that no one has avoided the hand of death. No one wants to 
die. That is a practical fact. Nor does anyone want to become old or diseased. But the 
law of Nature does not allow anyone immunity from death, old age or disease. The 
advancement of material knowledge has not solved these problems of life. Material 
science can discover the nuclear bomb to accelerate the process of death, but it cannot 
discover anything which can protect man from the cruel hands of death, disease and 
old age.
From the Puräëas we learn of the activities of Hiraëyakaçipu: This king was materially 
very much advanced, and by his material acquisitions, by the strength of his

nescience, he wanted to conquer death. He underwent a type of meditation so severe 
that all the planetary systems became disturbed by his mystic powers. He forced the 
creator of the universe, the demigod named Brahmã, to come down to him, and then 
he asked him for the benediction of becoming an amara, one who does not die. 
Brahmã refused to award this, however, because even he, the material creator, who 
has command over all the planets, is not himself an amara. He has a long duration of 
life, as is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, but that does not mean that he doesn't have 
to die.
Hiraëya means gold, and kaçipu means soft bed. This gentleman was interested in 
these two things, money and women, and he wanted to enjoy this sort of life by 
becoming artificially immortal. He asked Brahmã many things indirectly in hopes of 
fulfilling his desire to become an amara. He asked benediction that he might not be 
killed by any man, animal, god, or any living being within the categories of the 
8,400,000 species. He also asked that he might not die on the land, in the air, in the 
water or by any weapon whatsoever. So on and on, Hiraëyakaçipu thought foolishly 
that this would guarantee him against death. But in the end, although Brahmã granted 
him all these benedictions, he was killed by the Personality of Godhead in the Form of 
a half-man, half-lion. And no weapon was used to kill him except the nails of the 
Lord. He was killed on the lap of the wonderful Living Being Who was beyond his 
conception.
The whole point here is that even Hiraëyakaçipu, the most powerful of materialists, 
could not become deathless by his various plans. What, then, will be accomplished by 
the tiny Hiraëyakaçipus of today, who make plans which are throttled from moment 
to moment?
Çré Éçopaniñad instructs us not to make one-sided attempts to win the struggle for 
existence. Everyone is struggling hard for existence, but the law of material Nature is 
so hard and fast that it does not allow any to surpass it. In order to have permanent 
life one must be prepared to go back to Godhead.
This process of going back to Godhead is a different branch of knowledge, and it has 
to be learnt from the revealed Vedic Scriptures, such as the Upaniñads, Vedãnta, 
Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, etc. Therefore, to become happy in this life and to 
get a permanent blissful life after leaving this material body, one must take to this 
sacred literature and obtain transcendental knowledge. The conditioned living being 
has forgotten his eternal relation with God, and he has mistakenly accepted the 
temporary place of birth as all-in-all. The Lord has kindly delivered the above-
mentioned Scriptures in India and other Scriptures in other countries to remind the 
forgetful human being that his home is not here in this material world. The living

being is a spiritual entity, and he can only be happy by returning to his spiritual home, 
with the Godhead.
The Personality of Godhead, from His Kingdom, sends His bona fide servants to 
propagate this mission of going back to Godhead, and sometimes He comes Himself to 
do this work. All living beings are His beloved sons, His parts and parcels, and 
therefore God is more sorry than we ourselves are for the sufferings which we are 
constantly undergoing in the material condition. The miseries of the material world 
are also indirect reminders of our incompatibility with dead matter, and intelligent 
living entities generally take note of these reminders, and side by side engage 
themselves in the culture of vidyã, or transcendental knowledge. Human life is the 
best opportunity for the culture of spiritual knowledge, and the human being who 
does not take advantage of this opportunity in human life is called a narãdhama, the 
lowest of human beings.
The path of avidyã, or material advancement of knowledge for sense gratification, 
means repetition of death and repetition of birth also. The living entity, as he is 
spiritually, has no birth or death. Birth and death are concerned with the outward 
covering of the spirit soul, the body. This is compared with the putting on and taking 
off of outward garments. Foolish human beings who are grossly absorbed in the 
culture of avidyã, nescience, do not mind this cruel process, but, being enamored of 
the beauty of the illusory energy, they do the same things over repeatedly, without 
learning any lesson from the law of Nature.
The culture of vidyã or transcendental knowledge is essential for the human being. 
Unrestricted sense enjoyment in the diseased, material condition of the senses must be 
restricted as far as possible. Unrestricted sense enjoyment in this bodily condition is 
the path of ignorance and death. The living entities are not without spiritual senses. 
Every living being in his original spiritual form has all the senses which are now 
material, covered by the body and the mind. Activities of the material senses are 
perverted reflections of spiritual pastimes. The engagement of the spirit soul under the 
material covering is the diseased condition of the soul. And real sense enjoyment is 
possible when the disease is removed. In our pure spiritual form, freed from all 
material contamination, pure enjoyment of the senses is possible. The aim of human 
life should, therefore, not be perverted sense enjoyment, but should be to cure the 
material disease. Aggravating the material disease is no sign of knowledge. It is the 
sign of culturing avidyã, ignorance.
The degree of a fever must not be increased from 105 to 107 for good health. The 
degree is to be reduced to the normal state of 98.6. That should be the aim of human 
life. The modern trend of material civilization is to increase the degree of the feverish

material condition, which has therefore reached the point of 107 in the form of atomic 
energy, with the foolish politicians crying that at any moment the world may go to 
hell. That is the result of the advancement of material knowledge, and of the neglect of 
the most important part of life, the culture of spiritual knowledge. Here is a warning 
in Çré Éçopaniñad that we must not follow such a dangerous path leading to death. On 
the contrary, we must side by side develop the culture of spiritual knowledge so that 
we may become completely free from the cruel hands of death.
This does not mean that all civic activities for the maintenance of the body should be 
stopped. There is no question of stopping activities, as there is no question of wiping 
out one's temperature altogether when trying to recover from a disease. We have 
already tried to explain the matter by the expression "to make the best use of a bad 
bargain." The culture of spiritual knowledge has to be done with the help of this body 
and mind, and therefore maintenance of the body and mind is required if we are to 
reach our goal. The normal temperature should be maintained at 98.6 degrees, but it 
should not be foolishly increased to the degree of 107. The great sages and saints of 
India wanted to maintain the normal temperature by a balanced program of material 
and spiritual knowledge. They never allowed the misuse of human intelligence for 
diseased sense gratification.
Human activities diseased by a temperament of sense gratification have been regulated 
in the Vedas under the principles of Salvation. This system is found in four divisions: 
religion, economic development, sense gratification and salvation. At the present 
moment the people have no interest either in religion or salvation. They have only one 
aim in life, sense gratification, and in order to fulfill this end they have different plans 
for economic development.
Misguided man thinks that religion should be maintained for its contribution to 
economic development, and that economic development is required for sense 
gratification. And in order to guarantee further sense gratification after death, in 
heaven, there is some system of religious observances. But this is not the purpose of 
the principles of salvation. The path of religion is actually for self realization. 
Economic development is required just to maintain the body in a sound, healthy 
condition. A man should live in a healthy condition of life with a sound mind just to 
realize vidyã, true knowledge, which is the aim of human life. This life is not meant 
for working like an ass or for the culture of avidyã or for sense gratification.
The path of vidyã is most perfectly presented in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The 
Bhägavatam directs a human being to utilize his life in the matter of enquiring about 
the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth is realized step by step as Brahman, 
Paramãtman, and, at last, Bhagavãn, the Personality of Godhead. This Absolute Truth

is realized by the broadminded man who has attained knowledge and detachment, 
having followed the 18 principles of the Bhagavad-gétä described above. The central 
point in these 18 principles is the attainment of transcendental devotional service to 
the Personality of Godhead. Therefore it is recommended for all classes of men to 
learn the art of devotional service to the Lord.
Religiousness, economic development and sense gratification without the aim of 
attaining devotional service to the Lord are all different forms of nescience, as will be 
shown hereafter in Çré Éçopaniñad. Thus, to culture vidyã especially in this age, one 
must always hear and chant and worship with concentrated attention, targetted on the 
Personality of Godhead, Who is the Lord of the transcendentalists.

Mantra Twelve
andhaà tamaù praviçanti
ye 'sambhütim upäsate
tato bhüya iva te tamo
ya u sambhütyäm ratäù.
andham—ignorance; tamaù—darkness; praviçanti—do enter into; ye—those; 
asambhütim— demigods; upãsate—do worship; tataù—more than that; bhüyaù—again; 
iva—like that; to— who; tamaù—darkness; ye— those; u—also; sambhütyäm—in the 
Absolute; ratäù—engaged.
TRANSLATION
Those who are engaged in the worship of demigods enter into the darkest region of 
ignorance, and still more so do the worshipers of the Absolute.
PURPORT
The Sanskrit word asambhüti means those who have no independent existence. 
Sambhüti is the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Who is absolutely independent of 
everything. In the Bhagavad-gétä, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, 
positively describes Himself in the following words: "I am the Supreme Cause of the 
powers delegated to the demigods, the great sages and the mystics. And because these 
are endowed with limited powers, it is very difficult for them to know how I appear 
Myself, by My own internal potency, in the form of a man."
All philosophers and great åñis, or mystics, try to distinguish the Absolute from the 
relative by their tiny brain power. However, this can only help them to reach the point 
of negating relativity, without realizing any positive trace of the Absolute. Definition 
of the Absolute by negation is not a complete concept. Such negative definitions lead

one to create a concept of his own, and one then imagines that the Absolute must be 
formless and without qualities. But these negations are simply the opposite numbers 
of the relative forms and qualities, and are themselves therefore relative. By such a 
concept of the Absolute one can at the utmost reach to the impersonal effulgence of 
God, known as Brahman; but one cannot make further progress to the stage of 
Bhagavãn, the Personality of Godhead.
Such mental speculators do not know that Kåñëa is the Absolute Personality of 
Godhead, and that the impersonal Brahman is the glaring effulgence of His 
transcendental body, while Paramãtman, the Supersoul, is His all-pervading 
representation. They do not know that Kåñëa has His eternal Form, with 
transcendental qualities of eternal bliss and knowledge. The dependent demigods and 
great sages imperfectly realize Him as one of the powerful demigods, but they consider 
that the Brahman effulgence is the ultimate Absolute Truth. Kåñëa’s devotees, however
—who by dint of their unalloyed devotion surrender unto Him—can know that He is 
the Absolute Person, and that everything emanates from Him only. Such devotees 
continuously render loving service unto Kåñëa, the Fountainhead of everything.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is also said that only bewildered persons, driven by a strong 
desire for sense gratification, worship the demigods for the satisfaction of temporary 
problems. A temporary relief from a certain difficulty by the grace of some demigod is 
the demand of less intelligent persons. The living being is in the material 
entanglement, and he has to be relieved from material bondage entirely to obtain 
permanent relief on the spiritual plane, where eternal bliss, life and knowledge exist.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the worshipers of the demigods can go to the 
planets of the respective demigods. The Moon worshipers can go to the Moon, the Sun 
worshipers can go to the planet of the Sun, and so on. Modern scientists are now 
trying to go to the Moon with the help of rockets, which is not really a new attempt. 
The human being with his advanced consciousness is naturally inclined to travel in 
outer space and to reach other planets, either by sputniks, by mystic powers, or by 
worshiping the particular predominating deity on that planet. In the Vedic scriptures 
it is said that one can reach other planets in any of the ways mentioned above, most 
generally by worshiping the demigod presiding over the particular planet. But these 
planets are temporary residential places; the only permanent planets are the 
Vaikuëöha-lokas, found in the spiritual sky, where the Personality of Godhead 
predominates. The Bhagavad-gétä confirms this as follows:
Even though one may rise to the highest planet, Brahmä-loka, one has to come back again. 
But if someone attains to Me (in the spiritual world), he doesn't have to take birth again.

Çré Éçopaniñad suggests that one remains in the darkest region by hovering over the 
material planets, whatever his means may be. The whole universe is covered by the 
gigantic material elements, just like a coconut ball half-filled with water. As it is 
airtight and fully covered, the darkness within is dense, and therefore planets like the 
Sun and the Moon are required to illuminate the inside of the universe. Outside the 
universe there is a vast expansion of unlimited Brahma-jyoti space, full of Vaikuëöha-
lokas.
The biggest and the highest planet in the Brahma-jyoti is the Kåñëa-loka, or Goloka 
Våndävana, where the Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, resides. Lord Çré Kåñëa never 
quits this Kåñëa-loka where He dwells with His eternal associates, and yet He is 
omnipresent throughout the complete material and spiritual cosmic situation. This 
fact has already been explained in Mantra Four of Çré Éçopaniñad. The Lord is present 
everywhere, as the Sun is. A man can move through space with the highest possible 
speed, and still he will find that the Sun is there, although the Sun is situated in its 
own undeviating orbit.
The problem of life cannot be solved by going to the Moon. There are many pseudo- 
worshipers who become religionists for the sake of name and fame only. Such pseudo- 
religionists do not wish to get out of this universe and reach the spiritual sky. They 
want only to maintain the status quo in the material world, under the garb of 
worshiping the Lord. And the atheists and the impersonalists lead such foolish 
pseudo-religionists into the darkest regions by preaching the cult of atheism. The 
atheist directly denies the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the 
impersonalist supports the atheist by preaching the impersonal existence of the 
Supreme Lord. As far as we have gone through Çré Éçopaniñad, we have not come 
across any mantra where the Personality of Godhead is denied. It is said that He can 
run faster than anyone. Those who are running after the planets are certainly persons, 
and if the Lord can run faster than all of them, why should He be considered 
impersonal? The impersonal conception of the Supreme Lord is another face of 
ignorance, due to an imperfect vision of the Absolute Truth.
And so the ignorant pseudo-religionists, the manufacturers of so-called incarnations— 
directly violating the Vedic injunctions—are liable to enter into the darkest region of 
the universe, on account of their business of misleading those who follow them. These 
impersonalists generally pose themselves as incarnations of God to the foolish, who 
have no knowledge of the Vedic wisdom. And if such foolish men have any knowledge 
at all, it is more dangerous in their hands than ignorance itself. Such impersonalists do 
not even worship the demigods as is recommended in the scriptures.

In the scriptures there is a recommendation for worshiping the demigods under 
different circumstances, but at the same time it is said that there is no real need for 
this. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is clearly stated that the results of worshiping the 
demigods are not permanent. The whole material world is not permanent, and 
therefore anything achieved here within the darkness of material existence is also 
impermanent. The problem, then, is how to obtain real and permanent life.
The Lord states that as soon as one reaches Him by devotional service—which is the 
one and only way to approach the Personality of Godhead—there is complete freedom 
from the bondage of birth and death. In other words, the path of salvation, or getting 
out of the material clutches, fully depends on the principles of knowledge and 
detachment. And the pseudo-religionists have neither knowledge nor detachment 
from material affairs. Most of them want to continue in the golden shackles of material 
bondage, under the shadow of altruistic and philanthropic activities, and in the name 
of religious principles. By false religious sentiments they present a make-show of 
devotional service, indulging in all sorts of immoral principles, and still pass as 
spiritual masters and devotees of God. Such violators of religious principles have no 
respect for the authoritative ãcãryas, the holy teachers in the strict disciplic 
succession; and to mislead the people in general they themselves become so- called 
ãcãryas, without even following the principles of the ãcãryas.
These rogues in human society are the most dangerous elements and, for want of 
religious government, they pass on without being punished by the law of the state. 
They cannot, however, avoid the law of the Supreme, Who has clearly declared in the 
Bhagavad- gétä that these envious demons, in the garb of religious propagandists, shall 
be thrown down into the darkest region of hell. It is confirmed in Çré Éçopaniñad that 
the pseudo-religionists are heading toward the most obnoxious place in the universe 
after finishing with the spiritual mastership business, which is simply for the matter of 
sense gratification.

Mantra Thirteen
anyad evähuù sambhaväd
anyad ähur asambhavät
iti çuçruma dhéräëäà
ye nas tad vicacakñire.
anyat—different; eva—certainly; ähuù—it is said; sambhavãt—by worshiping the 
Supreme Lord, the Cause of all causes; sambhavät—different; ähuù—it is said; 
asambhavät—by worshiping what is not the Supreme; iti—thus; çuçruma—I heard it; 
dhéräëäm—from the undisturbed authorities; ye—those; naù—unto us; tat—about that 
subject matter; vicacakñire —perfectly explained.
TRANSLATION
It is said that one result is obtained by worshiping the Supreme Cause of all causes, 
and that another is obtained by worshiping what is not supreme. All this was heard 
from the undisturbed authorities who clearly explained it.
PURPORT
In this mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad the system of hearing from the undisturbed authorities 
is confirmed. Unless one hears from the bona fide ãcãrya, who is never disturbed by 
the changes of the material world, one cannot have the real key to transcendental 
knowledge. The bona fide spiritual master, who has also heard the Çruti mantras, or 
Vedic knowledge, from his undisturbed ãcãrya, never manufactures or presents 
anything which is not mentioned in the Vedic literature. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is 
clearly said that the worshipers of the Pitås, or forefathers, reach the forefathers, the 
gross materialists who make plans to remain here in this world remain here, and the 
devotees of the Lord, who worship none but Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Cause of all 
causes, reach Him in His Abode in the spiritual sky.

Here also in Çré Éçopaniñad, it is said that different results are achieved by different 
modes of worship. If we worship the Supreme Lord, certainly we will reach the 
Supreme Lord in His eternal Abode, and if we worship demigods like the Sun and 
Moon, we can reach these respective planets without any doubt. And if we want to 
remain here on this wretched planet with our planning commissions and our stop-gap 
political adjustments, we can certainly do that also.
Nowhere in authentic scriptures is it said that whatever you do and whatever you 
worship you will ultimately reach the same goal. Such foolish theories are offered by 
self-made masters who have no connection with the paramparã, the bona fide system 
of disciplic succession. The bona fide spiritual master cannot say that for everyone 
who has his own mode of worship—be it worship of the demigods or of the Supreme
—it leads to the same goal. For a common man it is very easy to understand that a 
person starting by train from Bombay can reach the destination for which he has 
purchased his ticket, and nowhere else. A person who has purchased a ticket for 
Calcutta can reach Calcutta. But contemporary so- called masters preach that, 
whatever spiritual ticket you may purchase, it will take you to the Supreme Goal. Such 
mundane and compromising offers attract many foolish creatures to become puffed up 
with their manufactured methods of spiritual realization, but the Vedic instruction 
doesn't uphold them. Unless one has received knowledge from the bona fide spiritual 
master—one who is in the recognized line of disciplic succession—one cannot have 
the real thing as it is. The Bhagavad-gétä says:
Thus, O chastiser of the foe, the yoga principles [of the Gétä] were known to the great kings. 
But, the paramparã system being broken, these principles appear now to be lost.
When Lord Çré Kåñëa was present in this world, the bhakti-yoga principles defined in 
the Bhagavad-gétä had become distorted, and so the Lord had to re-establish the 
disciplic system, beginning with Arjuna, who was the most confidential friend and 
devotee of the Lord. The Lord clearly said to Arjuna that it was because he was His 
devotee and friend that the principles of the Gétä were understandable to him. In other 
words, no one can understand the Gétä who is not a devotee and friend of the Lord. 
This means that only one who follows the path of Arjuna can understand the Gétä.
At the present moment there are many interpreters of this sublime dialogue who have 
nothing to do with Arjuna or Lord Krsna. They interpret the verses of the Bhagavad-
gétä in their own ways, and postulate all sorts of rubbish in the name of the Gétä. Such 
interpreters believe neither in Çré Kåñëa nor in His eternal Abode. So, then, what can 
they explain about the Bhagavad-gétä?

The Gétä clearly says that only those who have lost their senses worship the demigods. 
Kåñëa ultimately advises that one should give up all other ways and modes of worship, 
and fully surrender unto Him only. Those persons who are cleansed of all sinful 
reactions can have such unflinching faith in the Supreme Lord. Others will continue 
hovering over the material sphere with their paltry ways of worship, and thus will be 
misled from the real path, under the false impression that all paths lead to the same 
goal.
In this mantra the Sanskrit word sambhavãt, worship of the Supreme Cause, is very 
significant. Lord Kåñëa is the Original Personality of Godhead, and everything that 
exists has emanated from Him. In the Gétä the Lord explains Himself. He says there 
that He is the Creator of everyone, including Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva. And because 
these three principal deities of the material world are created by the Lord, He is the 
Creator of all that exists in the material and spiritual worlds.
In the Atharva Veda it is similarly said that One Who existed before the creation of 
Brahmã and One Who enlightened Brahmã with Vedic knowledge, is Lord Çré Kåñëa. 
"The Supreme Person desired to create the living entities, and thus Näräyaëa created 
all the beings. From Näräyaëa, Brahmã was born. Näräyaëa created all the Prajãpatis. 
Näräyaëa created Indra. Näräyaëa created the eight Vasus. Näräyaëa created the 
eleven Rudras. Näräyaëa created the twelve Ãdityas." This Näräyaëa being the plenary 
manifestation of Lord Kåñëa, Näräyaëa and Kåñëa are one and the same.
There are later readings also which say that the same Supreme Lord is the Son of 
Devaké. His childhood with Devaké and Vasudeva and His identity with Näräyaëa have 
also been confirmed by Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya, even though Çaìkarä does not belong to 
the Vaiñëava, or personalist, cult. There are still other readings, also in the Atharva 
Veda, such as this: "Only Nãrãyana existed in the beginning, and there was no 
existence of Brahmã or Çiva, nor of Agni, the fire, nor of water. There were no stars, 
there was no Sun, no Moon. He does not remain alone. He creates as He desires."
In the Mokña-dharma it is said: "I created the Prajãpatis and the Rudras. They have not 
complete knowledge of Me because they are also covered by My illusory energy.
In the Varäha Puräëa it is said: "Näräyaëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and 
from Him the four-headed Brahmã became manifested, as also did Rudra, who later 
became omniscient."
Thus all Vedic literature will confirm this view that Näräyaëa or Kåñëa is the Cause of 
all causes. In the Brahma-saàhitä also it is said that the Supreme Lord is Çré Kåñëa. He 
is "Govinda," the Delighter of every living being, and He is the Primeval Cause of all

causes. The really learned person will know all this by the evidence of great sages and 
the Vedas, and will thus decide to worship Lord Krsna as all-in-all.
Persons are called buddha, or really learned, who fasten themselves only to the 
worship of Çré Kåñëa. This conviction can be established when one hears the 
transcendental message from the undisturbed ãcãrya, with faith and love. One who 
has no faith in, or love for, Lord Kåñëa cannot be convinced of this simple truth. Such 
faithless persons are described in the Bhagavad-gétä as müdhas, foolish as the ass. It is 
said that the müdhas deride the Personality of Godhead because they don't have 
complete knowledge from the undisturbed ãcãrya. One who is disturbed by the 
whirlpool movements of the material energy is not qualified to become an ãcãrya.
Before hearing the Gétä, Arjuna was disturbed by this whirlpool--the reaction of 
family, society and community affection—and thus he wanted to become a 
philanthropist and a nonviolent man of the world. But when he became buddha, by 
hearing the Vedic knowledge of the Bhagavad-gétä from the Supreme Person, he 
changed his decision and became a worshiper of Lord Çré Kåñëa, Who had Himself 
designed the Battle of Kurukñetra. Arjuna worshiped the Lord by fighting with his so-
called relatives, and thus became a pure devotee of the Lord. Such achievements are 
possible only by worshiping the real Kåñëa and not by worshiping some fabricated 
"Kåñëa" inaugurated by foolish men who are without knowledge of the intricacies of 
the science of Kåñëa described in the Gétä and in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam.
According to the Vedãnta-sütra, the Sambhüta is the source of birth and sustenance, 
and the reservoir after annihilation. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam, the natural commentary 
upon the Vedãnta-sütras by the same author, comments that the source of all 
emanations is not a dead stone, but is abhijïah, or fully conscious. Therefore, the 
Primeval Lord Çré Kåñëa says in the Gétä that He is fully conscious of the past, the 
present and the future: and no one, including demigods such as Çiva and Brahmã, 
knows Him fully. Those who are disturbed by the tides of material existence cannot 
know Him fully. Such half-educated spiritual masters try to make some compromise, 
and make the mass of human beings the object of worship. They do not know that 
such worship of the masses is not possible, nor are the masses perfect. This is 
something like pouring water on the leaves of the tree, instead of watering the root. 
The natural process of worship is to pour water on the root of the tree from which the 
leaves grow. But today's disturbed leaders become more attracted by the leaves than 
the root, and therefore, in spite of perpetually watering the leaves, all is drying up for 
want of nourishment.
Çré Éçopaniñad advises us to pour water on the root, the Source of all germination. 
Worshiping the mass population by rendering bodily service which can never be

perfect is less important than service to the soul. The soul is the root generating 
different types of bodies in terms of the law of karma, or material reaction. To serve 
only the human being by medical aids, social amenities and educational facilities, 
while cutting the throats of poor animals in slaughterhouses, does not add up to any 
valid service to the living beings.
The living being is perpetually suffering from the material disease of birth, death, old 
age and disease, in different types of body. The human form of life is a chance to get 
out of this entanglement of material existence. This can be done simply by re-
establishing the lost relationship of the living entity with the Supreme Lord. And the 
Lord comes personally to teach us this philosophy of surrender unto the Supreme, the 
Sambhütam. Real service to humankind is to teach surrender unto the Supreme Lord, 
and to worship Him only, with full love and energy. That is the instruction of Çré 
Éçopaniñad in this mantra.
The simple way to worship the Supreme Lord in this age of disturbance is to hear and 
chant about His great activities. The mental speculators, however, think of the 
activities of the Lord as imaginary, and therefore they refrain from any such hearing 
process, and invent some jugglery of words, without any substance, to divert the 
attention of the poor innocent mass of people. Instead of hearing the activities of Lord 
Kåñëa, they prefer to advertise themselves by inducing their followers to sing about 
the pseudo-spiritual master. In modern times, the number of such pretenders has 
increased in considerable numbers, and it has become a problem for the pure devotees 
of the Lord to save the mass of people from the unholy propaganda of these 
pretenders and imitation incarnations of God.
The Upaniñads indirectly draw our attention to the Primeval Lord Sri Çré Kåñëa, and 
the Bhagavad-gétä, which is the summary of all Upaniñads, directly points out Çré 
Kåñëa. One should, therefore, hear about Kåñëa as He is in the Gétä or in the Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, and that will gradually help him in cleansing his mind of all 
contaminated things. The Bhägavatam says: "By hearing the activities of the Lord, one 
draws the attention of the Lord towards the devotee. And the Lord, being situated in 
the heart of every living being, helps the devotee by giving him proper direction.” The 
Bhagavad-gétä also confirms this.
This inner direction by the Lord cleanses the heart of the devotee of all dirty things 
which are produced by the material modes of passion and ignorance. The non-
devotees are under the direction of passion and ignorance. By passion one cannot 
become detached from material affinity, and by ignorance one cannot know what he 
actually is, and what the Lord is. Thus, in the state of passion, there is no chance for 
self realization however much one may play the false part of a religionist. For a

devotee, by the grace of the Lord, the modes of passion and ignorance are removed, 
and he at once becomes situated in the quality of goodness, the sign of a perfect 
Brãhmana. This stage of brãhminical qualification can be earned by anyone and 
everyone, provided he follows the path of devotional service under the guidance of a 
bona fide spiritual master. The Bhägavatam says that any lowborn living entity can be 
made purified under the guidance of a pure devotee of the Lord, because the Lord is 
so extraordinarily powerful.
The first sign of brãhminical qualification is that the candidate becomes happy, and 
becomes enthusiastic in the matter of devotional service to the Lord. This unveils 
before him, automatically, all about the science of God. And, thus knowing the 
science of God, he gradually becomes loosened from his material attachments, and his 
doubtful mind becomes crystal clear, by the grace of the Lord. In this stage only can 
one become a liberated soul and see the Lord in every step of life. That is the 
perfection of sambhavãt as described in this mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad.

Mantra Fourteen
sambhütià ca vinäçaà ca
yas tad vedobhayaà saha
vinäçena måtyuà tértvä
sambhütyämåtam açnute.
sambhütim—the eternal Personality of Godhead, His transcendental Name, Form, 
Pastimes, Qualities, Paraphernalia, and the variegatedness of His abode, etc; ca—and; 
vinäçam—and the temporary material manifestation of demigods, man, animals, etc., 
along with their false name, fame, etc.; ca—also; yaù—as they are; tad—that; veda—
knows; ubhayam—both; saha —along with; vinäçena—everything liable to be 
vanquished; måtyum—death; tértvä— surpassing; sambhütyã—in the eternal Kingdom 
of God; amåtam—deathlessness; açnute— enjoys.
TRANSLATION
One should know perfectly well about the Personality of Godhead and His 
transcendental Name, as well as the temporary material creation with its temporary 
demigods, men and animals. When one knows these, he surpasses death, and the 
ephemeral cosmic manifestation with it, and in the eternal Kingdom of God he 
enjoys his eternal life of bliss and knowledge.
PURPORT
Human civilization, by its so-called advancement of knowledge, has created many 
material things, including space capsules and atomic energy. But it has failed to create

a situation in which man need not die, take his birth again, become old, or suffer from 
diseases. Whenever these questions are raised by an intelligent man before a so-called 
scientist, the scientist very cleverly replies that material science is progressing, and 
that it will ultimately be possible to render man deathless and ageless. Such answers 
by material scientists prove their gross ignorance of material Nature. In material 
Nature everything is under the stringent laws of matter, and must pass through six 
stages of existence: birth, growth, duration of life, transformation, deterioration, and 
death at last. Nothing that is in contact with material Nature can be beyond the above-
mentioned six laws of existence, and therefore no one, whether demigod, man, 
animal, or tree, can survive forever here in the material world.
The duration of life may vary in different species. Lord Brahmã, the chief living being 
within this material world, may continue his life for millions and millions of years, 
while the minute germs may live just for some hours; that does not matter. No one in 
this material world can survive eternally. Things here are born or created under 
certain conditions, they stay for some time, and, if they have life then they grow, 
create generations, then dwindle gradually, and at last are annihilated. By that law 
even the Brahmãs (there are millions of Brahmãs in different universes—each one 
bigger than the last) are all liable to death, either today or tomorrow. Therefore, the 
whole material world is called Martya-loka, the place of death.
The material scientists and politicians are trying to make this place deathless because 
they have no information of the deathless spiritual nature, due to their ignorance of 
the Vedic literature. The Vedic literature is full of knowledge matured by experience. 
But modern man is averse to receive knowledge from the Vedas, Puräëas, and other 
scriptures.
In the Viñëu Puräëa we have information that Lord Viñëu, the Personality of Godhead, 
possesses different energies, known as parã, superior, and aparã, or avidyã—inferior. 
The material energy in which we are at present involved is called the avidyã, inferior, 
energy; and the material creation is made possible by such energy. But there is 
another, superior energy called the parã-çakti, where everything is different from this 
material inferior Nature. That nature is the eternal or deathless creation of the Lord.
All the material planets—upper, lower and intermediate, including the Sun, Moon and 
Venus—are scattered over the universe. These planets exist only during the lifetime of 
Brahmã. Some lower planets, however, are vanquished after the end of one day of 
Brahmã, and they are again recreated during the next daytime of Brahmã. Time 
calculation on the upper planets is different from that of ours. One of our years is 
equal to twenty-four hours, or one day and night, on many of the upper planets. The 
four ages of Earth (Satya, Tretã, Dvãpara, Kali) make a duration of twenty-two

thousand years and five months in terms of the time of these upper planets. Such a 
length of time multiplied by one thousand is one day of Brahma, and one night of 
Brahmã is the same. With such days and nights accumulating into months and years, 
Brahmã's life is estimated at one hundred years. And at the end of his life, the 
complete universal manifestation becomes vanquished.
The living beings residing in the Sun and Moon, as well as those in the Martya-loka 
system—which includes this Earth and many planets below the Earth—are all merged 
into devastating water during the nighttime of Brahmã. During this time no living 
beings or species of life remain manifested, although spiritually they continue to exist. 
This non- manifested stage is called avyakta. And again, when the entire universe is 
vanquished at the end of Brahmã's lifetime, there is an avyakta state. But beyond these 
two non-manifested states there is another, spiritual atmosphere or nature, where 
there is a great number of spiritual planets, existing eternally even when all the 
planets within this material universe are vanquished.
The cosmic manifestation within the jurisdiction of the various Brahmãs is a display of 
one-fourth the energy of the Lord, and this energy is called inferior. The spiritual 
nature beyond the jurisdiction of Brahmã is called tri-pãda-vibhüti, three-fourths the 
energy of the Lord, and is the superior energy, or parã-prakåti.
The predominating Supreme Person in the spiritual nature is Lord Sri Kåñëa. He can 
be approached only by unqualified devotional service, and not by anything else, such 
as the processes of jïäna (philosophy) and yoga (mysticism), much less that of karma 
(fruitive work). The karmés, or fruitive workers, can elevate themselves to the Svarga-
loka planets, including the Sun and the Moon. Jïänéns and yogés can reach still higher 
planets, such as the Brahmã-loka; and, becoming still more qualified by devotional 
service, they are allowed to enter into the spiritual nature, either in the illuminating 
cosmic atmosphere of the spiritual sky (the Brahman), or on the planets, according to 
qualification. It is certain, however, that no one can enter into the spiritual planets 
called Vaikuëöhas without being trained in devotional service.
On the material planets, everyone from Brahmã down to the ant is trying to lord it 
over material Nature, and this is called the material disease. As long as this material 
disease continues, the living entity has to undergo the process of changing bodies, 
whether in the form of a demigod, a man, or an animal; and ultimately he has to 
endure the unmanifested condition during the two kinds of devastations: the night of 
Brahmã, and at the end of Brahma's life. If we want to cease the process of repeated 
birth and death, and the concomitant factors of old age and disease, then we must try 
to enter into the spiritual planets, and Lord Kåñëa by His plenary expansions is the 
dominating Figure on each and every one of them.

No one can predominate over Kåñëa. And anyone trying to predominate over material 
Nature is called a conditioned soul, being subject to the laws of material Nature, 
suffering the pangs of repeated birth and death. The Lord comes here to re-establish 
the principles of religion, and the basic principle is to develop the attitude of 
surrender toward Him. The Lord teaches this in the last portion of the Bhagavad-gétä, 
but foolish men have tactfully misinterpreted this prime teaching, and have misled the 
people in diverse ways. They have been urged to open hospitals, but are not interested 
in educating themselves to enter into the spiritual kingdom by devotional service. 
They have been taught to take interest only in temporary relief work, which can never 
bring about real happiness for the living entity. They start varieties of public and semi-
governmental institutions for tackling the devastating power of Nature. But they don't 
know how to pacify insurmountable Nature.
Many men are advertised as great scholars of the Bhagavad-gétä, but they overlook the 
factual method presented there to pacify material Nature. Powerful Nature can only be 
pacified by the awakening of God consciousness, as is clearly mentioned in the Gétä.
Çré Éçopaniñad, however, teaches in this mantra that one must know both the sambhüti 
and the vinäça perfectly, side by side. By knowing the vinäça alone—the temporary 
material manifestation—you cannot save anything: In the course of Nature, there is 
devastation at every moment. No one can be saved from these devastations by any 
efforts of hospital- opening. They can be saved only by complete knowledge of the 
eternal life of bliss and awareness. The whole Vedic scheme is meant to educate men 
in this art of achieving eternal life. People are often misguided by other, temporarily 
attractive things based on sense gratification, but that sort of service which thus 
misleads them is most degraded.
You must save your fellow man in the right sense. There is no question of liking or 
disliking the truth. It is there. If you want to be saved from repeated birth and death 
you must take to the devotional service of the Lord. There can be no compromise in 
the matter of necessity.

Mantra Fifteen
hiraëmayena pätreëa
satyasyäpihitaà mukham
tat tvaà püñann apävåëu
satya-dharmäya dåñöaye.
hiranmayena—by effulgence of light; pãtrena—by dazzling covering; satyasya—of the 
Supreme Truth; apihitam—covered; mukham—the face; tat—that covering; tvam—your 
Self; püsan—O the Sustainer; apävåëu- kindly remove; satya—pure; dharmãya—unto 
the devotee; dåñöaye—for exhibiting.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Sustainer of all that lives, Your real face is covered by Your dazzling 
effulgence. Kindly remove that covering and exhibit Yourself to Your pure devotee.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord explains about His Personal rays, called Brahma-jyoti—
the dazzling effulgence of His Personal Form—as follows:
I am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is immortal and imperishable, eternal, the 
constitutional position of ultimate happiness. (Gétä, 14/27)
Brahman, Paramãtman and Bhagavãn are three angles of vision of the same Absolute 
Truth. Brahman is the phase of the Absolute Truth most perceptible to the beginner. 
Paramãtman is the phase of the Absolute Truth for those who have progressed. And 
Bhagavãn is the ultimate realization of the Absolute Truth. This is confirmed in the 
Gétä, where the Lord says that He is the ultimate concept of the Absolute Truth. He is 
the source of Brahma- jyoti, as well as of the all-pervading Paramãtman feature.

As He says that He is the ultimate reservoir of the Brahma-jyoti, or impersonal 
conception of the Absolute Truth, so also He says in the Gétä that there is no need of 
explaining His unlimited potency: it can be summarized in short that, by His one 
plenary portion—the all-pervading Paramãtman—He maintains the complete material 
cosmic creation. And in the Spiritual World also He maintains all manifestations. 
Therefore, in the Çruti mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad, He is addressed as Püñan, the ultimate 
Maintainer.
The Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, is always full with transcendental bliss. When 
He was present at Våndävana in India 5,000 years ago, He always remained in 
transcendental bliss, even from the beginning of His childhood pastimes. The killing 
of varieties of demons, such as Agha, Baka, Pütanã and Pralamba were also pleasure 
excursions for Him. When He was within His village He was enjoying with His 
mother, sisters and friends as the naughty Butter Thief, and everyone of His associates 
was enjoying celestial bliss by His stealing. The Lord is known as the Butter Thief, but 
the term is never used in a derogatory sense. The term Butter Thief, in the case of the 
Lord, is used with the understanding of the pleasure of His pure devotees. Everything 
that was done by the Lord at Våndävana was for the pleasure of His associates there. 
Such manifestations were created by Him to attract the dry speculators in the 
transcendental line, as well as the acrobats of the so-called hatha-yoga system, trying 
to find the Absolute Truth.
Of the childhood play of the Lord with His playmates, the cowherd boys, Çukadeva 
Gosvämé in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam said:
The Personality of Godhead, Who is perceived as the impersonal Brahman of bliss, Who is 
worshiped as the Supreme Lord by the devotees, and Who is considered an ordinary human 
being by the mundane, played with the cowherd boys who had achieved that position after a 
huge accumulation of pious deeds.
Thus the Lord is ever engaged in transcendental loving activities along with His 
spiritual associates in the various relationships of çãnta, calmness, dãsya, servitorship, 
sãkhya, friendship, vãtsãlya, paternal affection, and mãdhurya, conjugal love.
It is said that the Lord never goes out of the Våndävana dhãma, and so it may be asked 
how He manages the affairs of His different creations. This is answered in the Gétä: He 
pervades all the material creation by His plenary part, known as the Puruña 
incarnation. The Lord has nothing to do with material creation, maintenance and 
destruction, but He causes it to be done by His plenary expansion, this Paramãtman or 
Supersoul feature. Every living entity is known as ãtman, soul. The principal Ãtman, 
Who controls them all, is Paramãtman Supersoul.

The whole system of God realization is a great science. The materialists can only 
analyze and meditate on the twenty-four factors of the material creation. They have 
very little information of the Puruña, the Lord. The impersonal transcendentalists are 
simply bewildered by the glaring effulgence of the Brahma-jyoti. If one wants to see 
the Absolute Truth in full, one has to penetrate beyond the twenty-four material 
elements and the glaring effulgence as well. Çré Éçopaniñad hints at this direction, 
praying for removal of the hiraëmaya pãtra, the dazzling covering. Unless this 
covering is removed, and unless one can perceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
as He is, factual realization of the Absolute Truth can never be achieved.
The Paramãtman feature of the Personality of Godhead is one of three plenary 
expansions, collectively called Viñëu-tattva. The Viñëu-tattva within the universe (one 
of the three principal deities—Brahmä, Viñëu and Çiva) is known as the Kñérodaka-çäyé 
Viñëu. He is the all-pervading Paramãtman in each and every individual living entity. 
And the
Garbhodaka-çäyé Viñëu is the collective Supersoul of all living entities. Beyond these 
two there is the Käraëodaka-çäyé Viñëu lying in the Causal Ocean. He is the Creator of 
all the universes. The yoga system teaches the serious student to meet such Viñëu-
tattvas after overcoming the twenty-four material elements of cosmic creation. The 
culture of empiric philosophy helps one to realize the impersonal Brahma-jyoti, which 
is the glaring effulgence of the transcendental body of Lord Çré Kåñëa. This is 
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä as well
as in the Brahma-saàhitä (5/40):
In the millions and millions of universes, there are innumerable planets, each and every one 
of them different from the others by cosmic constitution, and all of them situated in a corner 
of the Brahma-jyoti. This Brahma-jyoti is the Personal ray of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Whom I do worship.
This mantra of the Brahma-saàhitä is the position of factual realization of the Absolute 
Truth, and the Çruti mantra of Çré Éçopaniñad under discussion is a confirmation of this 
mantra as a process of realization. It is a simple prayer to the Lord to remove the 
Brahma-jyoti, so that one can see the real face of God.
Perfect knowledge means to know the root of Brahman. The root of Brahman is Lord 
Çré Kåñëa, and in scriptures such as the Çrémad-Bhägavatam the science of Kåñëa is 
perfectly elaborated. In the Bhägavatam, the author, Çréla Vyäsadeva, has established 
by realization that the Supreme Truth is described either as Brahman, Paramãtman or 
Bhagavãn. But he has never said that the Supreme Truth is anywhere described as jéva,

the ordinary living entity. Therefore the living entity is not the all-powerful Supreme 
Truth. Otherwise, there would be no need of prayer by the entity for the Lord to 
remove the dazzling cover in order to see His real face.
The conclusion is, therefore, that in the absence of potent manifestations of the 
Supreme Truth, the impersonal Brahman is realized. Similarly, when there is 
realization of the material potencies of the Lord, with little or no information of the 
spiritual potency, it is called Paramãtman realization. Therefore, both Brahman and 
Paramãtman realization of the Absolute Truth are partial realizations. But when one 
realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, in full potency after the 
removal of the hiraëmaya-pãtra, as is prayed for in this mantra, then he realizes that 
Vãsudevaù sarvam iti: Lord Çré Kåñëa, known as Vãsudeva, is everything—Brahman, 
Paramãtman and Bhagavãn. He is Bhagavãn, the root, and Brahman and Param-ãtman 
are His branches.
In the Bhagavad-gétä there is a comparative analysis of the three grades of 
transcendentalists, known as jïänéns, the worshipers of the impersonal Brahman, the 
yogés, or worshipers of the Paramãtman feature, and bhaktas, or devotees of Lord Çré 
Kåñëa. It is stated in the Gétä that amongst all types of transcendentalists, one who is a 
jïäné, who has cultured the Vedic knowledge, is supreme. Yet the yogés are still more 
than the jïänéns. The yogés are far superior to fruitive workers as well. And amongst all 
kinds of yogés, "the one who constantly serves the Lord with all his energy is 
topmost."
The summary is that a philosopher is better than a laboring man, and a mystic is far 
superior to a philosopher. And of all the mystic yogis, one who is following bhakti 
yoga, who is constantly engaged in the service of the Lord, is the highest. Çré 
Éçopaniñad directs us toward this perfection of life.

Mantra Sixteen
püñann ekarñe yama sürya präjäpatya
vyüha raçmén samüha
tejo yat te rüpaà kalyäëa-tamaà
tat te paçyämi yo 'säv asau puruñaù so 'ham asmi.
püñan—the Maintainer; ekaåñe—the primeval Philosopher; yama—the regulating 
principal; sürya—the destination of the Süris(great devotees); prãjãpatya—the well-
wisher of the Prajãpatis (progenitors of Mankind); vyüha—kindly arrange; raçmén—the 
rays; samüha— wind up; tejah—effulgence; yat—that; te—your; rüpam—form; kalyãna-
tamam—auspicious; tat—that; te— your; paçyämi —I may see; yaù—one who is; asau
—the sun; asau—that; puruñaù—Personality of Godhead; saù—He; aham—myself; asmi
—I am.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, O primeval Philosopher, Maintainer of the universe, O regulating 
Principle, Destination of the pure devotees, Well-wisher of the progenitors of 
mankind, please remove the effulgence of Your transcendental rays, so that I can 
see Your Form of Bliss. You are the eternal Supreme Personality of Godhead, like 
unto the Sun, as I am.
PURPORT
The Sun and the Sun's rays are one and the same qualitatively. Similarly, the Lord and 
the living entities are one and the same in quality. The Sun is one, but the molecules 
of the Sun's rays are innumerable. The Sun's rays constitute part of the Sun; the Sun 
and the rays conjointly are the complete Sun. Within the Sun planet there is the Sun 
god, and similarly within the supreme spiritual planet, Goloka Våndävana, from which

the effulgent Brahma- jyoti is emanating, there is the eternal Lord, as is stated in the 
Brahma-saàhitä:
The transcendental Abode of Lord Krsna is the land of touchstones, of which the houses are 
built, shaded by desire trees. The Lord is engaged there in herding the surabhi cows, and is 
always served and surrounded by thousands of Goddesses of Fortune, who wait upon Him 
with all respect.
The description of this transcendental Abode of Lord Kåñëa is in the Brahma-saàhitä, 
and the Brahma-jyoti is described there as the supreme rays from that planet, just as 
the Sun's rays come from the Sun globe. Unless one surpasses the Brahma-jyoti glare, 
one cannot have any information of the land of the Lord. The impersonalist 
philosopher, being blinded by the dazzling Brahma-jyoti, cannot realize the factual 
Abode of the Lord, nor His transcendental form. Affected by such a poor fund of 
knowledge, the thinkers cannot understand the all- blissful transcendental form of 
Lord Kåñëa. Çré Éçopaniñad, therefore, offers this prayer to the Lord to remove the 
effulgent rays of the Brahma-jyoti, so that the pure devotee can see His all-blissful 
transcendental form.
By realization of the impersonal Brahma-jyoti, one experiences the auspicious aspect 
of the Supreme; by experience of the Paramãtman, or all-pervading feature of the 
Supreme, one experiences a still more auspicious enlightenment, and by meeting the 
Personality of Godhead face to face, the devotee experiences the most auspicious 
feature of the Supreme. Being addressed as the Philosopher, the Maintainer, the Well-
wisher, and so forth, the Supreme Truth cannot be considered impersonal. That is the 
indication of Çré Éçopaniñad. The word Maintainer is especially significant: The Lord 
maintains His devotees specifically, although He is the Maintainer of one and all 
beings. By surpassing the impersonal Brahma- jyoti, when the devotee sees the 
personal aspect of the Lord and His most auspicious eternal form, then the devotee 
realizes the Absolute Truth in full. Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says in his Bhagavat-sandarbha 
as follows:
The complete conception of the Absolute Truth is realized in the Personality of Godhead, 
because He is Almighty, with full potency in transcendence. In the Brahma-jyoti the full 
potency of the Absolute Truth is not realized, and therefore Brahman realization is only 
partial realization of the Personality of Godhead. O learned sages, the first letter of the word 
Bhagavãn is twice significant: first in the sense of "one who fully maintains," and second in 
the sense of "guardian." The second letter ga—means guide, leader or creator. The letter va 
(or ba) means that every being lives in Him, and He also lives in every being. In other words, 
the transcendental sound Bhagavãn represents the infinite knowledge, potency, energy, 
opulence, strength and influence, all without any tinge of material inebrieties.

The Lord fully maintains His unalloyed devotees, and He guides such devotees 
progressively on the path of devotional perfection. As Leader of His devotees, He 
ultimately awards the desired result of devotional service by giving Himself to His 
devotees. The devotees of the Lord see the Lord eye to eye by the causeless mercy of 
the Lord, and thus the Lord helps His devotees to reach the supermost spiritual 
planet, Goloka Våndävan. As Creator, He can create all the necessary qualifications in 
His devotee so that the devotee can ultimately reach Him. The Lord is the Cause of all 
causes, and there is no cause of Him, for He is the Original Cause. As such He enjoys 
His own Self by manifesting His own internal potency.
The external potency is manifested not exactly by Himself, for He expands Himself as 
the Puruñas, and it is in these forms that He maintains the features of the material 
manifestation. By such expansions does He create, maintain and annihilate the cosmic 
manifestation.
The living entities are also differentiated expansions of His Self, and because some of 
the living entities desire to be lord, imitating the Supreme Lord, He allows them to 
enter into the cosmic creation, with the option of fully utilizing their propensity for 
lording it over. On account of the presence of His parts and parcels, the living entities, 
the whole phenomenal world is stirred into action and reaction. The living entities are 
given full facility to lord it over material Nature, but the ultimate controller is the 
Lord Himself in His plenary feature of Paramãtman, the Supersoul, which is one of the 
Puruñas.
Therefore, there is a gulf of difference between the living entity known as ãtman, and 
the controlling Lord, known as Paramãtman—the soul and the Supersoul. Paramãtman 
is the controller, and ãtman is controlled; therefore they cannot be on the same level. 
The Paramãtman fully cooperates with the ãtman, and thus He is known as the 
constant companion of the living being.
This all-pervading feature of the Lord, Which exists in all circumstances of waking 
and sleeping, and also in potential states, and from Which the jéva-çakti (living force) 
is generated —as both the conditioned and the liberated souls—is known as Brahman.
Thus the Lord is the Origin of both Paramãtman and Brahman, and therefore He is the 
Origin of all living entities, and all else that exists. One who knows this engages 
himself at once in the devotional service of the Lord. Such a pure and fully cognizant 
devotee of the Lord is fully attached to Him in heart and soul, and whenever such a 
devotee assembles with similar devotees, they have no other engagement but to glorify 
the Lord in terms of His transcendental activities. Those who are not as perfect as the 
pure devotees, those who have realized only the Brahman feature or the Paramãtman

feature of the Lord, cannot appreciate the activities of such perfect devotees. But the 
Lord always helps such pure devotees by supplying necessary knowledge within their 
hearts, and by His special favor He dissipates all the darkness of ignorance. This the 
philosophers and yogis cannot imagine, because they more or less depend on their 
own strength. As is stated in the Katha Upaniñad, the Lord can be known only to those 
whom He favors, and not to anyone else. And such special favors are bestowed upon 
His pure devotees only. Çré Éçopaniñad here indicates such favor of the Lord, beyond 
the purview of the Brahma-jyoti.

Mantra Seventeen
väyur anilam amåtam
athedaà bhasmäntaà çaréram
oà krato smara kåtaà smara
krato smara kåtaà smara.
vãyuh—air of life; anilam—total reservoir of air; amåtam—indestructible; atha—now; 
idam- this; bhasmãntam—after being turned into ashes; çaréram—body; oà—O Lord; 
krato—the Enjoyer of all sacrifices; smara—please remember; kåtam—all that has been 
done by me; smara—please remember; krato—the Supreme Beneficiary; smara— please 
remember; kåtam —all that I have done for You; smara—please remember.
TRANSLATION
Let this temporary body be burnt into ashes, and let the air of life be merged with 
the totality of air. Now, O my Lord, please remember all my sacrifices, and because 
You are the ultimate Beneficiary, please remember all that I have done for You.
PURPORT
This temporary material body is certainly a foreign dress. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is 
clearly said that after the destruction of the material body, the living entity is not 
annihilated, nor does he lose his identity. The identity of the living entity is never, 
therefore, impersonal or without form; but on the contrary, it is the material dress 
which is formless, and which takes a shape according to the form of the indestructible 
person. No living entity is originally formless, as is wrongly supposed by persons with 
a poor fund of knowledge. Here also in Mantra Seventeen of Çré Éçopaniñad, the 
principle is supported that the living entity exists after the annihilation of the material 
body.

In the material world there is wonderful workmanship by material Nature in the 
matter of creating different varieties of bodies for the living beings, in terms of their 
propensities for sense gratification. The one who wanted to taste stool is given a 
material body which is quite suitable for eating stool —that of a hog. Similarly, the 
tiger has such a body that it can live by enjoying the blood of other animals, and by 
eating their flesh.
The human being is not meant for eating stool or flesh, because the shape of the teeth 
is different. Nor does he have any desire to taste stool, even in the most aboriginal 
state of life. Human teeth are so made that they can chew and cut fruit and vegetables, 
with two canine teeth so that one can eat flesh also. The material bodies of all animals 
and men are foreign to the living entity, and change according to the desire of the 
being for sense gratification. In this cycle of evolution one changes bodies one after 
another: from aquatic life—when the world was full of water—to vegetable life, from 
vegetable life to worm life, from worm life to bird life, from bird life to animal life, and 
from animal life to the human form.
The highest development of life is this human form when it is possessed of a full sense 
of spiritual knowledge, and the highest development of spiritual sense is described in 
this mantra of the Veda: one should give up this material body to be turned into ashes, 
and allow the living air to merge into the eternal reservoir of air. The living being's 
activities are performed within the body by movements of different kinds of air, and 
this is called, in sum, the präëa-vãyu. The yogis generally study to control the airs of 
the body, and the soul is supposed to rise up from one circle of air to another till it 
rises onto the brahma-randhra, or highest circle of air. Then the perfect yogi can 
transfer himself to any planet he likes. The process is give up body and then enter into 
another body, and the highest perfection of such a bodily change is possible when the 
living entity is able to give up this material body altogether, as is suggested in this 
mantra. He may then enter into the spiritual atmosphere, where he develops a 
completely different quality of body—a spiritual body—which never has to meet 
death or change.
Here in the material world one has to change his body, forced by material Nature on 
account of his different desires for sense gratification. These desires are represented in 
the various species of life, from the germs to the most perfect material bodies, those of 
Brahmã and the demigods. All of these have bodies of matter in different shapes, and 
the intelligent person sees oneness not in the variety of bodies, but in the spiritual 
identity.
The spiritual spark which is the part and parcel of the Supreme Lord is the same either 
in the body of a hog or in the body of a demigod. There are different bodies according

to the pious and vicious activities of the living entity. The human body is highly 
developed, with full consciousness of the constitution of the body; and the most 
perfect man, according to the Vedic scriptures, surrenders unto the Lord after many, 
many births of culturing knowledge. The culture of knowledge reaches perfection 
only when the knower comes to the point of surrendering unto the Supreme Lord, 
called Vãsudeva. But even after attaining knowledge in the matter of one's spiritual 
identity, unless he comes to the point of knowing that the living entities are eternal 
parts and parcels of the Whole, and that they can never become the Whole, one has to 
fall down again into the material atmosphere, even after having become one with the 
Brahma-jyoti.
The Brahma-jyoti emanating from the transcendental body of the Lord is full of 
spiritual sparks. The spiritual sparks being individual identities with the full sense of 
existence, sometimes desire to become the enjoyers of the senses, and thus they are 
given places in the material world to become false lords, under the dictation of the 
senses. This sense of over- lordship is the material disease of the living being, and 
under the spell of such sense enjoyment he transmigrates through the different shapes 
of body manifested in the material world. The sense of becoming one with the 
Brahma-jyoti is not, therefore, mature knowledge. The sense of surrendering unto the 
Lord completely, and developing the sense of spiritual service is the highest 
perfectional stage.
In this mantra the living entity prays to enter into the spiritual Kingdom of God after 
relinquishing the material body and the material air. The devotee prays to the Lord to 
remember his activities and the sacrifices he has performed, now before his material 
body is turned into ashes. This prayer is made at the time of death, with full 
consciousness of his past deeds and of the ultimate goal. One who is completely under 
the rules of material law re- members the heinous activities performed during the 
existence of his material body, and therefore he gets another material body after death. 
The Bhagavad-gétä confirms this truth. It states that at the time of death, the mind 
carries with it the propensities of the dying animal, and the next life is obtained in 
terms of that mental state.
Unlike the simple animals, who have no developed mind, the human being can 
remember the activities of his passing life like dreams at night, and therefore his mind 
remains surcharged with material desires, and he cannot enter into the spiritual 
kingdom with a spiritual body. The devotees, however, by practice of devotional 
service to the Lord, develop a sense of love for Godhead. And even if at the time of 
death a devotee does not remember his godly service, the Lord does not forget him. 
This prayer is to remind the Lord about the devotee's sacrifices, but even if there is no 
reminder, the Lord does not forget the devotional service of the pure devotee.

The Lord clearly describes His intimate relationship with His devotees in the Gétä. 
Srila Bhaktivinode Thãkur explains the Gétä’s verses in this connection:
One should accept a devotee who is on the right path of the saints, even though such a 
devotee may seem of loose character. One should try to understand the real import of 
the words "loose character." A conditioned soul has to act in double functions, namely 
one for the maintenance of the body, and again for self realization. Social status, 
mental development, cleanliness, austerity, nourishment and the struggle for 
existence, are all for the maintenance of the body. And the self realization part of his 
activities is executed in his occupation as a devotee of the Lord, and he performs 
action in that connection also. These two different functions go along parallel lines 
because a conditioned soul cannot give up the maintenance of the body. The 
proportion of activities for maintenance of the body decreases, however, in proportion 
to the increase in devotional service. And as long as the proportion of devotional 
service does not come to the right point, there is a chance for an occasional exhibition 
of worldliness. But it should be noted that such worldliness cannot continue for any 
length of time because, by the grace of the Lord, such imperfections will come to an 
end very shortly. Therefore, the path of devotional service is the only right path. Being 
on the right path, even an occasional occurrence of worldliness does not hamper one 
in the advancement of self realization.
And, in the Gétä Itself, Kåñëa says:
One who is engaged in devotional service, despite the most abominable action, is to be 
considered saintly because he is rightly situated. Very shortly does he become righteous, and 
attain to lasting peace. O son of Kunté, it is My promise that My devotee will never perish. O 
son of Påthã, anyone who will take shelter in Me, whether a woman or a merchant or born in 
a low family, can yet approach the Supreme Destination. How much greater then are the 
Brãhmanas, the righteous, the devotees and saintly kings! In this miserable world, these are 
fixed in devotional service to the Lord. Engage in My service, and surrender unto Me. 
Completely absorbed in Me, surely will you come to Me. (Gétä, IX/30-34)
Such facilities of devotional service are denied the impersonalists because they are 
attached to the Brahma-jyoti feature of the Lord. They can neither penetrate the 
Brahma-jyoti, as is suggested in the previous mantras, nor do they believe in the 
Personality of Godhead. Their business is mostly concerned with semantics, the 
jugglery of words of mental creation. As such the impersonalists pursue fruitless labor, 
as is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä in the Twelfth Chapter.
All the facilities suggested in this of Çré Éçopaniñad can easily be obtained by constant 
contact with the Personal feature of the Absolute Truth. Devotional service to the Lord 
consists essentially of nine transcendental activities on the part of the devotee:

1.
hearing about the Lord, 
2.
glorifying the Lord, 
3.
remembering the Lord, 
4.
serving the Lotus Feet of the Lord, 
5.
worshiping the Lord, 
6.
offering prayers to the Lord, 
7.
serving the Lord, 
8.
friendly association with the Lord, 
9.
surrendering everything unto the Lord. 
These nine principles of devotional service, either in sum total or one by one, can help 
the devotee to be constantly in touch with God, and therefore at the end of life it is 
easy for the devotee to remember the Lord. By adopting only one of these nine 
principles it was possible for the following renowned devotees of the Lord to achieve 
the highest perfection:
1.
By hearing only, Mahãrãj Parékñit, the hero of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, achieved the 
desired result. 
2.
Just by glorifying the Lord, Çukadeva Gosvämé, the speaker of Çrémad-
Bhägavatam, achieved his perfection. 
3.
By praying, Akrüra achieved the desired result. 
4.
By remembering, Prahlãda Mahãrãj achieved the desired result. 
5.
By worshiping, Påthu Mahãrãj achieved perfection. 
6.
By serving the Lotus Feet of the Lord, the Goddess of Fortune, Lakñmé, achieved 
perfection. 
7.
By personal service to the Lord, Hanumän achieved the desired result.

8.
By friendship, Arjuna achieved the result. 
9.
By surrendering everything that he had, Mahãrãj Bali achieved the desired 
result. 
Actually, the explanation of this mantra and of practically all the mantras of the Vedic 
hymns is summarized in the Vedänta-sütras; and then again they are properly 
explained in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the mature fruit of the 
Vedic tree of wisdom. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam this particular mantra is explained in 
the questions and answers of Mahãrãj Parékñit and Çukadeva Gosvämé at the very 
beginning of their meeting. As hearing and chanting of the science of God is the basic 
principle of devotional life, so the complete Bhägavatam is heard by Mahãrãj Parékñit 
and chanted by Gosvämé Çukadeva. Mahãrãj Parékñit enquired from Çukadeva because 
Çukadeva was a greater spiritual master than any great yogi or transcendentalist of his 
time.
Mahãrãj Parékñit’s question was, "What is the duty of every man, specifically at the 
time of death?"
The answer by Gosvämé Çukadeva was that everyone who is desirous of being free 
from all anxieties should always hear about and glorify the Personality of Godhead, 
Who is the Supreme Director of everything, the Extinguisher of all difficulties, and the 
Supersoul of all living entities.
So-called human society is generally engaged at night in the matter of sleeping or sex 
indulgence. And during the daytime men are engaged in earning money as much as 
possible, or else in shopping for the family maintenance. People have very little time 
to talk about the Personality of Godhead or to make any enquiries about Him. They 
have dismissed the case of God's existence in so many ways, especially by declaring 
Him to be impersonal—that is, without any sense perception. But in the Vedic 
literature, whether the Upaniñads or the Vedänta-sütras or the Bhagavad-gétä or the 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, in every scripture it is declared that the Lord is the sentient 
Being, supreme over all other living entities. And His glorious activities are identical 
with Himself. One should therefore not indulge in hearing and speaking of the 
rubbish activities of worldly politicians and the so-called big men of society, but 
should so mold his life that not a second is wasted without engagement in godly 
activities.
Çré Éçopaniñad directs us towards such activities.

Unless one is accustomed to this devotional practice, what will he remember at the 
time of death when the body is dislocated, and how can he pray to the Almighty Lord 
to remember his sacrifices? Sacrifice means sacrificing the interest of the senses. One 
has to learn this art by employing the senses in the service of the Lord during one's 
lifetime, so that one can utilize the result at the time of death.

Mantra Eighteen
agne naya supathä räye asmän
viçväni deva vayunäni vidvän
yuyodhy asmaj juhuräëam eno
bhüyiñöhäà te nama-uktià vidhema.
agne—O my Lord, powerful like the fire; naya—kindly lead me; supathã—in the right 
path; rãye—O the Omnipotent; asmãn—all of us; visvãni—everything including; deva
—O my Lord; vayunãni—all actions; vidvãn—the knower; yuyodhi—get me freed from; 
asmat—ourselves; juhurãnam—all hindrances on the path; enas—all vices; bhüyisthãm
—being fallen on the ground; to—unto you; namaù—of obeisances; uktim—words; 
vidhema— I act.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, powerful as the fire, Omnipotent One, now I do offer You all 
obeisances, falling at Your Feet on the ground. O my Lord, please lead me on the 
right path to reach You, and, as You know all of what I have done in the past, please 
make me free from the reactions to my past sins, so that there will be no hindrance 
to my progress.
PURPORT
This surrendering process and praying for the causeless mercy of the Lord leads the 
devotee progressively on the path of complete self realization. The Lord is addressed 
as the fire because He can burn anything into ashes—including the sins of the 
surrendered soul. As described in the previous mantras, the real or ultimate aspect of 
the Absolute is His feature as the Personality of Godhead. His impersonal feature of 
the Brahma-jyoti is a dazzling covering over the face of the Lord. Fruitive activities, or 
the karma-käëòa path of self realization, is the lowest stage in this endeavor. As soon

as such activities become even slightly deviated from the regulative principles of the 
Vedas, such activities are transformed into vikarma, or acts against the interest of the 
actor. Such vikarma is enacted by the illusioned living entities simply for sense 
gratification, and thus such activities become hindrances on the path of self 
realization.
Self realization is possible for the human form of life, but not for other forms. There 
are 8,400,000 species or forms of life—of which the human form, with the 
qualifications of Brahminical culture, presents the only chance to obtain knowledge of 
the Transcendence. Brahminical culture means truthfulness, controlling the senses, 
forbearance, simplicity, full knowledge, full faith in God—and not to become simply 
proud of one's high parentage. To be the son of a Brãhmana is a chance to become a 
Brãhmana, just as being the son of a big man is a chance to become a big man. But 
such a birthright is not everything, because one still has to attain the Brahminical 
qualifications for himself. As soon as one becomes proud of his birth as the son of a 
Brãhmana and neglects to acquire the qualifications of a real Brãhmana, he at once 
becomes degraded and drawn from the path of self realization, and his life-mission as 
a human being is defeated.
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is assured us by the Lord that the yoga-bhrañöas, or souls fallen 
from the path of self realization, are given a chance for rectification by taking birth 
either in the families of good Brãhmanas or in the families of rich merchants. These 
are the higher chances for self realization: to become a rich man's son, or to become 
the son of a good Brãhmana. And if these chances are misused by the illusioned 
human being, the result is that such a man loses the good chance of human life offered 
by the Almighty Lord.
The regulative principles are such that one who follows them is promoted from the 
plane of fruitive activities to the plane of transcendental knowledge, and from 
transcendental knowledge he becomes perfect, after many, many births, when he 
surrenders unto the Lord. This is the general procedure. But one who surrenders at 
the very beginning, as is mentioned in this mantra, at once surpasses all the stages of 
progression by simple adoption of the devotional attitude. As is stated in the Gétä, the 
Lord at once takes charge of such a surrendered soul and makes him free from all the 
reactions to his sinful acts. In the karma- käëòa activities there are many sinful 
actions, and in jïäna-käëòa, the path of philosophical development, the number of 
such actions is less. But in devotional service to the Lord, the path of bhakti, there is 
practically no chance of sinful reactions. One who is a devotee of the Lord attains all 
the good qualifications of the Lord Himself, not to mention becoming a Brãhmana. A 
devotee automatically attains the qualifications of an expert Brãhmana authorized to 
perform sacrifices, even though such a devotee may not have taken his birth in the

family of a Brãhmana. Such is the omnipotence of the Lord that He can make a man 
born in the family of a Brãhmana as degraded as a lowborn dog-eater, and He can also 
make a lowborn dog-eater more than a qualified Brãhmana, simply on the strength of 
devotional service.
The omnipotent Lord, being situated within the heart of everyone, can give directions 
to His sincere devotee as to the right path. Such directions are especially offered to the 
devotee, even if he desires something else. For others God gives sanction to the doer 
only at the risk of the doer, but in the case of a devotee the Lord directs him in such a 
way that he never acts wrongly. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is said that the Lord is so 
kind upon His devotee that even though he sometimes falls into the entanglement of 
vikarma—acts against the directions of the Vedas—the Lord at once rectifies the 
mistakes of the devotee from within his heart, because such devotees are very dear to 
the Lord.
Here in this mantra the devotee prays to the Lord to rectify him from within his heart. 
To err is human: A conditioned soul is very often apt to commit mistakes, and the 
only
remedial measure for such unknown sins is to give oneself up to the Lotus Feet of the 
Lord, so that He may guide the devotee. The Lord takes this charge for the fully 
surrendered souls, and thus all problems are solved simply by surrendering oneself 
unto the Lord and acting in terms of the Lord's directions. Such directions are given to 
the sincere devotee in two ways. One is by means of the saints, scriptures, and 
spiritual master, and the other is by the Lord Himself, residing within the heart of 
everyone. Thus the devotee is protected in all respects.
The Vedic knowledge is transcendental and it cannot be understood simply by 
mundane educational procedures. One can understand the Vedic mantras only by the 
grace of the Lord and the spiritual master. If one takes shelter of a bona fide spiritual 
master, it is to be understood that he has obtained the grace of the Lord. The Lord 
appears as the spiritual master for the devotee. And so the spiritual master, the Vedic 
injunctions, and the Lord Himself from within all guide the devotee in full strength, 
and there is no chance of such a devotee falling again into the mire of material 
illusion. The devotee, thus protected all around, is sure to reach the ultimate 
destination of perfection. The whole process is hinted at in this mantra of Çré 
Éçopaniñad, and the Çrémad-Bhägavatam still further explains this.
Hearing and chanting of the glories of the Lord are themselves acts of piety. The Lord 
wants everyone to do this, because He is the Well-wisher of all living entities. And by

practicing this hearing and chanting of the glories of the Lord, one becomes cleansed 
of all undesirable things within himself. His devotion becomes fixed upon the Lord. At 
this stage the devotee acquires the Brahminical qualifications, and the resultant 
reactions of lower qualities become completely vanished. He becomes fully 
enlightened by such devotional service and thus knows the path of the Lord and how 
to attain Him. All doubts become diminished, and he becomes a pure devotee.
Thus end the Bhaktivedãnta Purports to Çré Éçopaniñad, the knowledge that brings one 
nearer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa.