The
ur
da
clo edia
L - hriit:o 
'
L1-
Natural Secrets 
to
Healing, 
Prevention, 
& Longevity
HERBOLOGY 
. NUTRITION 
. PANCHA KARMA
AROMATHERAPY 
. HATHA YOGA . PRANAYAMA
M E D I T A T I O N .  
S O U N D  T H E R A P Y .  
C O L O R  T H E R A P Y
GEM THERAPY 
. EXERCISE 
. LIFESTYLE 
COUNSELING
SPIRITUAL 
COUNSELING 
. CIRCULATORY 
SYSTEM
DIGESTIVE 
SYSTEM 
. RESPIRATORY 
SYSTEM
URINARY 
SYSTEM 
. NERVOUS 
SYSTEM
REPRODUCTIVE 
SYSTEM 
. ]MMUNE SYSTEM
METABOLIC 
SYSTEM 
. INFECTIONS 
AND WOUNDS
SKIN . PET CARE . AND MORE

Professional Praise for the Ãyurveda Encyclopedia
More than 14,000 copies sold!
Magazine Reviews
EDITOR’S CHOICE!
“...a comprehensive, detailed primer for serious students of Ayurveda, (yet) its design and layout is
also “lay-person-friendly:” Indeed it is one of the better...texts...; clarif(ies)...Ayurveda for the
Western readers ...provides a deeper insight into the spiritual foundations of Ayurveda; a complete
analysis of how diseases are caused and...progress...Best of all (the) approach is refreshingly
honest.”
The Bodhi Tree Review
“You could buy a half-dozen plus books on Ayurveda to start your reference library, or you could
buy...(this) Encyclopedia. It’s detailed enough for the professional, but accessible to the lay
person...It is useful and entertaining for any student of Ayurveda or as a home self-healing
resource...(a) magnum opus.”
Hinduism Today
“...you‘ll be delighted to discover this comprehensive guide...”
Herb Research News (Herb Research Foundation)
“(one of) the better ‘good reads’...a four-part...encyclopedia...also contains useful appendixes
with features such as client health history form as well as an Ayurvedic glossary.”
Natural Pharmacy
Ayurvedic Doctors
“The Ayurveda Encyclopedia is an important reference volume for all students of Ayurveda and
Yoga, almost a complete course in Ayurveda in itself. Swami Sada Shiva Tirtha has done a
monumental work in putting together so much material in such a concise and clear manner for the
modern reader.”
Dr. David Frawley (Vamadeva Shastri);
Director: American Institute of Vedic Studies
Medical Professionals
For me, this is the next best book after Harrison’s Internal Medicine Text. I think every doctor
should read this book for better insights into the entire psycho-physiologic makeup of his or her
patients”
Patrick J. Conte MD; Radiologist - New Jersey
“...gives a (spiritual) perspective that is lacking in the current alternative literature.”
Robert Pincus, MD
“...a ‘must have’ reference for any health professional involved in integrative medicine. (The author)
has brought an ancient complex teaching into a fully usable western form, that can aid both the
practitioner and the patient to use Ayurvedic Medicine as part of a wholistic, life-enhancing
program.”
Ellen Kamhi PhD RN HNC (“The Natural Nurse”)/Author
“This is an excellent reference book for the pharmaceutical industry for developing formulations
to meet the rising demand of customers. It’s the Merck Manual of Ayurveda.”
Bharat Shulka, President - Pharm-Tech Industries

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
 i
Dedicated to His Holiness 1008 Sri Sri Srimat Swami Narayan Tirthaji Maharaj
1915 - 2001

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
ii
Dhanwantari: Divine father of Ãyurvedic Medicine
Máhárißi Bharadwaj: Human father of Ãyurvedic Medicine

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
 iii
The Ãyurveda Encyclopedia
Natural Secrets to
Healing, Prevention & Longevity
Swami Sadashiva Tirtha
Technical Editor:
Dr. R.C. Uniyal
Contributing Editors:
Dr. S. Sandhu, Dr. J. K. Chandhok

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
iv
© Copyright 1998 Swami Sada Shiva Tirtha; All rights reserved
Fifth Printing - 2005
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any way without written consent from the
publisher except for brief quotations used in critical articles and reviews.
Publisher
Ayurveda Holistic Center Press
82A Bayville Ave
Bayville, NY 11709 USA
http://ayurvedahc.com/
ISBN 0-9658042-2-4
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 97-077845
Edited by Guru Amrit Kaur Khalsa and Rob Paton of Caduceus Press, NJ
Book cover design by Linda Parks; Boulder, Colorado
This book is a reference manual, and is not intended to treat, diagnose, or prescribe.
The information in this book is in no way intended to substitute for health consultations
with licensed practitioners.
Some of the medical pictures appear courtesy of the Software Marketing Corporation’s
Bodyworks 3.0 CD-ROM program.
Some of the Indian clipart appears courtesy of Prium Graphics’ KalashKala 1.0 program
(617) 444-4103. All Hindi words used in KalashKala ver. 1.0 were created using Saralfonts, a
product of SaralSoft, located in California.
Acid-free paper; vegetable-based ink
Printed in Canada

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
 v
Table of Contents
Dedication........................................................vii
Photo of Átrea.................................................viii
Poem..................................................................ix
Foreword............................................................xi
Photos of Himalayas, Ashwins.........................xii
Acknowledgments...........................................xiii
Photos of Áyurvedic doctors and centers.........xiv
Introduction.......................................................xv
SECTION 1: Fundamentals...............................1
Chapter 1 Overview.............................................3
Chapter 2 The Human Universe........................13
SECTION 2: Analysis......................................37
Chapter 3 Analyzing Constitutions and Illness.39
SECTION 3: Therapeutics...............................65
Chapter 4 Herbology.........................................67
Chapter 5 Glossary..........................................113
Chapter 6 Nutrition..........................................121
Chapter 7 Pañcha Karma.................................169
Chapter 8 Aromatherapy..................................249
Chapter 9 Haóha Yoga and Práòáyáma............255
Chapter 10 Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras,
and Music............................................313
Chapter 11 Color and Gems............................321
Chapter 12 External Influences: Lifestyle,
Seasons, Exercise................................331
Chapter 13 Psychology, Ethics and
Spiritual Counseling............................337
SECTION 4: Specific Illnesses &Diseases....351
Chapter 14 Circulatory System.......................355
Bleeding
Anemia
Heart
Blood Pressure
Arteriosclerosis
Paraplegia
Chapter 15 Digestive System..........................363
Anorexia
Vomiting
Diarrhea/Dysentery
Digestion
Abdomen
Jaundice
Gall Stones
Dyspepsia
Indigestion
Gastroenteritis
Colic
Hyperacidity
Gastritis
Malabsorption
Food Allergies & Parasites
Constipation
Hemorrhoids
Obesity
Candida
Ulcers
Toxin (Áma)
Chapter 16 Infections and Wounds.................393
Fever
Abscess
Sinus
Wounds
Inflammatory Ulcers
Fractures/Dislocations
Chapter 17 Respiratory System......................409
Cough
Breathing
Hiccup
TB
Cold
Chapter 18 Urinary System.............................419
Urine          Prostate
Diabetes
Chapter 19 Ear, Nose, Throat,
Mouth, and Eyes.................................429
Ears
Nose
Catarrh
Hoarse Throat
Eyes
Mouth
Chapter 20 Nervous System...........................457
Convulsions
Sciatica

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
vi
Insanity
Epilepsy
Addictions
Alcohol Recovery
Fainting
Coma
Wasting
Multiple Sclerosis
Parkinsons
Alzheimers
Chapter 21 Skin.............................................479
Warts
Skin
Leukoderma
Herpes Zoster
Chapter 22 Neoplasm/Abnormal Growths.....493
Scrotum
Fistula
Elephantiasis
Hernia
Tumors
Cancer
Chapter 23 Reproductive System...................503
Females
Childbirth
Planets and Newborns
Males
Venereal Diseases
Chapter 24 Immune System...........................527
HIV/AIDS
Epstein Barr
Fibromyalgia
Chapter 25 Metabolic System........................531
Edema
Meningitis
Quinsy
Tonsillitis
Abscesses
Goiter
Hyperthyroidism
Benign Tumors
Gout
Thirst
Chapter 26 Miscellaneous: ............................541
Three Vital Organs—Heart, Head, Bladder
Headaches, Migraines
Arthritis, Rheumatism
Dangerous Spiritual Practices
Herbs for Tissues and Organs
Gland Definitions
Organs and Doßhas
When to Take Herbs
Herbal Recipes
Mutually Incompatible Foods
Herb Preparation and Use
Herb Mixing
Áyurvedic Acupuncture
Chapter 27 Outer Healing..............................557
Beauty Care
Jyotish - Vedic Astrology
Vástu £hástra
Feng Shui
Scientific Research
Ecological-caused disorders
Appendixes
Sanskrit Alphabet......................................586
Doßha Self-Test.........................................588
Client Health History Form......................590
Doßha Food Plans.....................................592
Resources.................................................608
About the Author......................................611
Glossary ...................................................613
Bibliography.............................................624
Index........................................................627
End poem.................................................669

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
 vii
Dedication
Dedicated to my beloved baba, His Holiness 1008, Sri Sri Srimat Swami Narayan Tirthaji
Maharaj, without whose Divine silence and blessings, this book could never have been written or
published.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
viii
Ãtreya Punarvasu: Author of the Charak Saåhitá

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
 ix
A Psalm of Dedication
(In memory of the Christmas in Montreal, 1952)
Who are Thou, Magnum Marvel
Hanging in the cross-bar of cruelty?
Veneration to Thee!
Does the soul of Eternal Pathos-Stalled
in the body of man
Role Defiance to Death?
A man never Thou art.
The petty strip of a loin-cloth
shies to bring Thy body bare to all eyes
But is forced to slip off Thy slim waist;
Thy arms wide apart,
Thy bellowing feet locked together,
For Thy palm and Thy soles to get
Teethed in canine hooks.
Thy sores drain Thy red hot blood.
And, what eyes are Thine!
Wide and Large azure pools,
Half-lid but flowing
The tears of mercy sublime
That roll down Thy sturdy cheeks
To mix up with Thy blood
And drench the arid bosom of Earth-with
the elixir of graceful piety.
And, here Thou art lofty- alone
Ignoring ignorance of Soul.
Thy golden curly locks
Spray the Spree of love sincere;
The crown of thorn about Thy head-Meant
to mean the message of Envy-Beams
luster of halo to clouds
As also to gloom and the glum;
And Thou stickest fast
As the scare-craft of Sin and the Devil.
=
=
=
Memory hits at the glimpses old.
I get to have seen Thee before-sometime
and somewhere else.
Pray wait till I may gather up.
Well perhaps Thou are the One
That on the beginning of the world
Cupped Thy palm to hold all the venom
And drenched Thy throat blue
To deliver the gods in heaven
As also all the beings of earth
Against the puff of poison.
It is Thine to keep everything
And every being playing pure-Pure
in form and in spirit.
Certainly yes I cognize Thee.
Thou art Civa the Benevolence.
C
C
C
And,
Did I not meet Thee once more yet
on the foot of a mighty oak
In the dense of a wood-Land hilly?
can it be a miss? Oh no.
These broad and big eyes
Shedding compassion of love
For all beings pining in penance
This pose of unstirring fortitude
of forbearing Forgiveness,
This untold agony of loving sacrifice
These cherry lips inviting
A thousand kisses of gratitude
And still tending a resolute vow-All
these were then and there-in.
There Thou satest stalled
To a humble seat of dried stalk,
As fixed as a doll divine,
And Thy lips muttering a stout oath—
I don’t fail to recollect it-This
sitting be mine Last
To soak me dry if
Knowledge unbound fling not its door
Open unto me and let me find
The means to free the soul
out of all coverings and bondage
Those eyes like the brightest stars
Glowed in the wild forlorn
Becoming the go to pilgrims fair.
Nothing can con nor whiff my ken
to find in Thee that one indeed-Buddha
Idol of Love Enlightened
☯
☯
☯
It’s all the grace of Thy blessings
That my memory blooms to brighten

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
x
Thy vision in full splendor of glory.
I met Thee, to be sure,
Amidst the havoc of bloody Kuruxetra.
Hero of all heroes, Thou wert
In the driver’s box of a chariot-The
chariot of mighty Arjuna
Drawn by four stallions white,
All brave, bold and proud-To
drive Thy faithful through the killing spree
To Eternal Security.
The reins of the shooting chargers
Were in Thy fists fixed;
Sanguinity roared and danced
Before Thy graceful eyes
But could by no means disturb
Thy serene, care-free comfort;
The same unbridled locks
Dangled in the wind by Thy shoulders;
The same rosy resolute lips bore
The assurance of faith unvexed.
And how much blood Thou hadest
The selfish monsters to shed to turn
The yellow sandy breast of Kuruxetra
Into a wild stretch of a ruddy mud!
The pangs of the dying ones,
The tears of widows and mothers,
The loud roars of enmity
The deep sighs of the destitute
And all these violence
Thou hadst to nook in Thy breast.
Was that, the task, too much for Thee
And, is it why Thou shiftest Thyself
To this far and far distance,
To ride the cross, and
To drain Thy noble blood in drops
In atonement for what Thou hadst to course?
Thou winst Thy Self
And dost wean the children of God
To savour truth, purity and faith.
Certainly Yes, O Magnum Marvel,
Thou art He that buggied Arjuna,
Thy brother and Thy Lamb as well,
From the foul hell to Proud Paradise
C
C
C
Ah! Thy Supreme Holy Excellency!
Eternal Existence
Paramount Life-Intelligence-Bliss!
Amalgam of total Beauty- Harmony- Music!
Thou art Sole Energy to spring motion forth.
And Nature is Thy modus operandi.
Salutations to Thee.
Blow the blind off the sockets of sight
And jut Thy revelation
more solemn and profound.
I, the most petty and low of Thy Lambs
Beg to pray for riddance
From the dismal abyss of falsehood—
Boastful and selfish Ignorance.
Holdst me up.
Heedest my passion’s groan,
Bathest me in faith divine
Brushest all scars of violation off
With Thy breath and Thy glance.
And foundst in my heart my soul
Long forgotten to feel.
Be it Thou pleasure to accept
- My ovation to Civa in Thee
- My tributes to Buddha in Thee
- My homage to Krishna in Thee
And be it Thy kindness superb
To turn this dolt in me
Into a fair forehead Arya,
The holy and ever
           progressive friar
To the goal of self-
immolation-
Clear, complete and perfect-
Against the slips of whom
Fore-and-aft standst Thou
Ever and for-ever.
Bhikshu Suddev
May 20, 1994; Shankar Math
Uttarkashi, India

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
 xi
Foreword
I am happy to write these few words by way
of introduction to, and appreciation of Shri
Swami Sada Shivaji’s book entitled, The Áyurveda
Encyclopedia: Taking Control of Your
Health; Natural Secrets To Healing, Prevention,
& Longevity for Families and Practitioners.
Áyurveda is a science of life that deals with
the problems of longevity, and suggests a safe,
gentle, and effective way to rid diseases afflicting
our health. Áyurveda is regarded as the fifth Veda—
by its virtue—and has been practiced in India for
thousands of years. Medicinal plants
and their utility are widely described in the Vedas;
especially in Atharva Veda. To understand
Áyurveda, it is necessary that we should have a
good knowledge of its basic principals. Swamiji
has clearly described these basic principals in his
book, The Áyurveda Encyclopedia. This book
covers approximately two years worth of study
at India government-recognized Áyurveda colleges
and universities. I congratulate Swamiji
for 
writing 
this 
magnificent 
work.
Dr. S.N. Srivastava
B.A.M.S. (K.U.)
U.G.T.T. (I.M.S., B.H.U)
Head of Department, Kayachikitsa
Government Áyurvedic College
Gurukul Kangri
Hardwar, India

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
xii
Aßhwin Twins: The Celestial Physicians
Uttarkaßhi: Himalayan Mountains and Ganges River

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
 xiii
Acknowledgments
Áyurveda has come into my life through
various teachers. First, studies were through two
correspondence courses, by Dr. Vasant Lad and Dr.
David Frawley. They were the first authors in the
U.S. to present Áyurveda in a simple, thorough,
and clear manner. Conversations with Dr. Frawley
showed him to have a generous spirit  of one who
is a living example of  Áyurveda.
Next, I went to India to get a deeper
understanding and experience from the source. My
teachers were Dr. R. H. Singh, department head
of Kayachikitsa, at Benares Hindu University
(BHU) and Dr. I. P. Singh, professor of Áyurveda
at BHU, who generously shared some of their time
to personally tutor and allow me to tour the BHU
Áyurveda clinic with their students. Dr. I.P.  Singh
spent many days privately tutoring me on
herbology and the spiritual foundations of the
subject. It was a great blessing to have such
esteemed teachers share their time, knowledge, and
experience.
During my spiritual studies with my Guruji
in the Himalayan town of Uttarkaähi, I met Dr.
Ram Chandra Uniyal, with whom I have studied
for many years. He kindly allowed me to sit in on
his consultations and gain greater practical
experience of pulse analysis and treatment of
disease. Dr. Uniyal, a recognized expert on
Himalayan mountain herbs, took the  photographs
of the herbs in this book and reviewed the book
for technical accuracy. Without his input on the
herbal therapies in Section 4, it would have been
impossible to complete this work.
Another peer review member, Dr. Satnam
S. Sandhu, provided several insights on the
tradition of Áyurveda, as well as some reflections
in the realm of Western medicine. His assistance,
technical and otherwise, has been crucial to the
accuracy and authenticity of this book.
The third peer review member was Dr. J.
Kishan Chandhok who has gone through many
chapters with a fine tooth comb, helping to clarify
many important points.
The author of the poem, A Psalm of
Dedication (page ix), is Swami Suddev Tirtha, my
elder guru brother, was an extremely learned man,
yet simple and humble (even at age 92 he was the
“stand-by” swami to replace the Shankaracharya
[highest spiritual post in India] should his
prescence be required). I am honored to accept and
print his wonderful poem about the universality of
religion. The underlying theme of this book is the
universality of Áyurveda as a healing science and
how it integrates simply with all other forms of
healing, including modern medicine. Swamiji
expired several months before the publication of
this book, and is dearly remembered.
Dr. Anil Kumar Darji also deserves
recognition for providing some modern
explanations for Áyurvedic pathologies, as well as
some of the herbal energetics in the materia medica.
Over the years he has taugh me how to address
many of the more serious health disorders. For
example we successfully treated non-Hodgkins
lymphoma along with western drugs - healing a
condition that has a 50% survival rate. It is this
deep level of Áyurvedic healing that I hope can be
introduced in the West.
Special thanks to the haóha yoga models
who generously donated their time and talents: Jeff
Caughey, certified Áyurvedic Practitioner/certified
haóha yoga instructor; Ray Pesonen, yoga teacher;
Dr. Baldev Anand, Pañcha karma specialist; and
Chris Deutsch, yoga student.
Countless thanks are also due to Guru
Amrit Kaur Khalsa and Rob Paton of Caduceus
Press, who edited this book. They worked above
and beyond the call of duty, taking a personal
interest in this project.
Also, I am grateful to my clients - true
teachers - from  whom I learnd great lessons.
Finally, I am most grateful to my Guruji,
His Holiness 1008 Sri Sri Srimat Swami Narayan
Tirthaji Maharaj, without whose blessings and
grace this task could never have been achieved.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
xiv
Certification student practicing herb mixing
Ayurveda Holistic Center, Bayville, NY, USA
Dr. Satnam Sandhu
Two Ayurveda Holistic Center branches in Uttarkashi (Himalayas), India
Dr. Ram Chandra Uniyal taking patient’s pulse
at the Uttarkashi center
 Gurukul Kangri; Hardwar India
Ayurveda Government College

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
 xv
This book was written at the request of my students,
who sought a deeper understanding of the
Áyurvedic process. To that end I have endeavored
to provide the following: deeper insight into the
spiritual foundation of Áyurveda; and the cause
and unfoldment of disease; photographs of the
Áyurvedic herbs; a more comprehensive materia
medica; diacritical marks to facilitate
pronunciation of Sanskrit (Áyurvedic language)
words; an expanded presentation of Áyurvedic
haóha yoga and práòáyáma with photographs; an
expanded pañcha karma chapter; a discussion of
current research on many of the Áyurvedic herbs;
a discussion of the complimentary relationship
between Western and Áyurvedic methods; and
discussions based not only on traditional Áyurvedic
thought, but also on the practical results of my
experiences and those of other Áyurvedic doctors
and practitioners.
     To achieve these ends, the ancient Áyurvedic
texts were consulted along with books by
contemporary authors. The purpose was to
synthesize ancient tradition with modern use.
Authentic Vedic  spiritual books have also been
researched to better incorporate the spiritual
dimension of Áyurveda.
     An attempt has been made to present the
material in a simple and instructive manner,
accessible even to those with little prior knowledge
of Áyurveda. It is also hoped it will help unite
Western and Áyurvedic traditions.
     This book is composed of four sections:
1. Áyurvedic Theory/Fundamentals
2. Constitution (Doßha) and Illness Diagnosis
3. Therapeutic Modalities
4. Specific Illnesses and Diseases (Diagnosis,
pathology, and therapies)
     Through this 5th printing, the book has found a
home with families, medical professionals,
university courses and research departments.
     Since I began practicing Áyurveda in 1988,
Áyurveda’s popularity has grown. It is important
to maintain its spiritual, intuitive integrity, trying
not to force-fit it into the Western medical paradigm
or chasing after ‘acceptance’ by Western medicine.
     Áyurveda is first and foremost a ‘spiritual
science’ - offering scientific insights how live in
harmony with nature and to grow toward the
realization of one’s true nature or Soul. Medicine
is only one aspect of this science of compassion.
     It is a science that must be lived as it is taught.
It is not enough to say, ‘do as I say’. The best
practitioner is one who is becoming more in
harmony with their Soul and thus can lovingly
teach how to heal by inspirational example.
     Let us focus on using Ayurveda to help the
needy help themselves in terms of spiritual,
physical, mental, and ecological health, organic
farming, and social equality. Let us share Ayurveda
more from love and less for fame and fortune.
Thereby, we can grow a truly healthy, peacful
world.
     As with all areas of life, dear readers, you will
succeed by following common sense, practicality,
and intuition. For it is a love of life - of God (or
spirit, nature, or ethics) that is the best medicine
and also the goal of life.
     Wishing you all health and peace.
Introduction
The knowledge of Áyurveda was handed down from Brahmá to Dakßha Prajápati, onto the
Aßhwin twins (the divine doctors), then passed to Indra. Sage Bharadvája volunteered to go to
heaven to receive this wisdom from Indra, and so became the first human to receive the
knowledge of Áyurveda. He passed it to Átreya, then onto Punarnavasu and finally Agniveßha.
This book is offered in devotional service. It is my hope that it will be read with devotion;
knowledge without devotion is like driving a car without oil,
or like growing a beautiful flower without a scent.
      Bayville, NY, USA
December, 2005

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
xvi

1
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                                      Chapter  1: Overview
Section 1
Ãyurvedic Fundamentals
AayuvRed sUÇSwanmœ

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
2

3
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                                      Chapter  1: Overview
Like an oasis is a mirage of the desert,
this world is an illusion of Brahman.
                  Upaniähadic wisdom
Chapter 1
Overview of Áyurveda
          yurveda, the “science of life,” or longevity,
            is the holistic alternative science from In-
               dia, and is more than 5,000 years old. It
is believed to be the oldest healing science in ex-
istence, forming the foundation of all others. Bud-
dhism, Taoism, Tibetan, and other cultural medi-
cines have many similar parallels to Áyurveda. The
secret of Áyurveda’s individualized healing method
was preserved in India, whereas it has been lost or
superseded in other cultures.
The First World Medicine
     Áyurveda (pronounced Aa-yer-vay-da), said to
be a world medicine, is the most holistic or com-
prehensive medical system available. Before the
arrival of writing, the ancient wisdom of healing,
prevention, and longevity was a part of the spiri-
tual tradition of a universal religion.  Healers gath-
ered from the world over, bringing their medical
knowledge to India. Veda Vyasa, the famous sage,
preserved the complete knowledge of Áyurveda
in writing, along with the more spiritual insights
of ethics, virtue, and Self-Realization. Others say
Áyurveda was passed down from God to his an-
gels, and finally to humans.
     The methods used to find this knowledge of
herbs, foods, aromas, gems, colors, yoga, mantras,
lifestyle, and surgery are fascinating and varied.
The sage, physicians/surgeons of the time were the
same sages or seers, deeply devoted holy people,
who saw health as an integral part of spiritual life.
It is said that they received their training of
Áyurveda through direct cognition during medita-
tion. That is, the knowledge of the use of the vari-
ous methods of healing, prevention, longevity, and
surgery came through Divine revelation; guessing
or animal testing was unnecessary. These revela-
tions were transcribed from oral tradition into writ-
ten form, interspersed with aspects of mortal life
and spirituality.
     Originally four main books of Vedic spiritual-
ity existed. Topics included health, astrology, spiri-
tual business, government, military, poetry, and
ethical living. These are known as the Vedas: ¼ik,
Sama, Yajur, and Atharva. Áyurveda was used
along with Vedic astrology (called Jyotißh, that is,
one’s “inner light”). Eventually, Áyurveda was
organized into its own compact system of health
and considered a branch of Atharva Veda. This
upaveda/branch dealt with the healing aspects of
spirituality; although, it did not directly treat spiri-
tual development. Passages related to Áyurveda
from the various Vedas were combined into sepa-
rate books dealing only with Áyurveda. Among
the ¼ik Veda’s 10,572 hymns are discussions of
the three constitutions (doßhas): air (Váyu), fire
(Pitta), and water (Kapha). Topics comprised or-
gan transplants, artificial limbs, and the use of herbs
to heal diseases of the mind and body and to foster
longevity. Within the Atharva Veda’s 5,977 hymns
are discussions of anatomy, physiology, and sur-
gery.
     There were two schools of Áyurveda at the time
of Átreya, the school of physicians and the school
of surgeons. These two schools transformed
Áyurveda into a scientifically verifiable and clas-
sifiable medical system. Through research and test-
ing, they dispelled the doubts of the more practi-
cal and scientific minded, removing the aura of
mystery that surrounded Divine

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
4
Bharadwaj
         (Dwapar Yuga)
    
    (human father of     
Ayurvedic medicine)
Kaähyap
  (Dwapar Yuga)
(children/gynecological)   
History of Ãyurveda
Brahma
Dakäha Prájpatí
Aähwini Kumar
(celestial physicians)
Indra
(Sat Yuga)
      Divodasa Dhanwantari
       (Treta Yuga) - (develops school 
      of surgery - 9-6th century BC)

5
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                                      Chapter  1: Overview
Aähtþáñga H^idayam
(written 8th century AD)
Suährut
(Suährut Saåhitá
written 4-5th century BC)
Ãtreya Punarvasu
(Ãtreya develops school of
physicians 8-6th century BC)
(Ãtreya writes Charak
Saåhitá - 1st century AD)
Mádhava Nidan by Mádjavakara
on diagnosis -9th century AD)
Bhávaprakáçha - by Bhávamiçhra
(Classifications -16th century AD)
Çhára´gadhara Saåhitá
(Ãyurvedic recipes -13th century AD)
Mercury first used - 14th century AD)

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
6
revelation. Consequently, Áyurveda grew in respect
and became a widely used system of healing in
India. People from many countries came to Indian
Áyurvedic schools to learn about this medicine in
its entirety. Chinese, Tibetans, Greeks, Romans,
Egyptians, Afghanis, Persians, and others traveled
to absorb the wisdom and bring it back to their
own countries. India’s Silk Road, an established
trade route between Asia (China, Tibet, etc.), the
Middle East (Afghanistan, Persia, etc.), and Eu-
rope (Rome, Greece, etc.), provided a link between
cultures. On this route travelers first discovered
Áyurveda.
     Charak and Sußhrut are two reorganizers of
Áyurveda whose works are still extant. The third
major treatise is called the Aßhþáñga H^idayam, a
concise version of the works of Charak and
Sußhrut. Thus, the three main ancient Áyurvedic
texts still in use are the Charak Saåhitá (compila-
tion), Sußhrut Saåhitá, and the Aßhþáñga H^idayam
Saåhitá. These books are believed to be over
1,200 years old and contain the original and com-
plete knowledge of this Áyurvedic world medi-
cine. Consequently, Áyurveda is the only com-
plete ancient medical system in existence.
     Charak represents the Átreya school of physi-
cians, discussing physiology, anatomy, etiology,
pathogenesis, symptoms and signs of disease,
methodology of diagnosis, treatment and prescrip-
tion for patients, prevention, and longevity. Inter-
nal and external causes of illness are also consid-
ered. Charak maintains that the first cause of ill-
ness is the loss of faith in the Divine. In other words,
when people do not recognize that God dwells
within all things, including themselves, this sepa-
ration of vision creates a gap. This gap causes a
longing or suffering for oneness of vision. This
suffering then manifests itself as the beginning of
spiritual, mental, and physical disease. External
influences on health include time of day, the sea-
sons, diet, and lifestyle. An entire section is de-
voted to discussions of the medicinal aspects of
herbs, diet, and reversal of aging.
     Sußhruta comes from the Dhanvantari school
of surgeons. In America, a society of surgeons
named themselves the Sußhruta Society in remem-
brance of the Áyurvedic father of surgery. This text
presents sophisticated accounts of surgical equip-
ment, classification of abscesses, burns, fractures,
and wounds, amputation, plastic surgery, and anal/
rectal surgery. Human anatomy is described in
great detail, including descriptions of the bones,
joints, nerves, heart, blood vessels, circulatory sys-
tem, etc., again, corroborated by today’s methods
of mechanical investigation. From the Sußhrut
Saåhitá, the first science of massage is described
using marma points or vital body points, later
adapted into Chinese acupuncture. Even the popu-
lar Polarity Massage Therapy in America was de-
veloped after advocates studied massage in India.
Eight Branches of Áyurveda
     The ancient Áyurvedic system was astound-
ingly complete. In the colleges of ancient India,
students could choose a specialty from eight
branches of medicine.
1. Internal Medicine (Káyachikitsá).
This is related to the soul, mind, and
body. Psychosomatic theory recog-
nizes that the mind can create illness in the body
and vice versa. The seven body constitutions and
seven mental constitutions were delineated here:
Váyu (air/energy), Pitta (fire), Kapha (water),
Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/Kapha, Pitta/ Kapha, and a com-
bination of all three (tridoßha). Although finding
the cause of an illness is still a mystery to modern
science, it was the main goal of Áyurveda. Six
stages of the development of disease were known,
including aggravation, accumulation, overflow,
relocation, a buildup in a new site, and manifesta-
tion into a recognizable disease. Modern equip-
ment and diagnosis can only detect a disease dur-
ing the fifth and sixth stages of illness. Áyurvedic
physicians can recognize an illness in the making
before it creates more serious imbalance in the
body. Health is seen as a balance of the biological
humors, whereas disease is an imbalance of the
humors. Áyurveda creates balance by supplying
deficient humors and reducing the excess ones.
Surgery is seen as a last resort. Modern medicine
is just beginning to realize the need to supply rather

7
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                                      Chapter  1: Overview
than to remove, but still does not know how or what
to supply.
     Additionally, there are over 2,000 medicinal
plants classified in India’s materia medica. A
unique therapy, known as pañcha karma (five ac-
tions), completely removes toxins from the body.
This method reverses the disease path from its
manifestation stage, back into the blood stream,
and eventually into the gastrointestinal tract (the
original site of the disease). It is achieved through
special diets, oil massage, and steam therapy. At
the completion of these therapies, special forms
of emesis, purgation, and enema remove excesses
from their sites of origin. Finally, Áyurveda reju-
venates–rebuilding the body’s cells and tissues af-
ter toxins are removed.
2. Ears, Nose, and Throat
(£hálákya Tantra).
Sußhruta reveals approximately 72 eye
diseases, surgical procedures for all eye disorders
(e.g., cataracts, eyelid diseases), and for diseases
of the ears, nose, and throat.
3. Toxicology
(Vißhagara-vairodh Tantra).
Topics include air and water pollution, tox-
ins in animals, minerals, vegetables, and epidem-
ics; as well as keys for recognizing these anoma-
lies and their antidotes.
4. Pediatrics (Kaumára bh^itya).
In this branch prenatal and postnatal care
of the baby and mother are discussed. Top-
ics include methods of conception; choosing the
child’s gender, intelligence, and constitution; and
childhood 
diseases 
and 
midwifery.
5. Surgery (£halyá Tantra). More
than 2,000 years ago, sophisticated
methods of surgery were known. This
information spread to Egypt, Greece, Rome, and
eventually throughout the world. In China, treat-
ment of intestinal obstructions, bladder stones, and
the use of dead bodies for dissection and learning
were taught and practiced.
6. Psychiatry (Bhúta Vidyá). A whole
branch of Áyurveda specifically deals
with diseases of the mind (including de-
monic possession). Besides herbs and diet, yogic
therapies (breathing, mantras, etc.) are employed.
7.  Aphrodisiacs (Vájikarana). This sec-
tion deals with two aspects: infertility (for
those hoping to conceive) and spiritual de-
velopment (for those eager to transmute sexual en-
ergy into spiritual energy).
8. Rejuvenation (Rasáyana).
Prevention and longevity are discussed
in this branch of Áyurveda. Charak says
that in order to develop longevity, ethics and vir-
tuous living must be embraced.
The Decline of Áyurveda
     The alert person may now ask why, if Áyurveda
is so exceptional, is it not widely practiced in In-
dia today. This is a valid question, which has an
equally valid answer. Áyurveda, like all of Vedic
philosophy, adheres to the belief in Sanátana
dharma, or accepting everything in its appropriate
time and place, and rejecting nothing. All aspects
of medicine may be useful, but the appropriate
treatment must be used when required. This is why
Áyurveda does not reject modern medicine. The
Indian temperament allows all religions to express
themselves freely in India. Buddhism, Jainism, and
other religions grew in India and influenced the
thinking of many people. Eventually, a time came
when all religions lost some degree of their spiri-
tual link, and egos vied for first place. Gentle spiri-
tual medicine lost ground. Divisiveness was fol-
lowed by foreign conquest. Áyurvedic colleges

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
8
were closed and books destroyed. One nation
forced Áyurvedic doctors to add information on
meat to the translations of the Áyurvedic texts.
     Another religion did not believe in harming the
body in any manner and destroyed the books on
Áyurvedic surgery. Nalanda, at Patna, India, a fa-
mous Áyurvedic university, was the main univer-
sity at the center of the Silk Road, where students
from China, Tibet, the Middle East, and Europe
came to study. This institution was among those
destroyed by various conquerors. During the nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries, the British
ruled India and closed the remaining Áyurvedic
universities (although Áyurveda continued to be
practiced in secret). The knowledge was preserved
by the guru-çhishya relationship (teacher-student)
and passed from one generation to the next by word
of mouth as it had centuries before. Finally, in 1920
Áyurveda reemerged and, with the help of the In-
dian government’s assistance, universities were
rebuilt. Now more than 150 Áyurvedic universi-
ties and 100 Áyurvedic colleges are flourishing in
India, with plans for more educational facilities in
development. Thus, Áyurveda, without resisting
or rejecting other systems, is slowly returning to
recognition and reestablishing its true value. Keep
in mind that just as some unethical western medi-
cal practices exist; unethical Áyurvedic pharma-
cies and doctors can also be found in India today.
     The oldest medicine, Áyurveda, is now the last
to be rediscovered. This world medicine may not
only unite healing practices, but also peoples, cul-
tures, and religions. The impact of its re-awaken-
ing is astounding, as we see its effectiveness and
demand in the United States growing in leaps and
bounds. Among the respected teachers of
Áyurveda, many include the original spiritual in-
tegration, reestablishing ancient Áyurveda, intact
in modern society. Spiritual Áyurveda, the origi-
nal world medicine, will soon find validation and
universal acceptance in all areas of society and the
world.
     What may surprise some people is the degree
of insight these ancient, mystical doctors, or ýiähis
(seers) had. Without the aid of modern technologi-
cal x-ray machines or CT-scans, they knew of the
inner workings of the human body. One can read
in the ancient Áyurvedic texts of the development
of the fetus, month by month. It is astonishing how
these ancient descriptions are validated by today’s
technologies. Even the distance from the planets
and the duration of their orbits were nearly identi-
cal to today’s technological measurements. It is
enough to make even the most skeptical of us sit
up and consider Áyurvedic insights.
     So we see the foundation for the integration of
Áyurveda and modern medicine. Too many people
on both sides of the holistic-vs-allopathic (mod-
ern) medicine debate want to deny the need for the
other science. Because of Áyurveda’s all-embrac-
ing philosophy, we see how all types of healing
are compatible. No one will be put out of a job.
Spiritual Áyurveda
     We have discussed Áyurveda,
the “science of life” as the original
world medicine. Yet Áyurveda is more than this; it
is a spiritual science. This is the most important
aspect of Áyurveda.
     Around 1500 B.C. the book, the Charak
Saåhitá discussed these spiritual principles. It said
that even if Áyurvedic doctors had a complete
knowledge of Áyurveda but could not reach the
inner Self or soul of the patient, they would not be
effective healers. Furthermore, if the practitioner
were more concerned with fame and fortune, and
not with spiritual development (Self-Realization),
they would not be effective healers.
     To understand the spiritual nature of Áyurveda,
we must know something about the Vedic roots of
philosophy, spirituality, and universal religion.
According to the ancient Vedic scriptures of India
there is a goal to life. We are not simply born, to
live, and then to die without some meaning or pur-
pose. Albert Einstein reflected this idea when he
said God does not play dice with the universe. Or-
der and reason exist in life. According to Vedic
philosophy life is Divine and the goal of life is to
realize our inner Divine nature. Áyurvedically
speaking the more a person realizes their Divine
nature the healthier they are. Thus it is the respon-

9
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                                      Chapter  1: Overview
sibility of the Áyurvedic doctor to inspire or help
awaken the patients to their own inner Divine na-
ture. Positive thinking or love is the best medicine.
When patients are taught they have this Divinity
within themselves, they feel a connection to life
and God (however each patient defines God). For
atheists, we speak of the greater mystical power,
which is synonymous to God. This connection al-
lows patients to feel they have a handle on life and
an ability to develop their own inner nature. After
this, secondary therapies of herbs, diet, meditation,
etc. are offered.
     Even modern medical doctors are finding a link
between their healthy patients and the patient’s
degree of spiritual faith. Spirituality changes the
definition of health, giving it an added dimension.
Two types of health can now be seen diagnosed
health and true health. Often when a patient is di-
agnosed as healthy, they still may not feel healthy
or alive. This is due to psychosomatic conditions
where a troubled mind affects the health of the
body. The deepest level of mental agitation is the
longing for a deeper spiritual connection.
     Áyurveda suggests true health is based on the
healthy functioning of four areas of life; physical/
mental health, career or life purpose, spiritual re-
lationships, and spirituality. First one needs to be
physically and mentally able to do work and play.
Then persons need to work to support themselves
and afford a social life. Work however is defined
as making a living doing something meaningful
or purposeful. To do this type of work one needs
to use their innate or God-given talents; they need
to work at something they love to do. It is this love
that cultures spirituality.
     All too often we find people working at jobs
that they dislike. Often people are forced into a
“practical” career by parents or societal beliefs.
Other persons lack the self-worth and confidence
to challenge themselves to find and live their
dreams. Working in meaningless, unfulfilling jobs
can create mental and physical disorders.
     The most extreme example of illness caused by
lack of purpose is cancer. Áyurveda considers can-
cer an emotionally caused disease. By not having
a purpose in life (i.e., suppressing life) people cre-
ate life within their body—cancer. When seriously
ill people discuss what they would love to do (in-
stead of what they are told to do) life returns to
their eyes. As they begin to follow up on these
ideas, some remarkable recoveries are seen. Pur-
poseful career is then an aspect of this new defini-
tion of health.
     The third realm of health is spiritual relation-
ships. When persons are healthy and purposefully
working, they can now begin to truly enjoy their
social life. These days we have become acutely
aware of the emotional and physical abuses that
exist in many people’s relationships. Co-depen-
dency and enabling are often used terms to describe
relationship diseases. From the spiritual standpoint
if one is dependent on anything other than God,
co-dependency exists. People look for something
lasting or permanent; only God is eternal and ev-
erlasting. Spiritual development directs one to fo-
cus inwardly to discover their eternal nature in-
stead of the ever-changing outer realm of life. For
relationships to be healthy all people must con-
tinue to develop their individual inner spiritual
lives. Then they are able to share their growing
spiritual fullness with their spouse and others.
     Too often individuals are attracted to one an-
other because they see a quality that they think they
do not have. In reality each person has all the hu-
man qualities within themselves because inner eter-
nal Divinity, by definition, contains everything.
Further, if one can see a quality in another they
must have it within themselves in order to recog-
nize it. When the main focus in people’s lives is
the Divine, then troubles that seemed like moun-
tains are seen as molehills. Thus the third dimen-
sion of health involves healthy spiritual relation-
ships.
Once people are sound in body and mind, work in
a purposeful career and have fulfilling spiritual
relationships, life develops a state of grace. People
then become eager to devote more time to spiri-
tual development, the final dimension of health.
Personal spiritual development is seen on many
levels. The body becomes more relaxed, the mind
more calm and alert; and one becomes more per-
sonable in relationships. Yet the most profound
developments take place inwardly; Divinity grows

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
10
within. Gradually one also begins to see the Di-
vinity in others and all of life.
     This is the multi-dimensional definition of
health according to Áyurveda. Life is composed
of many elements; it is not seen as independent
parts. If one aspect of life becomes imbalanced all
the other aspects are affected. Rather than merely
treating a symptom, Áyurveda looks to the root
cause or underlying reasons of illness. The body
may be sick because of mental or career stress.
Rather than instruct the patient to merely take a
drug or an herb to heal the physical condition, the
practitioner of Áyurvedic medicine looks to restore
balance within the patient (e.g., calming the mind
or finding a more purposeful job). The deepest root
level is spiritual development. Thus, all four areas
of life must be cultivated; mind/body, career, spiri-
tual relationships, and inner spiritual development.
The Development of
Allopathic Medicine
     Not long ago in America herbal and naturo-
pathic medicines were the common healing mo-
dalities. Grandmothers and mothers gave family
members natural or herbal remedies when they
were sick.
     Parallel to the onset of the industrial revolution,
rose allopathic medicine—not because it was bet-
ter, but because more money was available for its
propagation. A chief developer of allopathic medi-
cine was Andrew Carnegie, who saw a better fi-
nancial future for himself in investing large sums
of money to develop allopathic research and diag-
nostic machinery instead of encouraging natural
medicine research. Thus allopathy had the back-
ing to develop and surpass natural medicine.
     This statement is not meant to discredit the ef-
fectiveness and usefulness of modern medicine, but
merely intended to underline the point that herbal
medicine was also an effective healing method, but
it was swept under the rug in the name of progress
and was viewed less enthusiastically. Now, due to
difficult economic times, the high cost of medical
care, and hazardous side effects from drugs, people
have been forced to return to alternative measures
for relief. As with any groundswell at the
grassroots, when something works the word gets
out. People are returning to alternative or compli-
mentary healthcare in droves.
Self-Healing & Self-Realization
     The main theme of Áyurveda is that people can
adequately educate themselves to take control of
their own health. This is achieved by monitoring
and balancing one’s nutritional and lifestyle hab-
its to heal, prevent illness, and develop longevity.
Áyurveda teaches that people are their own best
healers. One’s intuition is better at discerning subtle
health imbalances than relying on another person.
All that is needed is some basic guidelines offered
by the Áyurvedic practitioner.
     The ability to take control of one’s health in-
spires self-worth and self-empowerment. Faith in
one’s intuitive abilities is further engendered when
persons actually see the positive results from their
efforts. Realizing one has the ability to take con-
trol of one’s own health is itself a key factor in
healing.
     Self-reliance is also the most important com-
ponent in spiritual development. Individuals can
learn to rely on their own intuition [along with
guidelines laid out by one’s spiritual mentor or guru
and from the scriptures]. As one begins to see posi-
tive results developing in their spiritual life, doubts
begin to vanish: clarity, confidence, and mental
peace begin to dawn.
     The mental peace of Self-Realization is said to
be the true state of life because it is eternal, non-
changing. Vedic çhastras (scriptures) speak of the
three legs of truth; what the scriptures say, what
the guru or spiritual guide says, and what one ex-
periences for oneself. Only when all three sources
are found to be saying the same thing is something
accepted as truth. But it is personal experience that
must also be known; it is not enough to follow
something dogmatically with blind faith.
Doubts are mental agitation. When doubts are
dispelled the mind gains a state of peace. In Self-
Realization one knows truth in its eternal nature;
they cannot be swayed or agitated. The first step

11
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                                      Chapter  1: Overview
towards Self-Realization is developing the
ability to not be swayed by others if you experi-
ence things differently. The American poet
Thoreau, after reading the Vedic scriptures,
expressed it this way:
If a man cannot keep pace with his
companions,
perhaps it is because he hears the beat
of a different drummer.
Let him step to the beat he hears,
no matter how measured or far away.
     The Áyurvedic practitioner instills this
philosophy in the patient, who then experiences
and respects inner intuition and Divinity. When
patients see that the practitioner believes they have
such Divine qualities, they usually respond in kind.
     A psychological study highlights the value of
expectation. Two teachers were given classes of
students with average abilities. One teacher was
told their class was above average while the other
teacher was told they had an average class. The
first teacher went to class expecting exceptional
work from the students and treated them accord-
ingly. The other teacher just taught the average
curriculum. The supposed above average class per-
formed above average. Thus, when the Áyurvedic
practitioner treats patients with respect, recogniz-
ing their inner intuitive abilities, the patients auto-
matically develop a greater sense of self-worth and
faith that they can take control of their health.
     As self-worth develops, people are not as eas-
ily swayed by peer pressure, whether pressed to
take drugs or lead an unethical life. Low self-es-
teem causes people to abuse themselves. Having
someone recognize one’s inner Divinity and self-
healing abilities develops confidence. Experienc-
ing positive results from self-healing and spiritual
development further generates confidence, health,
mental peace, and Divinity.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
12

13
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
A plate, a cup, and a bowl are all made from the same clay.
Like this, all creation is made from the same eternal Brahman.
Upaniähadic wisdom
Chapter 2
The Human Universe
he Vedic scriptures say that there is an
inextricable link between humans and the
universe. The very elements of human life
exist outside in the cosmos as well. As the poet
Walt Whitman said, “I believe a blade of grass is
no less than the journey-work of the stars.” In or-
der to understand the universe and environmental
situations, and to understand human health con-
cerns, one needs to appreciate the common link
between them: the elements of creation.
     The Vedas discuss the process of creation. First,
there was the eternal, Divine, unmanifest existence:
ever present. It is said that life was created from
within the eternal, like a thread that comes from
within a spider to be woven into a web. Creation
eventually dissolves back into the eternal like the
spider returning the web into itself.
     One may ask how the nonmoving eternal can
appear to move or create something. Here, the Vedic
literature, known as the Upaniähads, offers a meta-
phor: Just as the desert appears to create an oasis
without moving to create it, so does the nonmoving
eternity appear to produce this illusory creation.
The creation is called illusory because it is not last-
ing; only eternity is real because it is everlasting.
     There is not enough space in this book to justly
discuss this topic. This is a mere offering into the
insight of the origin of creation as explained by
the ancient Vedic ^ishis (seers).
     As creation developed, it formed three under-
lying principles that uphold all life: the laws of
creation, maintenance, and dissolution. Everything
in life is born or created, it lives, and then it dies.
These principles are known as sattwa, rajas, and
tamas, respectfully, and are called the three guòas
or tendencies. All of life, human and celestial, obey
these laws.
The Elements: Building Blocks of Life
     The creation principle developed five essential
elements—or building blocks that all life forms
contain: ether, air, fire, water, and earth. We can
easily see how life was created from the subtlest
to the grossest matter. From eternity, the subtlest
form of matter is ether. Ether mixing with eternity
creates air, a more observable or experiential ele-
ment. As air moves, it eventually creates friction,
which creates heat or fire. Heat produces mois-
ture, thus creating water, the densest element yet:
if one tries to walk through water, one is slowed
by its density. Finally, water produces the densest
form of matter, earth. The Vedas say that all of the
creation, including humans, is made up of combi-
nations of all five essential elements. These ele-
ments are the subtlest aspects of human life, finer
than the molecular, atomic, or subatomic levels.
     This is the level that Áyurvedic healing works
on. Focusing on the cause of the grosser levels of
life, the denser aspects will be taken care of since
they are made up of these five elements. Just as a
strong foundation supports a strong building, when
the five elements (the foundation of all matter) are
strong and balanced in a person, they will auto-
matically balance the more material levels.
     Thus, Áyurveda does not need to look at iso-
lated parts of the human anatomy, or at the vita-
min, chemical, or nutritional level of health. It sim-
ply balances the elements, and this balances the
more physical levels.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
14
     A person diagnosed with a duodenal ulcer is an
example of this balancing. Rather than create a
name for a symptom, Áyurveda identifies the ill-
ness as an excess of the fire element. Acid is a by-
product of heat. Áyurveda will look to see in what
part of the patient’s life overheating occurs. It may
be due to eating excessive fiery foods and spices
like tomatoes and peppers. One’s career may be
causing undue anger (i.e., hot temper). Perhaps the
person drinks alcohol (firewater).
     Once the cause is learned, suggestions for re-
ducing a person’s excessive intake of fire are dis-
cussed. Simultaneously, the patient is advised to
use more of the air and water elements to balance
the heat with coolness (air cools heat, water puts
out the fire). Thus, the holistic approach of
Áyurveda seeks the cause of an illness and restores
balance, using the insight of the elemental creation
of the universe.
The Áyurvedic Body
     Personalizing the healing process is a unique-
ness that Áyurveda brings to the holistic field of
health. From the insights of the Vedic sages, we
learn that people are different and need to be indi-
vidually treated.
     Expanding upon this elemental view, the
Áyurvedic practitioner understands that people are
made up of various combinations of the elements.
Some people have more air in their system; some
people have a more fiery constitution. Others are
predominantly made up of water. Still others are
combinations of fire and air, fire and water, or air
and water. Some people have an equal amount of
all three elements (ether is combined in air and
earth within water).
     Thus a more air-predominant individual needs
to take in less air and more fire and water. A water
person already has an excess of water, so there is a
need to reduce the intake of water and to increase
the fire and air elements in the diet and lifestyle.
Personalized Healing
     The general Áyurvedic approach is threefold.
1. Determining one’s elemental constitution (doßha
or prak^iti),
2. Learning the elemental cause of illness (vik^iti),
and
3. Applying therapeutic recommendations to bal-
ance elements causing the illness, without caus-
ing an imbalance to the doßha (constitution).
     This unique, personalized approach not only
makes healing effective, but gentle as well. Other
holistic measures may work, yet still aggravate the
person’s doßha. Áyurveda is the only holistic sci-
ence that needn’t warn people that they may feel
worse while the diseases or toxins are being re-
moved before they will feel better. Because of its
balancing approach, gentleness marks the entire
healing process.
Qualities of the Three Doßhas
     Parallel to the three guòas (sattwa, rajas, and
tamas) in creation are the three doßhas, or consti-
tutions, in the human body: Váyu (or Váta), Pitta,
and Kapha. Váyu may be understood as nerve
force, electro-motor, physical activity or that,
which is responsible for motion. It is commonly
called air. The root, ‘va’ means to spread. In West-
ern terms, it is the electricity setting the organism
into motion, maintaining the equilibrium between
Pitta and Kapha (inerts).
Váyu relates to the nerve-force.
It is responsible for all movement
in the mind and body.
The movement of Váyu even regulates the
balance of Pitta and Kapha.
     Pitta relates to internal fire, bile, body heat, di-
gestive enzymes, physio-chemical, biological,
metabolic and endocrine systems. It is responsible
for digesting the chyle into a protoplasmic sub-
stance like sperm and ovum.

15
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
The nerve network of the mind and body.
The bones are primarily affected by Váyu
Pitta relates to the circulatory, endocrine,
and digestive systems

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
16
     Kapha fills the intercellular spaces of the body
as connective tissue. Examples of these tissues in-
clude mucus, synovial fluid, and tendons. Kapha
is responsible for the gross structure of the body
(solid and liquid/phlegm-plasma). Each person is
made up of a combination of these elements.
The knee bones
are examples of
areas that are lu-
bricated 
by
Kapha.
     Together, the doßhas are responsible for cata-
bolic and anabolic metabolism. Catabolism breaks
down complex internal bodies, and Váyu (air en-
ergy) sets this energy free into simpler waste.
Anabolism takes food and builds it into more com-
plex bodies. The summit of the metabolic process
is protoplasm or essential matter [proteins, carbo-
hydrates, lipids, and inorganic salts]. Lifeless food
becomes living protoplasm and is set free as use-
ful energy or excess heat or motion that is emitted
from the body. Thus, the purpose of the three
doßhas is to move the lymph chyle (the by-prod-
uct of digested foods) throughout the body. This
nourishes and builds the body tissues. When any
or all of the doßhas develop imbalance, the body
ceases to be nourished, and disease develops.
     The three doßhas (Váyu, Pitta, Kapha) exist
throughout the entire body, in every cell, yet are
predominant (their sites of origin) in the colon,
small intestine, and stomach, respectively. Some
authorities say that Váyu primarily resides below
the navel, Pitta from the navel to the heart, and
Kapha, above the heart.
     Váyu is also found in (governing) the waist,
thighs, ear, bones, and skin. Pitta also governs the
navel, sweat, lymph, blood, eye, and skin. Kapha
additionally controls the chest, throat, head, bone
joints, small intestine, plasma, fat, nose, and
tongue.
Properties of the Three Doßhas
Váyu: Dry, light, cold, rough, subtle, moving
Pitta: Slightly oily, hot, light, odorous, liquid
Kapha: Oily, cold, heavy, slow, smooth, slimy,
static.
Each of the three doßhas has five
divisions or responsibilities.
5 Váyus
     Each of the five Váyus is responsible for vari-
ous physical and mental functions of the cerebral-
spinal and sympathetic nerves.
     Práò is located in the head and governs the
chest, throat, mind, heart, sense organs, intelli-
gence, expectorating, sneezing, belching, inspira-
tion, and swallowing of food—outward movement.
     Udán resides in the chest and controls the nose,
navel, and throat, and is responsible for initiating
speech, effort, enthusiasm, the capacity to work,
complexion, and memory—upward movement.
     Vyán is found in the heart and rapidly moves
throughout the body. It regulates all body move-
ments, including walking, raising and lowering of
the body parts, and opening and closing the eyes.
     Samán is located near the digestive fire. It works
in the alimentary tract (absorbing nutrients and
excreting wastes), and other abdominal organs. It
holds food in the alimentary tract, helps digest it,
separates nutrients from waste, and eliminates the
waste—equalized movement.
     Apán is seated in the colon, and controls the
waist, bladder, genitals, and thighs. Its main func-
tion is downward movement of wastes (feces,
urine), reproductive fluid, menstrual fluid, and it
also controls the downward movement of the fe-
tus.

17
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
5 Pittas
     Pachaka exists in the small intestine, stomach,
and colon as non-liquid heat, bile, or digestive fire.
The fire digests and transforms food, emulsifying
food fats and separating absorbable nutrients from
waste, so they may be passed to lacteals by ab-
sorption. [Food becoming partially digested in the
stomach is known as chyme. This chyme passes
into the small intestine where it becomes digested
by the pancreatic juice and bile. The usable by-
product is lymph and fatty matter, or chyle. The
chyle moves through lacteals, or lymphatic ves-
sels which carry chyle from the small intestine to
the thoracic duct. From the thoracic duct, the chyle
is sent into the blood.] Pachaka (digestive en-
zymes), through digestion, automatically nourishes
the other four Pittas.
     Ranjaka is located in the stomach, liver, and
spleen, and gives color to lymph chyle when it is
transformed into blood as it passes through the liver
and spleen.
     Sadhaka is found in the heart. It helps in per-
forming mental functions such as knowledge, in-
telligence, and consciousness by maintaining
rhythmic cardiac contractions.
     Alochaka resides in the retina of the eyes and
governs sight.
     Bhrajaka resides in the skin. It regulates com-
plexion by keeping secretions from the sweat and
sebaceous glands of the skin active.
5 Kaphas
     Avalambaka is found in the chest and creates
cohesion, softness, moistness, and liquidity, which
result in maintaining body strength.
     Kledaka is in the stomach, liquefying hard food
masses.
     Bodhaka is found in the tongue and is respon-
sible for taste.
     Tarpaka exists in the head and nourishes the
sense organs.
     Shleßhaka is located in the bone joints and lu-
bricates them.
     People who are predominantly an air (Váyu)
prak^iti will have different experiences depending
on whether their doßha is balanced or in excess.
Balanced Váyu-prak^iti individuals will be adapt-
able, cheerful, have natural healing tendencies, be
thin-framed, and very tall or very short. If there is
excess Váyu in their bodies, they may be very thin,
have dry skin, gas, constipation, bone problems,
or arthritis. They may talk very fast or become eas-
ily tired. Mentally, they may quickly grasp con-
cepts but soon forget them; be anxious, worried,
fearful, or nervous.
     Pitta-dominant individuals, when healthy and
balanced, will be warm, and have clear, penetrat-
ing thoughts. They will tend to be leaders and/or
athletic. They will be of moderate, muscular build,
and will be passionate. When they overheat, they
may find themselves impatient, hot-tempered, or
too critical. Physically, they will develop heat-re-
lated problems like ulcers, infections, rashes or
acne, eye problems, or high blood pressure.
     The Kapha-paramount individuals, when bal-
anced, are loyal and calm. Physically, they are big
boned and strong, with deep-toned voices. When
Kapha is excessive, they tend toward water ex-
cesses like water retention, being overweight, or
having bronchitis. Mentally, they will find them-
selves lethargic, too attached, and sentimental.
     As we discussed earlier, each person is made
up of a combination of these elements, yet each
usually has a combination predominantly of two
or all three of these elements. These elements in
turn, form three physiological principles, Váyu
(ether and air), Pitta (fire), and Kapha (water and
earth). Like the elements, people are predominantly
made up of one or more or these doßhas.
     People fall into seven prak^iti categories:
1. Váyu           5. Pitta/Kapha
2. Pitta             6. Kapha/Váyu
3. Kapha          7. Tridoßhic (equal amounts).
4. Váyu/Pitta (combination)
These constitutions may be further subdivided,
8, 9. Váyu/Pitta (with Váyu or Pitta being predomi-
nant)

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
18
10, 11. Váyu/Kapha (with Váyu or Kapha being
predominant)
12, 13. Pitta/Kapha (with Pitta or Kapha being pre-
dominant)
14-19. Tridoßhic (six additional constitutions, with
one or two doßhas being more predominant: e.g.,
Váyu predominance, Pitta and Kapha predomi-
nance, etc.)
Three external reasons cause doßhas to become
increased (imbalanced):
     1. Time of day or season (e.g., around noon-
time is ruled by Pitta; Fall is predominantly a Váyu
time)
     2. From inadequate, excessive or untimely sen-
sory experiences (e.g., excessive loud music, over-
eating)
     3. Actions (e.g., excessive speaking, inadequate
exercise, etc.)
Agnis: Digestive Fire (Enzymes)
     Most diseases are due to poor digestion. Agni
(enzyme) is found in the alimentary canal and di-
gests food. The normal digestion of the three
doßhas produces Samágni. Digestive activity
(healthy, deficient or excessive) is governed by the
doßhas becoming aggravated. The three doßhas
produce three agnis (vißhamágni, tíkßhnágni and
mandágni respectively). Excess Váyu in the body
produces weak, irregular digestion, and causes gas.
     Excess Pitta creates a situation like an over-
heated furnace. Food burns up quickly, and per-
sons experience burning sensations, thirst, acid
indigestion, etc. In some cases the agni fire even
burns up nutrients, causing malnutrition.
     When excess Kapha is in the digestive tract, the
digestive fire is low, making it difficult to digest
any foods. As a result, a person feels dull, poor,
inadequate, and lethargic; the stomach is heavy, or
the person may experience constipation. Váyu dis-
orders produce hard stools from the dryness caused
by gas. Pitta stools are soft or liquid due to excess
heat. Kapha stools are moderate. A healthy stool
is also moderate and easily eliminated once or
twice a day.
     Thirteen agnis reside in the body and are re-
sponsible for digestion,
     Jatharagni: Works at the gastrointestinal level,
governing basic digestion and the 12 other agnis.
     5 Bhutagnis: Metabolize the five elements that
are present in the body’s tissues. They are a form
of heat that is always present in all the tissues that
are responsible for proper function and develop-
ment of the tissues.
     7 Dhatagnis: Metabolize in the seven tissues
(dhátus). This is a biochemical process beyond
food digestion. It includes anabolic and catabolic
activity.
Body Tissues and Wastes
(The 7 Dhátus and 3 Malas)
Tissue Layers (Dhátus)
     The Áyurvedic view of the body has many simi-
larities to modern beliefs. Seven tissue systems
(dhátus) are in the body. Each tissue is primarily
governed by one of the three elements. Each dhátu
is developed or transformed out of the previous
tissue layer, starting with rasa (plasma). If plasma
is not healthy, then all the other layers will also be
affected.
r
e
y
a
L
e
u
ssi
T
(
s
u
tá
h
D
)
g
n
i
n
r
e
v
o
G
a
h
ä
o
D
(
a
m
s
al
P
.1
a
s
a
r
)
reta
w
/a
h
p
a
K
(
d
o
ol
B
.2
atk
a
r
)
erif/atti
P
(
elc
s
u
M
.3
a
s
å
á
m
)
reta
w
/a
h
p
a
K
(
ta
F
.4
s
a
d
e
m
)
reta
w
/a
h
p
a
K
(
e
n
o
B
.5
ihts
a
)
ria/u
y
á
V
/diulf-
s
e
v
re
N
.6
(
w
o
rra
m
ájja
m
)
reta
w
/a
h
p
a
K
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
.7
(
s
e
u
ssit
a
r
k
u
h
¤
)
reta
w
/a
h
p
a
K

19
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
     With insight into the governing doßha, the cause
of a diseased dhátu is accurately determined. For
example, if a person has cancer in the blood, we
know that excess Pitta (heat, toxins) exists in the
blood. If a person has osteoporosis, then too much
Váyu is in the bones. Muscular Dystrophy would
be an example of a muscular or Kapha problem.
     Once the elemental cause of the illness is
known, therapies are used to balance the system
through reducing the excess elements(s) and in-
creasing the deficient one(s). Therapies include the
use of herbs, foods, and lifestyle variations.
Signs and Symptoms of
Vitiated Tissues (Dhátus)
Body Wastes (Malas)
     Another important factor in health is the proper
elimination of waste: feces, urine, and sweat (mis-
cellaneous waste includes tears (eye), spit (tongue),
oily secretions (skin), mucoid secretions (mucus
membrane), and smegma (genitalia excreta). Malas
(bodily wastes) help maintain the functioning of
our organs.
     Feces (puríßha) provide support and tone, as
well as maintaining the temperature of the colon.
Improper functioning can lead to Váyu illness like
worry, fear, ungroundedness, nervousness, head-
aches, gas, distention, and constipation. Function-
ing of the feces is damaged by excessive use of
purgatives, colonics, worry, and fear (fear can both
create improper functioning or be a by-product of
this dysfunction). It is also damaged by excessive
travel, the wrong foods (such as “junk food,” or
those foods that are too light or too heavy), over-
sleeping, coffee, drugs, antibiotics, insufficient
exercise, and prolonged diarrhea. In Áyurvedic lit-
erature it has been clearly stated that debilitated
persons suffering from tuberculosis should not be
given any kind of purgatives, as it is the feces that
preserve the temperature of such persons.
      Urine (mútra) expels water and other solid
wastes from the body. Poor urine elimination re-
sults in bladder pain or infection, difficult urina-
tion, fever, thirst, dry mouth, or dehydration. Di-
uretic drugs, alcohol, excessive sex, trauma, fright,
or too few liquids damage it.
     Sweat (sweda) controls the body temperature
by way of expelling excess water and toxins, cools
the body, moistens the skin and hair, carried ex-
cess fat from the body, and purifies the blood. Ex-
cess sweating can cause skin diseases (usually Pitta
related) like eczema, boils, fungus, burning skin,
dehydration, fatigue, or convulsions (Váyu-
caused). Deficient sweating can result in stiff hair,
skin fissures, dry skin, dandruff, wrinkles, or sus-
ceptibility to colds and flu (i.e., peripheral circu-
lation). Too much dry food, lack of salt, excess or
deficient exercise, and excessive use of diaphoretic
herbs or excess sweating damage the sweating
functions.
Life Sap (Ojas)
     Ojas (the life sap) is the essence of all the tis-
sues (dhátus). It pervades every part of the body.
(
s
e
u
ssi
T
s
u
tá
h
D
)
s
m
o
t
p
m
y
S
&
s
n
gi
S
(
a
m
s
al
P
a
s
a
r
)
,n
oitatipla
p
,ss
e
n
ss
elts
er
n
oits
u
a
h
x
e
,nia
p
c
aid
ra
c
y
b
d
etatirri
,e
s
u
a
c
tu
o
hti
w
s
e
sio
n
d
u
ol
/nib
olg
o
m
e
H
(
d
o
ol
B
atk
a
r
)
nik
s
,ss
e
n
y
r
d
,ss
e
n
h
g
u
o
r
rets
ul
f
o
ss
ol
,s
k
c
arc
(
elc
s
u
M
a
s
å
á
m
)
f
o
yllaic
e
p
s
e(
n
oitaic
a
m
e
d
n
a
,k
c
e
n
,s
k
c
ottu
b
)
n
e
m
o
d
b
a
(
ta
F
s
a
d
e
m
)
e
y
e
,stnioj
g
nik
c
arc
,niht
ylre
v
o
,e
d
utiss
al
n
oits
u
a
h
x
e
(
e
n
o
B
ihts
a
)
;hte
et
,slia
n
,ria
h
g
nillaf
stnioj
e
s
o
ol
(
w
o
rra
M
ájja
m
)
e
n
o
b
,ss
e
n
k
a
e
w
,ss
e
n
niht
e
n
o
b
u
y
á
V
,ss
e
nth
gil
s
e
s
a
e
sid
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
(
e
c
n
e
ss
e
a
r
k
u
h
¤
)
,htu
o
m
y
r
d
,ss
e
n
k
a
e
w
,n
oitre
x
e
,e
d
utiss
al
,r
olla
p
n
oitalu
c
aje-
n
o
n
,e
c
n
eto
p
m
i
n
e
m
e
s
f
o

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
20
(Some authorities believe ojas is a combination of
eight different drops (aßhtabindu) of liquid, se-
creted from the pineal gland.) Excessive sex, drugs,
talking, loud music, insufficient rest or burnout,
and high technology deplete Ojas. Signs of dimin-
ished ojas are fear, worry, sensory organ pain, poor
complexion, cheerlessness, roughness, emaciation,
immune system disorders, and easily contracting
diseases.
Tastes (Rasas)
     Áyurveda says there is a total of six tastes. Each
taste is governed by a doßha. These tastes may ei-
ther aggravate or pacify the doßhas, dhátus, and
malas.
     Tastes provide varying degrees of nourishing
strength. Sweet taste is the most nourishing, and
as each taste becomes less nourishing, it becomes
more bitter, until it is astringent—and the least
nourishing.
     This is also the order of tastes that get digested
(so eating sweets first is better, and astringent foods
last). Some authorities state that if one were to eat
sweets last, the body would digest this taste first,
letting the other tastes pass undigested through the
system. By the time the sweets are digested, the
other foods have passed through the system with-
out being digested. Other authorities believe that a
little sweet taste at the end of the meal stimulates
digestion.
     Every substance, including some foods, may
have more than one taste (i.e., primary and sec-
ondary tastes). Substances alleviate doßhas, aggra-
vate doßhas, or maintain health. When health is at
least slightly in balance, persons are advised to have
a little of each taste daily. Rasa is discussed in a
Chapter 6, the chapter on nutrition.
Potency: (Vírya)/After Taste: (Vipaka)
     The qualities of substances are either hot
(úßhná) or cold (síta). Hot tastes generally aggra-
vate Pitta and mitigate Váyu and Kapha. Cold tastes
mitigate Pitta and aggravate the rest. After diges-
tion, one experiences an aftertaste, which is either
sweet, sour, or pungent. Again, this is important in
balancing or imbalancing the doßhas. These aspects
will also be discussed in the chapter on nutrition.
20 Qualities (Guòas)
     Each substance has qualities associated with
one doßha. Again, like increases like and oppo-
sites reduce doßhas, dhátus, and malas. Áyurveda
has developed a remarkably detailed and precise
analysis of the qualities. These attributes are used
in finding which qualities will heal or aggravate
the doßhas. For example, substances that are heavy
and cold are not suggested for those with weak
digestion, such as Váyu and Kapha doßhas. Foods
that are hot and oily heal the Váyu doßha.
(
ets
a
T
a
s
a
R
)
a
h
ä
o
D
d
et
a
v
a
r
g
g
A
a
h
ä
o
D
d
e
c
n
ala
B
/te
e
w
S
u
d
á
w
s
a
h
p
a
K
atti
P
/u
y
á
V
/r
u
o
S
al
m
a
a
h
p
a
K
/atti
P
u
y
á
V
/ytla
S
a
`
a
v
al
a
h
p
a
K
/atti
P
u
y
á
V
/tn
e
g
n
u
P
uta
k
u
y
á
V
/atti
P
)ss
e
c
x
e
ni(
a
h
p
a
K
/retti
B
atkit
u
y
á
V
a
h
p
a
K
/atti
P
/tn
e
g
nirts
A
a
y
a
h
ä
a
k
u
y
á
V
a
h
p
a
K
/atti
P

21
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
     In the table below the 20 guòas or qualities are
listed.
     Disease (roga) is caused by deficient, improper,
or excess contact with 1) seasons (e.g., excess cold
in winter), 2) sensory objects (e.g., overeating), and
3) activities (e.g., over exercise). Health (arogya)
is achieved through proper contact with the three.
     Disease is caused by imbalancing the doßhas.
For example, if a Pitta doßha (fiery person) eats
much ginger, they will create excess fire in the
body. This results in Pitta disorders like acid indi-
gestion. Diseases occur due to internal or external
factors, and reside in the body or mind. Disease is
caused by rajas (over-activity) and tamas (lethargy)
psychological/ spiritual factors.
Three Mental Qualities:
Sattwa, Rajas, Tamas
     The three guòas, sattwa, rajas, and tamas are
found in nature and in the mind, paralleling the
three doßhas of the body. Sattwa, or purity, is the
preferred mental state because a person with this
quality is calm, alert, kind, and thoughtful. A per-
son whose mind is predominantly rajasic (too ac-
tive) is always seeking diversions (incessant ac-
tivity). The tamasic-predominant mind is a dull,
lethargic mind.
     Just as combinations of Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha
exist for the body, the mind has combinations of
sattwa, rajas, and tamas. Individuals whose minds
are sattwic and rajasic are those who enthusiasti-
cally study spiritual and holistic measures to im-
prove themselves. Rajasic/tamasic minded people
will actively work and exercise to overcome their
lethargy.
     Mental balance and the development of purity
and peace develop the mind towards a sattwic mind.
This is the first stage of samádhi or spiritual real-
ization.
     To decide the cause of illness, the practitioner
observes, questions, and takes the pulse of the pa-
tient. Illness can be understood by learning its
cause, or seeing it in its incubatory, beginning,
developmental, or advanced stages.
The Váyu Mind
When Váyu doßha persons are balanced,
they are cheerful, creative, and adaptable.
When Váyu doßhas are imbalanced, they are
worried, nervous, fearful, and giddy.
     The mental constitution of Váyu individuals
tends towards fear, anxiety, and insecurity. They
can easily be deceived with threats or promises.
They do not have much courage, are of solitary
nature, and possess few intimate friends (although
they form friends with those in other social circles).
Váyu people do not make good leaders or followers
and are not materialistic (as they spend and earn
freely).
     Sattwic influence creates comprehension, the
need for unity and healing, and creates a positive
mental outlook.
   Rajasic influence creates indecisiveness,
unreliability, hyperactivity, and anxiety.
     Tamasic influence creates fear, a servile atti-
tude, dishonesty, depression, self-destructiveness,
addictive behavior, sexual perversions, animal in-
stincts, or suicidal thoughts.
/y
v
a
e
H
.1
u
r
u
g
/th
gi
L
.1
1
u
h
g
al
/
w
ol
S
.2
a
d
n
a
m
/k
ciu
Q
.2
1
a
n
h
ä
k
et
/dlo
C
.3
a
m
ih
/to
H
.3
1
á
n
h
ä
ú
/yli
O
.4
a
h
d
gin
s
/y
r
D
.4
1
a
h
ä
k
ú
r
/hto
o
m
S
.5
a
n
h
ä
k
alh
¤
/h
g
u
o
R
.5
1
a
r
a
h
k
/dilo
S
.6
a
r
d
n
á
s
/diu
qi
L
.6
1
a
v
a
r
d
/tf
o
S
.7
u
di^
m
/d
ra
H
.7
1
a
nihta
k
/elb
at
S
.8
a
rihts
/g
niv
o
M
.8
1
ala
c
/eltb
u
S
.9
a
m
h
ä
k
ú
s
/e
g
ra
L
.9
1
alú
hts
/y
m
ils-
n
o
N
.0
1
a
d
a
h
äiv
/y
m
il
S
.0
2
alih
c
cip

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
22
The Pitta Mind
When Pitta doßha individuals are healthy
or balanced, they are goal-oriented,
powerful, warm, athletic.
When Pitta doßhas are imbalanced,
they are burnt out, angry, impatient,
irritable, and critical.
     Mental Pitta individuals possess fiery emotions
like irritability, anger, and hate. Mentally, they have
abilities of penetration, yet can be aggressive and
seldom sentimental. They are determined,
articulate, convincing, and yet may try to dominate
others with their will and ideas. They are self-
righteous and may become fanatical. Pitta people
are good leaders, ambitious, and work hard to
achieve great goals. They help their families and
friends, but are cruel and unforgiving to enemies.
Also, they are bold, adventurous, daring and enjoy
challenges. Although they have much clarity, they
lack compassion.
     Sattwic influence creates clarity, intelligence,
leadership, warmth, and independence.
     Rajasic influence creates willfulness, ambition,
anger, manipulation, vanity, impulsiveness, and
aggressiveness.
     Tamasic influence creates vindictiveness, vio-
lence, hate, criminality, and psychopathic behav-
ior.
The Kapha Mind
When Kapha doßha persons are healthy they
love to cook for others, are strong, and loyal.
Imbalanced Kapha doßhas become
lethargic, hoarding, overly materialistic
     These people are the emotional ones, full of
love, desire, romance, and sentiment. However,
they also have the negative emotions of lust and
greed. Kapha doßhas find it hard to adapt to new
situations, yet they are very loyal. They have many
friends and are close to their families, communi-
ties, religions, and countries. They are more com-
fortable with practical knowledge than with ab-
stract ideas.
Sattwic influence creates calmness, peace, love,
compassion, faith, nurturing, and forgiveness.
Rajasic influence creates greed for money, mate-
rial luxuries, and comfort. They are too
sentimental, controlling, attached, and lustful.
Tamasic influences create dullness, sloth, lethargy,
depression, lack of care and a tendency to steal.
Developing Samádhi: Divine Peace
     Some patients have one type of physi-
cal constitution combined with another
type of mental constitution (i.e., a heavy and ner-
vous person has a Kapha body and Váyu mind).
Consequently, when suggesting healing measures
for the Kapha body illness, the practitioner takes
care not to aggravate the Váyu mental constitu-
tion. In this example, fire-increasing measures are
recommended, including herbs, foods, and aromas,
but not air-increasing ones. Mental disease is re-
lated to rajas and tamas, the activity and lethargy
principles of the three guòas (qualities). The guòas
also reflect the level of the soul’s development. If
the mind is sattwic, or pure, then clarity exists. A
sattwic-minded person perceives the knowledge of
Divinity. A sattwic mind is also the first stage of
samádhi. Poor mental discrimination is the cause
of all illness, making one dishonest, self-destruc-
tive, and hurtful to others. One would overindulge
in “junk food,” entertainment, etc. The best way to
heal is by following a sattwic lifestyle. This in-
cludes meditation, compassionate actions, ethical
and virtuous behavior, healthy, organic foods, and
living within the rhythms of nature. People in
whom sattwa predominates, see the good in all
things (including the value an illness may offer),
and they are the healthiest people as well.
     Tamas creates lethargy, dullness, and a cloudy
perception. This is caused by fear and ignorance,
and plays on one’s animal nature. A person with
this frame of mind would choose not to do much
of anything. When this mental quality is predomi-

23
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
nant, such persons will suppress their emotions.
Emotional suppression is a major cause of severe
illness, like cancer. Stagnancy describes their emo-
tional makeup. Negative mindedness and self-de-
struction define their personality.
     Rajas causes a turbulent, or distracted, mind. It
makes one look outside for comfort and fulfillment.
It causes one to seek external validation. Rajas
makes one think love is derived from an external
relationship, not from within. It makes one will-
ful, egoistic, and manipulative.
     When rajas and tamas exist in the mind simul-
taneously, activity is devoted to greedy purposes.
These persons also overextend themselves for those
ends. They blame others for their condition and
expect others to cure them.
     When rajas is free from a trace of tamas, it then
can develop purer activities, like studying or learn-
ing about health and spirituality. Yet the rajasic-
minded person may still burn out during the learn-
ing process.
     Often, just as people have some qualities of all
three doßhas, that mind has some of each guòa.
Seven mental guòa types exist: sattwa, rajas,
tamas, sattwa-rajas, sattwa-tamas, rajas-tamas,
and triguòa (equal amounts of the three guòas).
Just as external factors may cause doßha derange-
ment, the rajasic nature of our modern technologi-
cal society may cause mental rajasic derange-
ments.
Mental Qualities: Práòa, Tejas & Ojas
     The mind has three governing agents similar to
Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha. They are called práòa (air),
tejas (fire), and ojas (life sap). Again, it is the bal-
ance of these three elements that decide mental
balance and clarity. Too much práòa will create
anxiety, worry, insomnia, and loss of memory and
concentration. (This práòa is different from the air
we think of as respiration. Here, práòa means life-
force, soul, or kuòæaliní ¤hakti). Excess práòa dries
up ojas, the sap that creates one’s spiritual life sap.
Through meditation, ojas becomes transmuted into
life energy, or “kuòæaliní ¤hakti,” which develops
one’s Self-realization. Spiritually speaking, an
undetectable tube runs up the middle of our spine
called the “sußhumòá” in which the kuòæaliní en-
ergy travels. Without this ¤hakti energy, not only
is our physical and mental health used up, but also
so is our spiritual development. Excess tejas also
depletes ojas by burning it up, whereas excess ojas
can create a lethargic person.
Doßhas and the Organs
     Each organ is primarily governed by one doßha.
By knowing which doßha controls which organs,
one achieves the health of the appropriate organ,
through balancing the elements (doßhas)
* Origin Sites of the doßhas
     By merely knowing which doßha is related to
which tissue layer and body system, Áyurveda can
identify and bring balance to health problems. For
example, diabetes is a condition of the water (glu-
cose) metabolism srota. Kapha doßha causes this
condition (from sweet tastes). By removing wa-
ter-increasing foods and herbs from one’s diet, and
eating fire and air increasing foods (bitter and pun-
gent tastes), diabetes is controlled. Certain herbs
like ¤hilájit and guæmar, and special Áyurvedic
abhyañgas (massage-like) are also used specifi-
cally for healing the pancreas and kidneys.
u
y
á
V
a
tti
P
a
h
p
a
K
*
n
olo
c
lla
m
s
*
e
nits
etni
*
h
c
a
m
ots
niar
b
re
vil
s
g
n
ul
s
h
giht
n
e
elp
s
m
uid
ra
cire
p
s
e
n
o
b
re
d
d
alb
lla
g
re
m
ra
w
elpirt
y
e
n
dik
y
e
n
dik
y
ra
nir
u
re
d
d
alb
tra
e
h
y
ra
nir
u
re
d
d
alb
s
a
erc
n
a
p
s
a
erc
n
a
p
s
a
erc
n
a
p
s
u
retu
s
ets
et

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
24
Health, Excess & Deficiencies of the Dhátus
Plasma/Rasa
     Excess: Saliva, phlegm, blocked channels, loss
of appetite, nausea, Kapha is increased through-
out body.
     Deficient: Rough skin, dry lips, dehydration,
weariness and exhaustion after slight activity, in-
tolerance to sound, tremors, palpitations, heart
pain, a sense of emptiness, poor nutrition.
     Healthy: Good complexion, healthy hair, vital-
ity, compassionate, and happy.
Blood/ Rakta
     Excess: Skin disease, abscesses, liver, and
spleen enlargement, hypertension, tumors, de-
lirium, poor digestion, jaundice, burning sensation,
bleeding, redness in skin, eyes, and urine.
     Deficient: Low blood pressure, pallor, low skin
luster, blood vessel collapse, shock, desiring sour
and cold foods, loose and dry hair, dry, rough,
cracked skin.
     Healthy: Good color in cheeks, hands, feet, lips,
tongue lustrous eyes, warm skin, vital yet sensi-
tive to sun and heat, passion.
Blood cells
Muscle/Máåsa
     Excess: Enlarged liver, swelling, tumors in
muscle sites, heaviness or swelling of glands, over-
weight or obesity, irritability, aggression, fibroids,
miscarriage, low sexual vitality.
     Deficient: Weariness, loose limbs, lack of co-
ordination, emaciation of hips, back of neck and
abdomen, fear, unhappiness, insecurity.
     Healthy: Able to exercise, strong, adaptable.
Well developed neck, shoulder and thigh muscles.
Courageous, integrity, fortitude and a strong char-
acter.
Rotator Arm Muscles
Extensor Arm Muscles
Flexor Arm Muscles

25
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
Fat/Medas
     Excess: Overweight and obesity, lacking mo-
bility, asthma, fatigue, sexual debility, thirst, dia-
betes, shortened life span, hypertension, breast,
sagging belly and thighs, emotional fear and at-
tachment.
     Deficient: Weary eyes, fatigue, cracking joints,
enlarged spleen, limb emaciation, thin abdomen,
brittle or weak hair, bones, nails, teeth.
     Healthy: Lubricated tissues, oily hair, eyes, and
feces. Ample body fat (not excessive). Melodious
voice, loving, joyful, humorous, and affectionate.
Bone/Asthi
     Excess: Spurs, extra bones and teeth, extra large
frame, joint pain, low stamina, anxiety, arthritis,
bone cancer, or gigantism in extreme cases.
     Deficient: Pain or loose joints, falling of teeth,
hair and nails, poor bone and tooth formation, fa-
tigue, dwarfism in extreme cases.
     Healthy: Large joints, and prominent bones,
flexibility, long, feet, large, strong, white teeth,
patient, consistent, stable, hard working.
Marrow/ Majjá
     Excess: Limbs, eyes and joint (origin) heavi-
ness, deep non-healing sores, cloudy eyes, and in-
fections.
     Deficient: Weak and porous bones, small joint
pain, seeing spots or darkness before the eyes,
dizzy, low sexual vitality, feeling emptiness, and
fear. Váyu becomes imbalanced from low nerve
tissue supply.
     Healthy: Strong joints, clear eyes, good speech,
able to withstand pain, sharp, clear, sensitive mind
with good memory, open, feeling, compassionate,
receptive.
Marrow Cavity
Autonomic N.S.
Semen/ £hukra
     Excess: Excess sexual desire that leads to an-
ger, excess semen, semen stones, and a swollen
prostate.
     Deficient: Low vitality and sexual desire, im-
potence, sterility, difficult and slow ejaculation,
bloody semen. One may experience lassitude, wea-
riness, a dry mouth, lower back pain, fear, anxiety,
and lack of love.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
26
     Healthy: Attractive body, lustrous eyes, good
hair growth, well-formed sexual organs, charm,
loving, compassionate, empathic. Excess produces
Kapha. Deficiencies produce Váyu.
Srotas: Body Channel Systems
     Other parallels exist between East and West
concerning srotas. Srotas are the channels, pores,
or systems that carry or circulate the doßhas and
tissues (dhátus) or their elements to the various
organs. During this process of circulation the
dhátus are transformed from the first to the last
tissue layer (rasa through ¤hukra). Each dhátu has
two aspects: nutrition for its own tissue layer, and
sustenance for the next developing dhátu.
     Áyurveda notes 16 systems, several more than
those that are currently considered. The origin sites,
which carry each dhátu, are listed on the next page.

27
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
(
s
m
e
ts
y
S
s
a
to
r
S
)
d
e
t
a
le
R
:e
ti
S
n
a
g
r
O
n
ia
M
a
h
ä
o
D
ss
e
c
x
E
f
o
s
n
g
i
S
y
r
o
ta
rip
s
e
R
)
h
ta
e
r
B
lati
V
(
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
ò
á
r
P
,a
e
h
c
a
rt
,e
s
o
n
;n
o
lo
c
,tra
e
H
:e
a
r
u
elp
,tc
a
rt
y
ratn
e
m
ila
s
g
n
u
l
u
y
á
V
n
o
italitn
e
v
re
p
y
H
e
vits
e
g
i
D
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
n
n
Á
atti
P
:e
n
its
etn
i
lla
m
s/e
vits
e
g
i
D
a
e
h
rraid
,y
tid
ic
a
re
p
y
H
)reta
w
(
m
silo
b
ate
M
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
k
a
d
U
a
h
p
a
K
:s
a
e
rc
n
a
p
d
n
a
etala
P
ai
m
e
c
y
lg
o
p
y
h
,re
g
n
u
H
a
m
s
al
P
/cita
h
p
m
y
L
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
s
a
R
a
h
p
a
K
:sle
ss
e
v
d
o
o
lb
d
n
a
tra
e
H
s
cita
h
p
m
y
l
,s
d
n
alg
n
ello
w
s
,a
m
e
d
E
d
o
o
l
B
/y
r
o
talu
c
ri
C
)
n
ib
o
lg
o
m
e
H
(
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
tk
a
R
atti
P
:n
e
elp
s
d
n
a
re
vi
L
,n
ik
s
f
o
sre
d
r
o
sid
,n
o
is
n
etre
p
y
H
,s
e
ss
e
c
s
b
a
;g
n
id
e
elb
r
o
,n
e
elp
s
s
n
o
ita
m
m
alf
n
i
,e
cid
n
u
aj
ralu
c
s
u
M
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
s
å
á
M
a
h
p
a
K
:n
ik
s
d
n
a
stn
e
m
a
g
i
L
sr
o
m
e
r
T
e
s
o
p
id
A
/ta
F
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
o
d
e
M
:s
g
n
ire
v
o
c
n
a
g
r
o
d
n
a
y
e
n
d
i
K
a
h
p
a
K
y
tis
e
b
o
,a
m
e
d
E
latele
k
S
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
vih
ts
A
u
y
á
V
:s
p
ih
,e
u
ssit
e
s
o
p
id
A
e
u
ssit
e
n
o
b
a
rtx
E
w
o
rra
M
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
á
jja
M
u
y
á
V
:stn
io
j
d
n
a
s
e
n
o
B
,sr
o
m
e
rt
,n
ia
p
,ain
m
o
s
n
I
e
vitp
e
c
re
p
y
lre
v
o
,y
tivitis
n
e
sre
p
y
h
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
r
k
u
h
£
a
h
p
a
K
:slatin
e
g
la
n
retx
E
,a
e
h
rr
o
k
u
el
,n
o
italu
c
aje
e
r
u
ta
m
e
r
P
n
o
issi
m
e
la
n
r
u
tc
o
n
,a
e
h
rr
o
ta
m
re
p
s
ta
e
w
S
/s
u
o
e
c
a
b
e
S
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
d
e
w
S
a
h
p
a
K
:s
elcillo
f
ria
h
d
n
a
ta
F
ta
e
w
s
y
lio
e
viss
e
c
x
E
y
r
o
te
rc
x
E
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
h
ßír
u
P
u
y
á
V
:n
o
lo
c
d
n
a
m
u
tc
e
R
a
e
h
rrai
D
y
ra
n
ir
U
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
rtú
M
:re
d
d
alb
y
ra
n
ir
u
d
n
a
y
e
n
d
i
K
a
h
p
a
K
n
o
ita
n
ir
u
tn
e
u
q
e
rf
r
o
ss
e
c
x
E
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
ela
m
e
F
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
tr
A
,n
o
ita
u
rts
n
e
m
(
s
u
ret
U
atti
P
:)s
e
n
o
m
r
o
h
)
n
o
ita
u
rts
n
e
m
ss
e
c
x
e
(
aig
a
h
rr
o
n
e
M
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
ela
m
e
F
s
a
to
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
y
n
a
tS
a
h
p
a
K
:s
e
s
n
e
m
d
n
a
k
li
m
ts
a
e
r
B
k
li
m
ts
a
e
r
b
f
o
w
o
lf
ss
e
c
x
E
From this chart we see that a Váyu excess will create problems in the colon, rectum, skeleton, or nervous
system. Pitta derangement occurs in the female reproductive, digestive, and circulatory systems. Kapha rules
the remaining channels: metabolic, lymphatic, muscular, adipose, reproductive, sebaceous, and female
reproductive subsystem (breast milk system). When these srotas are depleted, specific symptoms develop:

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
28
s
m
ets
y
S
(
s
ato
r
S
)
y
c
n
eicife
D
f
o
s
n
gi
S
hta
er
B
lati
V
a
h
a
v
a
ò
á
r
P
nia
p
r
o
d
n
u
o
s
hti
w
)
hta
er
b
f
o
ss
e
ntr
o
h
s
,.g.e(
s
eitila
m
r
o
n
b
a
g
nihta
er
B
n
oits
e
gi
D
a
h
a
v
a
n
n
A
etite
p
p
a
w
ol
,tsriht
e
viss
e
c
x
e
,s
a
erc
n
a
p
,ta
o
r
ht
,s
pil
,etala
p
,e
u
g
n
ot
y
r
D
reta
W
a
h
a
v
a
k
a
d
U
ai
m
e
c
ylg
re
p
y
h
,g
niti
m
o
v
,a
e
s
u
a
n
,n
oits
e
gid
ni
,aix
er
o
n
a
,re
g
n
u
h
f
o
ss
o
L
a
m
s
al
P
a
h
a
v
a
s
a
R
,g
nitniaf
d
n
a
re
v
ef
,ss
e
nis
w
o
r
d
,ss
e
niv
a
e
h
,a
e
s
u
a
n
,aix
er
o
n
a
,re
g
n
u
h
f
o
ss
o
L
ria
h
y
ar
g
ylra
e
,n
oits
e
gid
r
o
o
p
,n
oitaic
a
m
e
,e
c
n
eto
p
m
i
,s
k
c
olb
y
r
otalu
cric
,ai
m
e
n
a
n
oitar
d
y
h
e
d
,s
elk
nir
w
d
n
a
nib
olg
o
m
e
H
a
h
a
v
atk
a
R
d
n
a
s
nie
v
d
e
s
p
allo
c
,ss
e
n
y
r
d
,rets
ul
f
o
ss
ol
,s
k
c
arc
,s
er
u
ssif
,nik
s
h
g
u
o
R
ar
u
p
r
u
p
,sre
d
r
o
sid
e
vits
e
gid
,ai
m
e
n
a
,s
g
niht
r
u
o
s
&
dlo
c
r
o
f
eris
e
d
,s
eiretra
elc
s
u
M
a
h
a
v
a
s
å
á
M
,retio
g
,slio
b
,sitillis
n
ot
,xiv
re
c
r
o
alu
v
u
d
e
m
alf
ni
,e
u
ssit
elc
s
u
m
f
o
n
oitaiti
V
latc
er
r
o
n
oig
er
la
n
a
e
ht
ni
sle
ss
e
v
d
o
olb
d
etalid
(
s
dio
h
rr
o
m
e
h
,sittolgip
e
d
e
m
alf
ni
,nik
s
g
nile
e
p
,sr
o
m
ut
ralu
n
ar
g
,sr
o
m
ut
elc
s
u
m
,)s
e
n
ar
b
m
e
m
s
u
o
c
u
m
e
ht
f
o
sr
o
m
ut
e
n
ot
elc
s
u
m
r
o
o
p
,s
m
s
a
p
s
elc
s
u
m
ta
F
a
h
a
v
o
d
e
M
,s
utille
m
s
ete
b
aid
g
nid
ulc
ni
sre
d
r
o
sid
y
ra
nir
u
f
o
s
m
otp
m
y
s
d
n
a
s
n
gis
y
r
ota
b
u
c
n
I
nik
s
y
r
d
,n
oitaic
a
m
e
,ria
h
d
etta
m
e
n
o
B
a
h
a
vihts
A
ni
n
oita
s
n
e
s
g
nik
c
arc
;e
u
ssit
hto
ot
d
n
a
e
n
o
b
tn
eicife
d
,hte
et
d
n
a
s
e
n
o
b
k
a
e
W
sis
o
r
o
p
o
ets
o
,slia
n
d
n
a
ria
h
f
o
ss
ol
d
n
a
n
oitar
olo
c
sid
,nia
p
e
n
o
b
,hte
et
w
o
rra
M
a
h
a
v
ájja
M
s’
n
o
s
nik
ra
P
,ss
e
n
b
m
u
n
e
v
re
n
,s
e
ss
e
c
s
b
a
tnioj
,g
nitniaf
,ss
e
nid
dig
,nia
p
tnio
J
)s
elc
s
u
m
ot
g
nirif
to
n
s
e
v
re
n
(
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
a
h
a
v
a
r
k
u
h
£
y
n
e
g
o
r
p
k
cis
r
o
,ytilirets
,y
c
n
eto
p
m
I
s
e
c
e
F
a
h
a
v
a
h
ßír
u
P
)
d
n
u
o
s
d
n
a
nia
p
hti
w
r
u
c
c
o
y
a
m
(
n
oita
pits
n
o
C
e
nir
U
a
h
a
v
a
rtú
M
n
oita
nir
u
lu
f
nia
p
r
o
,tlu
ciffid
,ytn
a
c
S
ta
e
w
S
a
h
a
v
a
d
e
w
S
d
n
e
n
o
g
nid
n
ats
ria
h
,n
oita
s
n
e
s
g
nin
r
u
b
,nik
s
h
g
u
o
r
,ta
e
w
s
tn
eicife
d
r
o
f
o
k
c
a
L
s
u
ret
U
a
h
a
v
atr
A
s
eic
n
eicife
d
e
n
o
m
r
o
h
,s
e
s
n
e
m
d
e
y
ale
d
r
o
ytn
a
c
S
kli
M
ts
a
er
B
a
h
a
v
a
y
n
atS
kli
m
ts
a
er
b
f
o
k
c
a
L

29
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
(
sle
n
n
a
h
C
s
ato
r
S
)
f
o
s
e
s
u
a
C
ato
r
S
n
oit
aiti
V
hta
er
B
lati
V
a
h
a
v
a
ò
á
r
P
g
nisicre
x
e
,y
r
g
n
u
h
n
e
h
w
,slio
,s
e
gr
u
lar
uta
n
g
niss
er
p
p
u
S
-reta
W
m
silo
b
ate
M
a
h
a
v
a
k
a
d
U
tsriht
e
viss
e
c
x
e
,s
d
o
o
f
y
r
d
,lo
h
o
cla
,n
oits
e
gid
ni
,ta
e
H
n
oits
e
gi
D
a
h
a
v
a
n
n
A
d
o
o
f
elbits
e
gid
ni/e
m
o
s
elo
h
w
n
U
a
m
s
al
P
a
h
a
v
a
s
a
R
y
rr
o
w
re
v
o
,s
d
o
o
f
ylio
,dlo
c
,y
v
a
e
h
ss
e
c
x
E
nib
olg
o
m
e
H
a
h
a
v
atk
a
R
er
u
s
o
p
x
e
erif
d
n
a
n
u
s
,s
k
nir
d
d
n
a
s
d
o
o
f
g
nitatirri
,ylio
,to
H
elc
s
u
M
a
h
a
v
a
s
å
á
M
sla
e
m
retfa
th
gir
g
nip
e
els
,s
d
o
o
f
y
v
a
e
H
ta
F
a
h
a
v
o
d
e
M
d
o
o
f
yttaf
,s
p
a
n
y
a
d
,e
sicre
x
e
o
N
e
n
o
B
a
h
a
vihts
A
s
d
o
o
f
g
nis
a
erc
ni
u
y
á
V
,s
e
n
o
b
s
b
u
r
d
n
a
s
etatirri
ta
ht
e
sicre
x
E
w
o
rra
M
a
h
a
v
ájja
M
y
r
d
,
w
o
rra
m
e
n
o
b
f
o
n
oiss
er
p
m
o
c
d
n
a
y
r
ujni
,s
diu
qil
ss
e
c
x
e
,g
nih
s
u
r
C
s
d
o
o
f
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
a
h
a
v
a
r
k
u
h
£
la
u
x
e
s
e
viss
e
c
x
e
,e
gr
u
la
u
x
e
s
f
o
n
oiss
er
p
p
u
s
,e
sr
u
o
cretni
yle
m
itn
U
e
c
n
e
glu
d
ni
e
nir
U
a
h
a
v
a
rtú
M
n
a
si
ere
ht
n
e
h
w
e
sr
u
o
cretni
d
n
a
,g
nik
nir
d
,g
nita
e
,e
gr
u
e
nir
u
g
niss
er
p
p
u
S
eta
nir
u
ot
e
gr
u
s
e
c
e
F
a
h
a
v
a
h
sír
u
P
er
o
fe
b
g
nita
e
,sla
e
m
e
gral
ylre
v
o
g
nita
e
,eta
c
efe
d
ot
e
gr
u
e
ht
g
niss
er
p
p
u
S
la
e
m
ts
al
e
ht
g
nits
e
gid
ta
e
w
S
a
h
a
v
a
d
e
w
S
dlo
c
d
n
a
to
h
f
o
g
nita
e
yle
m
itn
u
,ra
ef
,feir
g
,re
g
n
a
,ta
e
h
,e
sicre
x
e
ss
e
c
x
E
s
g
niht

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
30
sle
n
n
a
h
C
(
s
ato
r
S
)
s
k
c
ol
B
f
o
s
m
o
t
p
m
y
S
w
olfr
e
v
O
f
o
s
m
o
t
p
m
y
S
hta
er
B
lati
V
a
h
a
v
a
ò
á
r
P
ain
re
h
lataih
,a
m
hts
a
,h
g
u
o
c
s
g
n
ul
d
etar
o
fre
p
m
silo
b
ate
M
-reta
W
a
h
a
v
a
k
a
d
U
y
r
d
,re
c
n
a
c
cita
erc
n
a
p
,s
ete
b
aid
ta
o
r
ht
d
n
a
,s
pil
,etala
p
,e
u
g
n
ot
g
niti
m
o
v
y
reta
w
,aix
er
o
n
a
n
oits
e
gi
D
a
h
a
v
a
n
n
A
sr
o
m
ut
r
o
h
c
a
m
ots
d
etar
o
fre
p
,g
niti
m
o
v
)re
clu
.e.i(
s
e
nits
etni
a
m
s
al
P
a
h
a
v
a
s
a
R
h
p
m
yl
,s
d
n
alg
n
ello
w
s
ere
v
e
s
re
c
n
a
c
h
p
m
yl
,n
oitc
u
rts
b
o
h
g
u
o
c
hti
w
g
nid
e
elb
nib
olg
o
m
e
H
a
h
a
v
atk
a
R
n
e
elp
s
r
o
re
vil
,ai
m
hty
h
rra
tn
e
m
e
graln
e
g
nid
e
elb
elc
s
u
M
a
h
a
v
a
s
å
á
M
elc
s
u
m
,s
n
oita
m
m
alf
ni
cin
o
r
h
c
sr
o
m
ut
e
u
ssit
elc
s
u
m
f
o
g
nira
et
ta
F
a
h
a
v
o
d
e
M
d
n
a
s
u
o
e
n
atu
c
b
u
s(
sr
o
m
ut
taf
sis
o
relc
s
oiretra
,)
n
gin
e
b
ylla
u
s
u
e
u
ssit
e
s
o
pid
a
f
o
g
nira
et
e
n
o
B
a
h
a
vihts
A
re
c
n
a
c
,sr
u
p
s
,n
oita
cificla
c
g
nik
a
er
b
s
e
n
o
b
w
o
rra
M
a
h
a
v
ájja
M
S
M
,a
m
o
c
,s
n
oislu
v
n
o
c
e
g
a
m
a
d
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
a
h
a
v
a
r
k
u
h
£
etats
o
r
p
,s
ets
et
n
ello
w
s
,y
c
n
eto
p
m
i
sr
o
m
ut
e
niretu
,s
e
n
ots
re
d
d
alb
ni
m
re
p
s
e
nir
U
a
h
a
v
a
rtú
M
,n
oita
nir
u
lu
f
nia
p
r
o
tlu
ciffid
s
e
n
ots
r
o
s
n
oitc
u
rts
b
o
g
nitsr
u
b
re
d
d
alb
s
e
c
e
F
a
h
a
v
a
h
sír
u
P
,s
k
c
olb
la
nits
etni
,sr
o
m
ut
ytn
a
c
s
r
o
n
oita
pits
n
o
c
,sitilu
citre
vid
d
n
u
o
s
,nia
p
,lo
ots
n
oitar
o
fre
p
n
olo
c
ta
e
w
S
a
h
a
v
a
d
e
w
S
g
nita
e
w
s
o
n
a
m
s
alp
ni
ta
e
w
s
s
u
ret
U
a
h
a
v
atr
A
,a
e
h
rr
o
n
e
m
a
,a
e
h
rr
o
n
e
m
s
y
d
,nia
p
sr
o
m
ut
,sis
o
r
olh
c
lo
ots
ni
e
nir
u
r
o
s
e
s
n
e
m
kli
M
ts
a
er
B
a
h
a
v
a
y
n
atS
,sitits
a
m
,g
nille
w
s
,nia
p
,kli
m
o
n
re
c
n
a
c
,sr
o
m
ut
,sts
y
c
y
r
ujni
ts
a
er
b

31
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
     Using cross-referencing, by knowing a symp-
tom, Áyurveda finds the imbalanced srota.
     Srotas include, veins (¤hirá), arteries (dhamaní),
capillaries (rasavahini), ducts (náæí), passages
(pantha), tracts (marga), spaces inside the body
(¤harírachidra), ducts [open at one end and closed
at the other] (samvritásamvrita), residence
(sthána), containers (áßhaya), and abodes (niketa).
They are the visible and invisible areas in the
body’s tissue elements. Affliction of these srotas
creates vitiation of the tissues that reside there or
pass through them (i.e., vitiation of one, leads to
depletion of the other). Váyu and Kapha doßhas
cause vitiation of the srotas and tissue elements
(Charak Saåhitá - Vimánasthána Ch. 5 verse 9).
The 13 Natural Urges
     Áyurveda, we have already said, emphasizes
gentle and natural methods. To highlight this,
Áyurveda notes that certain bodily urges are natu-
ral and necessary for proper health and function-
ing of the mind, emotions, and body. The result of
suppressing these natural urges creates serious
health problems.
13 Natural Urges and the
Results of Suppressing Them
1. Sleep: Insomnia, fatigue, headache, deranges the
vital force.
2. Cry: Eye disease, allergies, light-headedness,
heart disease (suppressed emotions).
3. Sneeze: Headache, facial nerve pain, numbness,
weak senses, lung disorders, and respiratory aller-
gies.
4. Breathe: Coughing, asthma, shallow breath, low
vitality, heart disease.
5. Belch: Cough, hiccups, anorexia, difficult
breathing, palpitations.
6. Yawn: Tremors, numbness, convulsions, insom-
nia, harms nervous system, deranges Váyu.
7. Vomit: Nausea, anorexia, edema, anemia, fever,
skin diseases, damages Kapha.
8. Eat: Low appetite and digestion, malabsorption,
light-headedness, deranges the whole body and
mind, suppresses the agni fire and Pitta.
9. Drink: Dryness, deafness, fatigue, heart pain,
bladder pain, lower backache, headache, damages
Kapha and Váyu.
10. Urinate: Kidney and urinary system derange-
ment, difficult or painful urination, bladder pain,
lower backache, headache, deranges Váyu and
Kapha.
11. Ejaculate: Weakens the reproductive and uri-
nary systems, penis and testes pain, swollen pros-
tate, difficult urination, cardiac pain, insomnia,
malaise, Váyu derangement.
12. Defecate: Weakens the colon, excretory and
digestive srotas, causes constipation, abdominal
weakness, abdominal distention, headaches,
muscle cramps, deranges Váyu.
13. Flatulate: Causes constipation, difficult urina-
tion, abdominal pain, distention, weakens Váyu,
air wastes are absorbed into the bones and mar-
row, aggravating arthritis and nerves.
     It is for these reasons that Áyurveda advises
that people follow nature’s call, living naturally
and gently, without straining or forcing.
Four Disease Conditions
     All diseases are said to fall into one of four cat-
egories: those that are easily healed, those that are
difficult to heal, those that are controllable but can-
not be healed, and those that cannot be healed. Each
form of disease has specific features.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
32
     Easily Healed: People able to receive all thera-
pies, adults, self-controlled persons, not having the
vital organs affected, having mild or few causes,
or are currently in the first three of the six stages
of development (see second section following this).
Other indications include no secondary complica-
tions or diseases; or the disease is different from
the doßha, dhátu, region, season and constitution.
Further signs include, favorable planetary influ-
ence, having a proper practitioner and therapy, or
disease arising from only one doßha. Other signs
include diseases that manifest themselves in only
one disease pathway (i.e., inner, outer, central), or
those that have recently begun to develop.
     Difficult But Able to be Healed: Diseases re-
quiring surgery, dual doßha illness, or tridoßhic ill-
ness (some believe tridoßha belongs in the next
category).
     Controllable But Not Able to be Healed: Ill-
ness remaining throughout life, which have symp-
toms of easily healed description, are controllable
through using appropriate foods, herbs, nutrition,
and lifestyle regimens.
     Unable to be Healed: Symptoms that are the
opposite of diseases that can be healed (described
above), long lasting (and involving all seven dhátus
and important vital organs), causing anxiety, delu-
sion and restlessness, showing fatal signs, and caus-
ing loss of sensory organs.
Requirements of the Practitioner & Patient
     Practitioners are required to have both proper
education and experience learned from a qualified
teacher, to be ethical and virtuous, and to follow
their own Áyurvedic lifestyle and spirituality —in
actions, words, and thoughts.
     Patients should want to be healed, and should
be able and willing to take responsibility to heal
themselves or to be open to the therapies adminis-
tered.
     The practitioner should be honest and tell pa-
tients when they are unable to suggest healing
measures, and recognize a patient who does not
really want to be healed. The practitioner is not
advised to attempt healing persons who cannot be
healed. They will gain a reputation as an unscru-
pulous pretender, just out to make money.
Effects on Doßhas:
Time, Geography and Age
     The environment also plays a role in the bal-
ance of the doßhas. Each humor has certain times
of the day when it is predominant. It is sometimes
necessary to avoid imbalancing one’s doßha by
considering these effects.
     Thus, a Pitta doßha person would not be ad-
vised to spend much time in the sun between 11:00
and 3:00 P.M. They should avoid working at this
time as well, since they will be more susceptible
to overheating their systems during this time of
day.
Geography
     Geography affects a person in the same man-
ner as the seasons. Hotter climates will aggravate
Pitta doßhas. Cold and damp northwest regions will
bother the Kapha person. Dry and cold climates
will aggravate the Váyu doßha. Consider this ex-
ample of geographical therapy: If a person has a
Kapha condition, he or she may be advised to visit
the mountains or desert where it is drier. This cli-
mate causes the person to heal properly and
quickly. (See Chapter 12 for a detailed discussion
of seasons).
g
n
ilia
v
e
r
P
a
h
ß
o
D
y
a
D
e
h
t
f
o
s
e
m
i
T
a
h
p
a
K
.
M
.
A
9
-
7
.
M
.P
9
-
7
atti
P
/a
h
p
a
K
.
M
.
A
1
1
-
9
.
M
.P
1
1
-
9
atti
P
-.
M
.
A
1
1
.
M
.P
3
-
M
P
1
1
.
M
.
A
3
u
y
á
V
.
M
.P
5
-
3
.
M
.
A
5
-
3
a
h
p
a
K
/u
y
á
V
.
M
.P
7
-
5
.
M
.
A
7
-
5

33
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
Age
     Although a person’s doßha generally does not
change during their life, five stages need to be con-
sidered due to age.
The 5 Doßha Stages of Life
     Generally, we see a tendency for children to get
colds and congestion, a Kapha condition, what-
ever their doßha. During a person’s midyears, more
Pitta illness occurs. In the later years, we see Váyu
attacking the bones and memory of the elderly.
Simply by considering age factors, a person can
stay healthy and balanced, avoiding the problems
that come with age.
Humor-Imbalancing Priorities
     We have discussed the situations that imbalance
the humors: internal (foods, mind, emotions, and
body) and external (i.e., environmental and the
lifestyle). When two of these factors simulta-
neously affect an individual, one component will
have more of an effect on one’s doßha than the
other will.
1. Constitution outweighs environment
If the constitution is kept balanced, environmental
factors will not aggravate a condition. For example,
if children maintain a balanced constitution, they
will be less susceptible to Kapha-type colds and
flu in the winter. Environmental factors include
spiritual (karmic) situations such as past life influ-
ences.
2. Lifestyle outweighs environment
Following a lifestyle that balances their doßha pro-
tects people from environmental aggravations (i.e.,
cold weather will not seriously affect Váyu per-
sons if they take measures to keep warm).
3. Internal intake (of foods and drinks) out-
weighs external exposure
Seasonal temperatures cannot cause any imbalance
if a person eats herbs and foods that balance one’s
doßha.
4. Mind and emotions outweigh physical fac-
tors
A calm, peaceful mind and cheerful disposition
will keep away physical imbalances. (Worry will
cause physical illness. A clear, calm mind will pre-
vent bodily disease).
5. Degree of factors is most significant
An excess of any one cause of an imbalance will
create an illness. Too hot a summer day, too much
worries, too much junk food, etc., will override
any other balancing measures.
6. Combinations of factors outweigh individu-
als
Two or more agents acting on a person will be more
problematic than just one component.
Three Desires
     Intelligent persons are advised to pursue good
health, wealth, and Self-Realization. Health is the
basis of life, so living a healthy lifestyle (i.e.,
wholesome diet and lifestyle, and adequate rest,)
is essential. Living a long life without adequate
financial resources is sure to promote troubles. The
goal of life, according to Áyurvedic precepts, is
Self-Realization. By living a healthy life and not
being troubled by financial matters, persons have
the time to focus on the prime goal of life. Thus
Áyurveda suggests people live lives of charity,
compassion, nonviolence, celibacy, devotion to
Divinity and sádhaná (meditation) or prayer (see
the discussion on Yama and Niyama in Chapter 13).
These measures help to develop one’s Self-Real-
ization. By ignoring these principles, people are
forced to be reborn repeatedly until they follow
these measures and gain Self-Realization.
e
g
A
n
ia
M
a
h
ß
o
D
sra
e
y
5
1
-
htri
B
a
h
p
a
K
sra
e
y
7
2
-
5
1
atti
P
/a
h
p
a
K
sra
e
y
2
4
-
7
2
atti
P
sra
e
y
6
5
-
2
4
u
y
á
V
/atti
P
sra
e
y
+
6
5
u
y
á
V

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
34
Management of the Doßhas
     Váyu is reduced through heat and moistness.
     Pitta is reduced through leisure and cold.
     Kapha is reduced through heat, dry, and light-
ness.
     Váyu (Apán Váyu) gathers and becomes exces-
sive while food is in the large intestine  (originat-
ing site). Western medicine has a parallel view.
Carbohydrates become fermented and proteins
become putrefied. This produces gas in the colon.
Váyu is alleviated when food is in the stomach.
This is why it is suggested that Váyu individuals
have a meal every 3-4 hours. In this way, putting
food in the stomach reduces the Váyu accumulated
since the last meal. Because the colon is the organ
that is the main site of Váyu and mostly affects air,
Áyurveda recommends enemas (bastis) to cleanse
the excess Váyu from the colon.
     Pitta gathers and becomes excessive when food
is in the duodenum and small intestine  (originat-
ing site). It is reduced when the food reaches the
colon. Thus, an excess of Pitta may create heart-
burn about two hours after meals. Because the
small intestine is the main site of Pitta, purgation
(virechana) is recommended. From the western
point of view, the Pitta (Pachak Pitta) is parallel to
the digestive enzymes secreted by the pancreas,
liver, etc. that are active in the duodenum and small
intestine.
     Kapha gathers and becomes excessive in the
stomach just after eating (Kledaka Kapha). Kapha
moistens the food and passes it on to the small
intestine for the action of Pitta. It is the sluggish-
ness of Kapha that causes one to feel sleepy after
eating a meal. If an excess of Kapha develops, one
may feel nauseous or want to vomit just after eat-
ing. Kapha is relieved when food is in the small
intestine. The parallels to Kapha in western medi-
cine are mucoid secretions and saliva. When food
is eaten, secretions from the mucus membranes (in
the intestines) moisten the food. These secretions
from the lungs rise into the trachea (from the cili-
ary action) and move to the throat. Then the secre-
tions are swallowed and move down the esopha-
gus and finally, into the stomach. Áyurveda calls
these excess secretions water, or Kapha. In West-
ern medicine expectorants are used to remove the
excess secretions. These expectorants have minor
emetic properties. In large doses, these expecto-
rants cause vomiting (emesis). Likewise, Kapha
doßha is balanced by vaman (emesis). [See dia-
gram below]
Underlying Causes of Health:
Agni, Áma and Ojas
     The main cause of illness is a poor digestive
system. If the digestive fire (agni) does not burn
strongly enough, foods do not get digested. If food
is not digested, nutrients cannot be absorbed. When
foods do not get digested, they sit and accumulate
in the colon, becoming a breeding ground for yeast
infections, toxins, gas, and constipation. Undi-
gested foods are called áma. Áma is the root cause
of most problems in the body, resulting from ex-
cess Váyu or Kapha (or both). If the agni burns
too much, heat and acid build up in the system,
creating Pitta problems.
     Digestion begins in the mouth and stomach as
saliva acts upon the food to digests it. Práòa Váyu
moves the food from the mouth to the stomach
(ámáßhaya). Once in the stomach the food takes
on a predominantly sweet (madhura) taste. Food
1. Ciliary action
moves 
secretions
upward
2. Secretions
move into
trachea
3. Secretions
are swallowed 
into the throat
4. Then, they
move down
esophagus
5. Finally, secretions
move into the stomach
     The Path of Food
Moistening Secretions

35
Section 1: Fundamentals                                                                   Chapter 2: The Human Universe
mixes with the digestive enzymes (Pachaka Pitta).
Samána Váyu moves the food to the duodenum
(grahaní) where digestion continues due to the
digestive fire or agni (koßóhágni), assuming a pun-
gent taste. The liver and pancreas are involved in
the digestive process.
     Finally, the large intestine (Váyu) absorbs the
air and ether elements. Here, undigested foods be-
come feces, and water is absorbed, transferred, and
eliminated through the urine.
     Properly digested food creates nutritional es-
sence, chyle, or plasma (rasa). Improperly digested
food becomes undigested food toxins (áma) that
are the cause of most diseases. Earth foods build
protein bulk, such as muscles. Watery foods build
vital fluids and fat. Fiery foods build enzymes and
hemoglobin. Air foods build bone and nerve plex-
uses, and ether foods build the mind.
     The health of the immune system determines
whether diseases are warded off. Áyurveda notes
that there is a sap-like material called ojas (per-
haps analogous to pineal gland secretion) that coats
the immune system and protects it from disease. If
the agni fire is too low or too high, this life sap
will be diminished. Just like the tree that creates a
sap over the bruise in the bark to protect and heal
the bruise, our life sap (ojas) protects and heals us
from illness.
     Too much dryness or too much heat and fire
eats away the life sap. A weak immune system is
the cause of all illness, from colds to multiple scle-
rosis to AIDS. To heal the immune system, one
needs adequate rest and pure (sattwic) foods and
herbs that specifically rebuild the ojas (life sap).
Examples include blanched almonds or tahini, and
ojas building herbs like ¤hatávarí and
a¤hwagandhá, respectively.
Summary
     So, we have seen that by knowing the constitu-
tion and elemental cause of one’s illness
(vik^iti), by knowing which tissue layers (dhátus),
systems, and organs are governed by which doßha,
and by knowing how to balance the agni fire and
build the ojas, Áyurveda offers an individualized,
simple, gentle, and effective form of healing.
     All diseases can be caused by any of the hu-
mors, depending on which sites they relocate to,
so the patient is examined completely, using all
possible methods. Since disease development
(pathogenesis) is the same for all doßhas, only the
humors, stages, sites, and directional movement
of the humors are examined. Humors have to re-
turn to their origin sites to be eliminated.
     Áyurveda emphasizes promoting health, pre-
venting disease, and enhancing longevity (rejuve-
nation or age reversal). By using rasáyana-(reju-
venation) promoting herbs and diet, good conduct,
daily routine, and seasonal living longevity is de-
veloped.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
36

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 37
Section 2
Ãyurvedic Analysis
AayuvRed indanSwanmœ

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
38

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 39
The physician should examine the disease first,
then the drug and finally the management.
They should always proceed
with prior knowledge.
Charak Saåhitá
Chapter 3
Analyzing
Consitutions and Diseases
Overview
       yurveda, according to Charak Saåhitá, was
        a scientific and logical interpretation, in which
tridoßha theory was enumerated along with man-
agement of Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha. Nature was
seen as uniform, and rational knowledge was em-
phasized over the supernatural. Symposia were
held for practitioners to express opinions and to
arrive at an accepted view of truth. Lord Átreya
presided over the talks.
     Rather than analyze and name millions of body
parts and diseases, Charak Saåhitá holds that it is
happiness and unhappiness that result in health and
disease respectively The healthy or holistic per-
son is termed Purußha, or eternal Divinity. The
causes of illness are deha-manasa, or psychoso-
matic reasons: mind affects body and body affects
mind. Thus, the ‘partial’ view has no place and
Sattwavajaya, or holistic psychotherapy, has its
origins in the Áyurvedic science.
     Áyurveda then, is seen as a highly accurate and
personalized method of analyzing people’s con-
stitutions and illnesses; it recommends and pro-
vides gentle, natural and effective therapies.
     Áyurveda relies totally on nature to heal, while
Áyurvedic therapies only help in the healing pro-
cess. Swabhavoparama (recession by nature) is the
method of using herbs, diet, lifestyle, and other
therapies (discussed in the next section) to return
the mind and body back to its natural state of bal-
ance.
     The nature of an illness is learned through five
methods.
1. Cause (nidána)
2. Premonitory or incubatory signs (púrvarupa)
3. Signs and symptoms (rupa)
4. Diagnostic tests (upaähaya)
5. Pathology or stages of manifestation (samprapti)
1. Nidána or etiology (cause)—All diseases are
caused by the aggravation of the doßhas.
2. Púrvarupa (hidden or incubatory signs)—Signs
and symptoms cannot be attributed to any specific
doßha due to their mild nature. Two forms exist;
a) Symptoms may occur due to one or more of
the aggravated doßhas and disappear when the
disease manifests, or
b) Symptoms that develop into the specific dis-
ease.
3. Rupa (signs and symptoms)—Manifestations of
the disease are clearly observed.
4. Upaähaya (diagnostic tests)—When practitio-
ners cannot determine the cause of the illness
through the other methods they test with herbs,
food, or habits. These therapies show whether they
heal or aggravate the illness.
5. Samprapti or pathogenesis (disease develop-
ment) —Not merely symptoms or signs, this is the
actual manifestation of disease. Five kinds of de-
velopment exist:
a) The varieties of a disease.
b) The different aspects of the doßhas causing the
illness.
c) Whether a disease is of primary or secondary
nature.
d) The severity of the illness, strong or weak (e.g.,
due to age, general health, etc.).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
40
e) Time of digestion, day, or season when the doßha
is predominant.
Etiology: Cause of All Disease
     All diseases are caused by aggravation of the
doßhas. This aggravation of different doßhas is
caused by the intake of improper diet and leading
an improper lifestyle  (Mithya Áhar Vihar). The
three causes of illness are excessive, insufficient,
or improper use of,
1. The senses
2. Actions
3. Seasonal factors
1. Unsuitable use of the senses: Unwholesome
contact of the senses (taste, touch, sight, sound,
and smell) with objects. For example, sound
(hearing loud voices, noise pollution cause se-
rious mind and health problems). Touch (con-
tact of the skin with chemicals, hot objects, or
overly cold objects). Sight (exposure to too
much light, such as staring at the sun).
2. Actions: Relate to body, speech, and mind.
These include, conduct, urge, posture, concern,
and emotions. Thoughts and decisions leading
to harmful or unhealthy situations are said to
be errors of the intellect. Spiritually speaking,
the first intellectual error is to believe that any-
one or anything is separate from oneself. The
Áyurvedic texts say that this is the first cause
of all diseases, the loss of faith in the Divine.
3. Seasonal factors: Váyu accumulates during the
dry or dehydrating heat of the summer
(Gríßhma: mid-May to mid-July). It becomes
aggravated during the rainy season (Varßha:
mid-July to mid-September), which causes
weakened digestion, acidic atmospheric con-
ditions, and gas produced from the earth.
     Pitta accumulates during the rainy season due
to the acidic conditions of the atmosphere and a
weakened digestion. It is aggravated during autumn
(£harat: mid-  September to mid-November) when
the heat returns (perhaps equivalent to Indian Sum-
mer). This occurs after the cooling spell of the rainy
season.
     Kapha accumulates during the cold season
(£hiçhira: mid-January to mid-March) due to the
cold and damp caused by the winds, clouds, and
rain. It gets aggravated during the spring (Vasant:
mid-March to mid-May) when the warm weather
liquefies the accumulating Kapha (from the cold
season).
Seasonal Increases of the Doßhas
Váyu Increasing Causes: Bitter, salty, and astrin-
gent tastes, dry, light, cold foods, fasting, waiting
longer than three or four hours between meals,
a
h
ß
o
D
et
al
u
m
u
c
c
A
et
a
v
a
r
g
g
A
e
zila
m
r
o
N
u
y
á
V
/re
m
m
u
S
a
m
h
ßír
G
/y
nia
R
á
h
ßr
a
V
/n
m
utu
A
ta
r
a
h
£
-
y
a
M
-
di
m
ylu
J-
di
m
-
ylu
J-
di
m
.tp
e
S
-
di
m
-
.tp
e
S
-
di
m
.v
o
N
-
di
m
,y
r
d
si
ta
e
h
g
nitar
d
y
h
e
d
k
a
e
w
,n
oits
e
gid
,niar
cidic
a
s
a
g
htra
e
d
n
a
n
u
s
ht
m
ra
w
atti
P
/y
nia
R
á
h
ßr
a
V
/n
m
utu
A
ta
r
a
h
£
/retni
W
atn
a
m
e
H
-
ylu
J-
di
m
.tp
e
S
-
di
m
-
.tp
e
S
-
di
m
.v
o
N
-
di
m
-
.v
o
N
-
di
m
.n
a
J-
di
m
k
a
e
w
,n
oits
e
gid
niar
cidic
a
d
n
a
n
u
s
ta
e
h
s
n
r
uter
tsio
m
,dlo
c
a
h
p
a
K
/dlo
C
a
rih
çih
£
/g
nir
p
S
tn
a
s
a
V
/re
m
m
u
S
a
m
h
ßír
G
-
.n
a
J-
di
m
h
cra
M
-
di
m
h
cra
M
-
di
m
y
a
M
-
di
m
-
-
y
a
M
-
di
m
ylu
J-
di
m
p
m
a
d
,dlo
c
,ht
m
ra
w
s
eife
u
qil
y
r
d
,
m
ra
w

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 41
suppression or premature initiation of the 13 natu-
ral urges, staying awake late at night, prolonged
high pitched speaking, excess emesis and purga-
tion, sudden grief, fear, worry, or anxiety; exces-
sive exercise or sexual intercourse; the end of the
digestive process.
Pitta Increasing Causes: Pungent, sour, and salty
tastes, foods causing heat and burning sensations,
anger, autumn, the middle of digestion, sun or heat
exposure, exhaustion, eating with indigestion.
Kapha Increasing Causes: Sweet, sour, and salty
tastes, oils, heavy or indigestible foods, overeat-
ing, cold foods, lack of exercise, excess sleeping,
naps, inadequate emesis and purgation, eating be-
fore hungry, in the spring, before noon and early
night, the first stage of digestion.
Factors Increasing All Doßhas: Eating excessively,
improper diet, uncooked, contaminated or incom-
patible foods; spoiled food and drinks; dried veg-
etables, raw root vegetables. Other factors include
eating fried sesame seeds and molasses, mud, bar-
ley beer, foul and dry meat, eating food out of sea-
son; direct breeze, negative thoughts, living in
mountain slopes. Malefic positioning of the plan-
ets and constellations, improper administration of
therapies, illegal actions, and being too inactive
also increase all the doßhas.
Food Intake and Doßha Illness
     Improper quantity of food results in impairing
strength, complexion, weight, distention,
longevity, virility, and ojas. It afflicts the body,
mind, intellect, and senses, causing harm to the
dhátus (tissues)—especially Váyu. Food taken
in excess aggravates all three doßhas. Obstructions
are produced in the stomach and move
through the upper and lower tracts, producing
diseases according to one’s doßha.
     Váyu: Colic pain, constipation, malaise, dry
mouth, fainting, giddiness, irregular digestive
power, rigidity, hardening and contracting of ves-
sels.
     Pitta: Fever, diarrhea, internal burning sensa-
tion, thirst, intoxication, giddiness, and delirium.
     Kapha: Vomiting, anorexia, indigestion, cold
fever, laziness, and heaviness.
Disease Development: Six Stages
     Earlier, it was briefly mentioned that six stages
of disease development exist. However, modern
medical technology can only see the last two stages
of any illness. Áyurveda offers insight into the ear-
lier stages and enables those monitoring their health
to take care of any small imbalances well before
developing any serious illness. The six stages of
disease development are:
1. Accumulation: Illness begins in one of the three
main doßha sites: stomach (Kapha), small intes-
tine (Pitta), or the colon (Váyu). Excess Kapha in
the stomach creates a blockage in the system that
leads to lassitude, heaviness, pallor, bloating, and
indigestion. Pitta accumulation creates burning
sensations, fever, hyperacidity, bitter taste in the
mouth, and anger. The collecting of Váyu creates
gas, distention, constipation, dryness, fear, fatigue,
insomnia, and the desire for warm things.
     The value of monitoring these experiences
within one’s body and mind leads to the earliest
detection of an imbalance, while it is still in its
hidden or incubatory stages.
2. Aggravation: As the imbalanced elements (hu-
mors) continue to increase, the symptoms men-
tioned above become more aggravated and will be
noticed in other parts of the body as well. Kapha
aggravation causes a loss of appetite, indigestion,
nausea, excess saliva, heaviness in the heart and
head, and oversleeping. The aggravated Pitta ex-
perience is one of increased acidity, burning sen-
sations in the abdomen, lowered vitality, or insom-
nia. Váyu aggravation results in pain and spasm in
the abdomen, gas and rumbling in the bowels, and
light-headedness.
3. Overflow: Once the origin site is full with the
excess humor (element), it will begin to overflow

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
42
into the rest of the body using different channels
of transportation. The doähas begin to overflow
into the GI tract, then join with the circulating
plasma and blood. During circulation the humors
then begin to seep into the organs, dhátus (tissues),
and malas (waste). Simultaneously, symptoms at
the origin site continue to grow worse.
4. Moving and localization at a distant site: The
humors will move to wherever a weak site exists
in the body. This is where and when specific dis-
eases begin to develop. For example, a Váyu ill-
ness could move to the bones and begin to create
arthritis. If the duodenum is weak, humors deposit
themselves there and create an ulcer (usually a Pitta
condition). Kapha moves to organs like the lungs
when weakened. Healing is still simple,  even at
this fourth stage of illness.
5. Manifestation: This is the first stage of the de-
velopment of illness for which Western science can
detect signs of disease. Here, diseases become fully
developed, showing signs of clinical features.
Names are given to imbalances of the humors, such
as cancer, bronchitis, arthritis, etc.
6. Distinction/Chronic Complications: In this last
stage, the symptoms become clear enough so that
the elemental cause may be determined. For ex-
ample, Váyu asthma will cause dry skin, constipa-
tion, anxiety, attacks at dawn, and the desiring of
warmth. Pitta asthma will show yellow phlegm,
fever, sweating, and attacks at noon and midnight.
Asthma brought on by Kapha will create white
phlegm, water in the lungs, and attacks during the
morning and evening.      Some practitioners de-
scribe this stage as the chronic phase of develop-
ment. For example, if one develops an inflamma-
tion or abscess in stage five, in stage six, compli-
cations set in, and the abscess may burst and be-
come a chronic ulcer.
Three Disease Pathways
     In our consideration of the Áyurvedic view of
the body, we also learn of the classification of ill-
ness and the healing process through the three paths
that disease travels.
Inner: This is the digestive tract involving diseases
of the GI tract. These diseases are easy to heal be-
cause toxins are expelled through the tract. Dis-
eases of the inner path include fever, cough, hic-
cups, enlarged abdomen or spleen, internal edema,
vomiting, and hard stools.
Outer: This path refers to the plasma/skin, blood,
and superficial tissues. Toxic blood and skin dis-
eases are harder to heal because removing an ill-
ness from the tissue is more difficult. Symptoms
include abdominal and other malignant tumors,
edema, and hemorrhoids.
Central: This path refers to muscle, fat, bone, mar-
row, and deeper nerve tissues. This is the most
delicate area of the body, affecting the heart, head,
bone joints, and urinary bladder. The most diffi-
cult diseases develop here, such as cancer or ar-
thritis. These diseases develop between the inner
and outer paths.
Signs and Symptoms of Disease, by Doßha
Excess Váyu: Drooping, dilation, loss of sensation,
and weakness; continuous, cutting, pricking, crush-
ing, or splitting pain; obstruction, contraction, or
constriction; twisting, tingling, thirst, tremors,
roughness, dryness, throbbing, curvatures, gas,
winding, stiffness, or rigidity; astringent taste in
mouth, blue/crimson discoloration, partial vacu-
ums in bodily liquids.
Excess Pitta: Burning sensation, reddish discolora-
tion, heat, high digestive fire, pus, ulcers, perspi-
ration, moistness, debility, fainting, toxicity, bitter
and sour tastes in the mouth, oozing, fungus.
Excess Kapha: Oiliness, hardness, itching irrita-
tions, cold, heaviness, obstructions, toxic or mu-
cus coatings inside the srotas (channels), loss of
movement, swelling, edema, indigestion, excessive

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 43
sleep, whitish complexion, sweet and salty tastes
in the mouth.
Three Kinds of Diseases
     All diseases arise from bad actions occurring
in one’s
1. Present life (finding a specific cause of the ill-
ness). These are healed with therapies of the op-
posite nature.
2. Past lives (no apparent cause for an illness).
These are healed after the action has worked itself
out.
3. A combination of both (diseases that suddenly
manifest as terrible, profound and severe). These
require a combination of therapies and the cessa-
tion of harmful activities.
     Diseases are either primary (initial symptoms)
or secondary (complications arising later). If the
secondary complications of the doßhas do not sub-
side when the primary causes are healed, additional
therapies must be administered.
Analysis of Factors
     For healing to occur, the practitioner carefully
studies and decides the condition of the vitiated
tissues (dhátus) and wastes (malas), patient’s habi-
tat, strength, and digestive power. He needs to learn
the constitution, age, mind, lifestyle, diet, the stage
of the disease, and the season, before recommend-
ing the appropriate therapy. (Symptoms may ap-
pear mild or severe, depending upon the patient’s
total strength (mental and physical). Thus, the prac-
titioner needs to make a careful and complete
analysis).
     After determining individual body type and the
elemental cause and development of illness, the
next step is to analyze the patient’s constitution
and illness (prak^iti and vik^iti respectively).
The Doßhas -
Deciding the Cause of Disease:
General Approach
     The practitioner has several methods of learn-
ing the prak^iti (constitution) and the vik^iti (ill-
ness) of patients:
1. Authoritative Instruction
2. Direct Observation
3. Inference
1. Authoritative Instruction comes from a teacher
who has had much experience in determining the
cause and nature of constitutions and illness.
2. Observation includes visual analysis of the face,
finger nails, eyes, tongue, urine, stool, complex-
ion, and shape; it also includes auditory observa-
tions of the tone of voice, listening for intestinal
gurgling, cracking sounds of bones and fingers,
coughing or hiccups, as well as by palpation, most
notably the evaluation of the pulse.  By noticing
certain characteristics, the practitioner begins to
learn the doßha or prak^iti (constitution) and the
doßha imbalance that may be causing the illness
(vik^iti).
     Áyurvedic observation is a threefold approach:
questioning, observing, and palpating (touch). To
gain information that is not readily observable, the
practitioner addresses questions directly to the
patient and also asks the patient to complete a ques-
tionnaire or self-test (see appendix 2).
     Discussion with the patient helps reveal the
prak^iti and vik^iti. Discussing one’s family and
personal health history, and learning of the patient’s
symptoms round out the consultation.
     Questionnaires are self-tests which ask a se-
ries of mental and physical questions that help the
practitioner decide a person’s mental and physical
doßha and illness.
3. Inference Through reasoning the practitioner
gains indirect knowledge about the state of vari-
ous health conditions. The situations learned
through inference are summarized in the follow-
ing table:

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
44
Client Knowledge Through Inference
     Only after a careful analysis of all three areas—
that is, considering the cumulative information, —
does a practitioner determine the prak^iti (consti-
tution) and vik^iti (illness). The practitioner would
not make quick judgments based on only one or
two signs. Often people have characteristics of all
three doßhas, so the practitioner finds the one or
two doßhas that predominate. Sometimes a patient
is tridoßhic, or having equal parts of all three
doßhas. [It is not important what doßha a person is
(i.e., there is no preferred constitution). What is
important is that one’s constitution is balanced.]
     By observing, listening, and questioning, the
practitioner learns of one’s constitution and illness.
Below are general guidelines that show which
doßha is in excess. Sometimes the patient may use
words like “dry,” “hot,” or “lazy,” which alerts the
practitioner to the doßha being deranged.
Observation
     Face: The face offers various clues to help the
practitioner determine the disorder. A thin facial
structure is an indication of a Váyu prak^iti. A wide
structure is more of a Kapha constitution. Strong
muscular or moderate facial structure suggests Pitta
doßha. The picture of a face (below) shows which
organs may be imbalanced or diseased.
FACE ANALYSIS
     Mouth: Váyu excess—foul and smelly, Pitta
excess—bitter, Kapha excess —sweet, Tridoßhic
excess—all symptoms.
     Tongue: The tongue also offers many signs
about health. Its size, shape, and coating help the
practitioner decide the humor causing the illness.
     Coating: Suggests áma or toxin in the system.
When only a little coating is on the tongue, the
person is generally healthy. A thick, white coating
indicates áma (Kapha). Thick, greasy, yellow, or
inflamed tongues suggest áma fermentation (Pitta).
n
oiti
d
n
o
C
m
o
r
F
d
e
r
r
ef
n
I
in
g
a
)erif
e
vits
e
gid
(
re
w
o
p
e
vits
e
gid
htg
n
erts
ytic
a
p
a
c
e
sicre
x
e
s
eitilib
a
y
r
o
s
n
e
s
yltc
err
o
c
ot
ytic
a
p
a
c
e
vie
cre
p
s
eitilib
a
latn
e
m
s
d
n
atsre
d
n
u
s
n
oitc
u
rts
ni
a
ò
u
g
latn
e
m
)s
a
m
at
,s
ajar,a
w
tta
s(
,eltn
e
g
.g.e(
n
oiss
er
p
x
e
)
y
r
g
n
a
,h
sra
h
re
g
n
a
lu
fe
g
n
e
v
er
feir
g
lu
f
w
o
rr
o
s
ra
ef
n
ois
n
e
h
er
p
p
a
y
oj
d
o
o
m
y
p
p
a
h
er
u
s
a
elp
s
e
y
e
&
e
c
af
d
eifsita
s
e
g
ar
u
o
c
d
ni
m
etulo
s
er
ytilib
ats
latn
e
m
,e
c
n
ala
b
g
niss
er
p
x
e
s
e
k
atsi
m
f
o
k
c
al
eris
e
d
e
ht
sts
e
u
q
er
f
o
tn
u
o
m
a
s
e
k
a
m
tn
eilc
e
c
n
e
gilletni
f
o
n
ois
n
e
h
er
p
m
o
c
n
oiss
u
c
sid
la
utirip
s
n
oitp
e
c
e
d
s
n
oitc
a
tn
e
u
q
e
s
b
u
s

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 45
     If a coating is on the front third of the tongue,
this indicates Kapha toxins (áma), the middle third
shows Pitta áma, and the back third suggests Váyu
áma. Should the coating be on two thirds of the
tongue, or on the entire tongue, then there is a dual
doäha or tridoäha áma excess.
     Below is a diagram of a tongue, with the corre-
sponding areas from which organ health can be
detected.
     Color: A blackish brown color shows Váyu dis-
orders. Yellow, green or reddish suggests Pitta prob-
lems in the liver or gall bladder. Kapha problems
are revealed by a whitish color. Blue may suggest
heart problems, blue or purple would indicate stag-
nation or liver disorders. Váyu problems yield a
dull or pale color. Kapha conditions are pale col-
ored.
     Size: Váyu doähas have a small, long, thin, or
trembling tongue. Pitta doßhas have a medium
tongue with a sharp tip. Kapha people have large,
thick, round tongues with thick lips.
     Marks: Teeth-like marks around the front arc/
edge of the tongue means that nutrients are not
being absorbed.
     A line down the middle of the tongue suggests
immune problems. Cracks in the tongue show Váyu
imbalances.
     Brushing or scraping the tongue with a tooth-
brush or spoon removes excess mucus. This pro-
cess releases repressed emotions as well.
     The diagram below shows where on the tongue
the doßhas are reflected.
     Eyes: The eyes also help show an individual’s
doßha. Generally, Váyu eyes are small and un-
steady. Pitta eyes are sharp and piercing, and red-
dish or bloodshot. Large, wide and white eyes sug-
gest Kapha doßha. Healthy eyes are serene, cheer-
ful, and beautiful.
Váyu
Pitta
Kapha
Right side of body
Left side of body

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
46
Nails: The nails also help reveal one’s doßha and
illness. Váyu nails are thin, brittle, and cracking.
Biting the nails shows Váyu nervousness. Lines in
the nail show malabsorption. Pitta nails are me-
dium in size and pinkish in color. Wide, strong,
white colored nails suggest Kapha doßha.
Váyu
Pitta
Kapha
     Small white spots on the nails reveal calcium
or zinc deficiencies, or calcium deposits in certain
organs. Spots on the ring finger suggest calcium
deposit in the kidney. If the spots are on the middle
finger nail the deposit is in the small intestine.
When spots are on the index finger, the deposits
are in the lungs. See the diagram below.
Lips: Thin, dry, or cracked lips are signs of Váyu
excesses. Medium sized lips reveal a Pitta doßha.
Wide, thick lips suggest a Kapha doßha.
Voice: Deep tonal voices are characteristic of
Kaphas. A moderate speaker, with a tendency to-
wards arguing, suggests a Pitta person. A person
with a low, weak voice indicates a Váyu individual.
Pulse Analysis
A healthy pulse is thick and strong
A sick pulse is thick and dull, or sluggish
- Náæíprakaäham: Ch. 2 verse 4
Pulse Analysis: This is a science in itself. Although
it takes many years to become proficient in this
practice, pulse reading offers many insights, in-
cluding doßha knowledge, general health, and or-
gan health. Since pulse reading requires much skill,
one may decide the prak^iti (constitution) and
vik^iti (illness) without even using pulse analysis.
     Two Áyurvedic texts deal exclusively with the
intricacies of pulse analysis: Náæívijñánam (mean-
ing the science or knowledge of pulse diagnosis),
by Máháriähi Kanada (circa 7th century B.C.), and
Náæíprakaßham by £ha´kar Sen (19th-20th Cen-
tury AD). The basic belief is that the pulse reveals
different qualities, rates, and temperatures, and
appears stronger in different positions for each
doßha.
     Pulse analysis takes a long time to master, and
many factors may cause inaccurate readings, so it
is advised not to take pulses under certain condi-
tions.
Time of Taking Pulse: The pulse is read or ana-
lyzed when the patient and practitioner are at rest.
Náæíprakaßham suggests taking the pulse in the
morning, when the pulse is cool (afternoon pulse
is hot; evening pulse is fast). The ideal constitu-
tion (doßha) pulse is read upon waking in the morn-
ing (before 10:00 a.m.), after expelling stool and
urine, and before eating.
Constitution Pulse: 6:00 - 10:00 a.m.
Illness (Imbalance) Pulse: 10:00 a.m. on.

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 47
Finding the Pulse
     Two schools of thought exist on this subject.
The author of Náæívijñánam suggests that the in-
dex finger be placed on the radial pulse of the wrist,
just under the thumb (see the diagram below). The
middle finger is placed just under the index finger
(but not resting on the bony protrusion [radial tu-
bercle]), and the ring finger is placed closest to the
elbow.
Xa—¡gauSOamaUlae kryaae; paadyaaegaÆlPdfata;
kpaalapaafvaÆyaae; Saz¡Byaae naazIByaae vyaaiDaina<a‡ya;
/1/
£hra´gußhóhámúle karayoà
pádayorgalphada¤hataà |
kapálapár¤hvayoà ßhaæbhyo náæíbhyo
vyádhiniròayaà || verse 1||
Náæívijñánam
     A second school suggests the index finger
should be placed on the radial pulse below the flex
in the wrist (i.e., two finger widths below the thumb
root). As before, the other two fingers are posi-
tioned below it. In both cases, finger pressure on
the wrist is applied lightly.
     Some suggest taking the pulse of the right hand
for men, and the left hand for women (except when
they have a fever). Others suggest checking both
pulses. When taking one’s own pulse, males use
their left hand and take the right pulse. Females
take the left-hand pulse with their right hand.
     The practitioner’s left palm supports the
patient’s elbow, with the right hand fingers press-
ing the artery. The patient’s elbow and wrist are
slightly bent. Finger pad tops are soft and can eas-
ily read the pulses. Fingers are placed between the
wide bone below the thumb and the thin bones (in
the middle of the wrist).
     Many factors may cause inaccurate readings,
so it is advised not to take pulses under certain
conditions.
     Finding the pulse of Váyu persons may be hard
due to the weakness of their pulse. Kapha pulses
may also be difficult to find or read because of
excess fat or thick skin. The pulse under the ring
g
n
i
k
a
T
e
sl
u
P
et
a
r
u
c
c
A
e
sl
u
P
e
k
a
T
e
sl
u
P
e
k
a
T
t
o
N
o
D
sla
e
m
n
e
e
w
te
b
sla
e
m
retfa
d
ets
er
n
e
h
w
r
o
e
sicre
x
e
retfa
k
r
o
w
s
u
o
u
n
erts
m
o
o
r
hta
b
retfa
slla
c
er
uta
n
n
e
h
w
re
v
ef
hti
w
hta
b
retfa
r
o
g
nir
u
d
g
nihta
b
n
u
s
retfa
x
e
s
retfa
e
g
a
ss
a
m
retfa
erif
ra
e
n
g
nittis
elih
w
Bony protrusion
(radial tubercle)
Váyu
Kapha
Pitta
The 2nd positioning option.
Váyu pulse is now beginning 
just below the tubercle.
Váyu
Kapha
Pitta

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
48
finger may also be difficult to find because the pulse
moves deeper into the arm as it gets farther away
from the wrist. [Other positions to find the pulse
include at the lower ankles and at the temples.]
     Although the pulse becomes slower as one gets
older, the general rule in deciding doßhas is:
Pulse Rate
Pulse Quality
     A most interesting and unusual method to learn
the constitution (prak^iti) or present imbalance
(vik^iti) is the quality of the pulse. When the doßhas
are aggravated, the pulse expresses itself in vari-
ous ways.
Váyu pulses have the personality or quality of a
snake, feeling quick, thin, thready, irregular, and
crooked, with symptoms of nervousness, indiges-
tion, Váyu fevers.
Pitta pulses feel like a frog: bounding or jumpy,
regular (or if irregular, it has a consistent pattern),
with symptoms of heat, insomnia, diarrhea, ver-
tigo, hypertension, eye, or skin problems. When
the pulse is also felt as wiry, hard, stiff, and fast,
there are corresponding symptoms of Pitta asthma,
rheumatism, gout, chronic headaches, and bleed-
ing disorders.
Kapha pulses are swan-like: regal, slow, and con-
stant. Some people say it is a warm pulse, while
others say it is cold. Related symptoms are cough-
ing, melancholy, constipation, bronchial disorders,
and overweight.
Váyu/Pitta pulses alternate between snake and frog
qualities. The pulse feels knotty, restless, intermit-
tent, imperceptible, thick, and thin. Health issues
include thirst, vertigo, headaches, suppressed urine,
extremity pain, and heat.
Pitta/Váyu pulses feel jumpy and hard, with heat
and blood related symptoms being predominant.
Váyu/Kapha pulses alternate between snake and
swan qualities, weak and forceful, vanishing, hol-
low, slippery, and irregular qualities. Symptoms
include chills, extremity pain, frequent urination,
cough, insomnia, drowsiness, feeling slow and fast,
soft and expanded. Sometimes chronic complaints
arise around the new and full moon.
Kapha/Váyu pulses feel soft and slow.
Pitta/Kapha pulses alternate between frog and
swan qualities, with symptoms of both fire and
water excesses. Pitta concerns are more aggravated.
Kapha/Pitta pulses alternate between swan and
frog qualities, with predominantly Kapha symp-
toms, and secondary Pitta complaints.
Tridoßhic (all three doßhas) pulses will show all
three qualities: snake, frog, and swan. Pulse move-
ments are periodic, quick, jumpy, and slow.
Healthy pulse has no signs of dullness. In the morn-
ing the pulse feels cool and steady, at noon it feels
warm. The pulse moves quickly in the evening.
These three pulses indicate the person has been
healthy for a long while and will continue to be
healthy for some time to come.
Pulse-Doßha Detection
     One method is to lightly place fingers on the
pulse positions until a pulse is first felt under one
finger. If the pulse if first noticed under the index
finger, this shows a Váyu doßha (before 10 a.m.)
or Váyu imbalance (after 10 a.m.). The middle fin-
ger suggests a Pitta doßha or Pitta imbalance. A
Kapha doßha pulse is first felt under the ring fin-
ger. Sometimes this method is inaccurate because
of the pulse being more easily felt closer to the
wrist.
     Some practitioners believe that whichever fin-
ger the pulse is first felt (i.e., index/Váyu, middle/
Pitta, ring/Kapha) will tell whether an illness is
located in a Váyu, Pitta, or Kapha organ (or the
prak^iti before 10 a.m.). Should the pulse be felt
s
a
h
ä
o
D
s
e
sl
u
P
u
y
á
V
0
0
1
-
0
8
atti
P
0
8
-
0
7
a
h
a
K
0
7
-
0
6

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 49
under two fingers simultaneously, then both doßhas
are imbalanced (or a dual-doäha prak^iti before
10 a.m.). Sometimes one may feel the pulse under
one or two fingers strongly and yet feel a mild pulse
under the second or third finger. The fainter pulses
suggest a slight imbalance of the corresponding
doßha.
     For example, a pulse is first felt under the in-
dex finger and then a milder pulse is felt under the
middle finger. This shows a main Váyu imbalance,
with a secondary Pitta disorder. If the pulse is felt
under all three fingers (either strongly or mildly),
then all the doßhas are imbalanced.
     Pulse quality, position, and rate are the three
best pulse methods to decide one’s doßha.
After 10:00 a.m. one only learns the vik^iti
(current imbalance or disease) from both the
quality and position of the pulse -
or must take the deepest level pulse
(i.e. occluding the pulse, then  gradually
releasing pressure until the pulse is first felt).
     The practitioner takes the pulse from the thumb
side of the client (radial side), not reaching across
from the pinky side (ulnar side).
Pulse Qualities Signs for Health and Disease
Abscess- agitated, fiery
Acidity- crooked, shaky, wide, slippery, slow
Anemia- faint, felt at intervals
Anger- accelerated
Appetite (loss of)- steady, slow, hard, mild
Asthma- thin, steady, accelerated, hard, speedy,
intense, felt under all three fingers, hollow
Bile- hot
Boils- (hard) bilious
Colic- (pulse according to the doßhas) (with ab
dominal worms)- expanded
Convulsions- wide and rapid (hysterical)- crooked
and rapid
Constipation- frog, strong
Cough- trembling, thin, restless, slow, hot, swan
Deafness- quick and spreading
Diabetes- knotty
(mellitus)- thin
(insipidus)-
Váyu: Crooked, thin.
Pitta: Fast.
Kapha: Slow
Diarrhea (chronic)- [after evacuations] gentle,
     weak.
Váyu: Crooked.
Pitta: Fast.
Kapha: mild
Dysentery-
(Váyu)- crooked
(Pitta)- restless
(Kapha)- cold, slow, swan-like
(with mucus)- wide, inert, dull
(two doßhas) both pulses, respectively
(caused by three doßhas) disappears, or is
imperceptible
(after bowel evacuation) energy-less
Dysmenorrhea- steady, quick
Edema- sometimes weak, thin, cold, stopping
Eye Diseases- hard, slow, slippery, crooked
Fainting- lightning-like
Fear- weak
Healthy/Nourished- rises or jumps upward, pure,
stays in place, steady, not slow,
Feces (suppression)- hard, heavy, or frog
Fever- heated
Full-blooded- slightly hot and heavy
Fistula-in-ano- dull Kapha pulse
Gonorrhea- thin, knotty, inert; pulse at joint
Good Digestion- soft, mild, quick, not dull
Gout (acute)- slow, crooked, hard, mild
Headaches- weak, changeable
Heart diseases- swan
Hemorrhage- hard, slow
Hemorrhoids- (differs according to the doßha de
ranged)
Hernia- rises and jumps
Hiccup- much trembling and fast
Hoarse/loss of voice- thready, grave, twisting,
tricky, thin, hard, inert
Hungry- restless, unsteady, wavering
Hysteria- weak, fast
Indigestion- slow, hard, or inert; cool; swan-like
(Chronic)- under nourished, slow

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
50
Insanity- speedy and turning, crooked
Jaundice- weak, splitting, and expanded
Mucus- wide, hot
Negative Thoughts (evil spirits)- hot, curved
Nose Diseases- agitated, slowed
Obesity- thick, slow
Parasites- sometimes disappears, is slow, or fast
Phlegm- thick and slow
Pregnant- weak, slow
Rheumatism- thin, fast
Satiated- steady and slow
Sciatica- wide, crooked, slow
Sex (afterwards)- weak and accelerated (passion)-
deranged
Sinus- agitated, fiery
Spleen enlargement- trembling, restless, and be
coming speedy
Suppression of urges (repeatedly)- hard, heavy
Thirst- leech-like
Thyroid (enlarged)- wide, slow
 (hypo)- slow
Toxic blood (bile)- slow, hard, and mild
Tumor (abdominal)- restless, gyrates, quick
(throat)- wide, slow, trembling
Urine (suppressing or discharge pain)- heavy, hard,
urgent
stones- frog, low, crooked
inability (obstruction)- frog
other diseases- thin, knotty, inert
Váyu disorders- thin and fast
Vomiting- thick, slowed, disappears (elephant and
swan-like)
Wasting- weak or differing movements
Nature of Pulse Depending Upon Diet Intake
Foods and Qualities
Onset of Fevers
     Depending upon the time and doßha causing
fever, the pulse yields different readings.
     Váyu- generally a slow, weak pulse, especially
when beginning during times of
s
ets
a
T
6
e
sl
u
P
te
e
w
S
n
a
w
s
r
u
o
S
d
rib
ytla
S
th
giarts
,y
d
e
e
p
s
cidic
A
/to
H
th
gil
,
m
ra
w
,g
o
rf
retti
B
m
r
o
w
stn
e
g
nirts
A
k
a
e
w
,d
ra
h
s
ets
at
elpitlu
M
s
e
slu
p
lare
v
e
s
d
o
o
F
e
sl
u
P
sli
O
e
di
w
,k
ciht
ste
e
w
S
e
kil-
g
o
rf
,e
di
w
a
n
a
n
a
B
g
o
rf/e
k
a
n
s
s
d
o
o
F
d
eir
F
g
o
rf/e
k
a
n
s
g
nits
a
F
d
etarele
c
c
a
,k
a
e
w
ta
e
M
p
u
s
p
m
uj
,d
ra
h
,e
di
w
kli
M
w
ols
s
e
ss
alo
M
g
o
rf/e
k
a
n
s
s
diu
qi
L
d
ra
h
s
d
o
o
F
y
r
D
g
o
rf/e
k
a
n
s
s
d
o
o
F
d
ra
H
)tf
o
s
r
o
diu
qil(
g
ni
w
olf
s
d
o
o
F
lla
m
S
etara
p
e
s
,ytto
n
k
g
nih
sir
u
o
N
d
e
p
ole
v
e
d

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 51
     (accumulation)- slow, weak [occurring during
digestion, in the summer, and at noon, and mid-
night].
     (excess)- heavy, hard, quick [after digestion, in
the afternoon, end of night, and in the rainy sea-
son].
     Pitta- (accumulating)- clearly felt under all three
fingers, and quickens its pace [after meals, morn-
ing, evening, and during the rainy season].
      (excess)- hard, quick, bursting pulse [occurs
while digesting, at noon and midnight, and in au-
tumn].
     Kapha- (accumulating or in excess)- weak, thin,
thready, cold [during digestion, evening, the end
of night, in autumn and in winter].
Váyu/Pitta Fever- thick, hard, undulating.
Váyu/Kapha Fever- slow and hot.
Váyu/Kapha Fever- dry and quick.
Pitta/Kapha- slow, thready, weak, sometimes cool,
sometimes cold and slow.
Tridoßhic Fever- the symptoms described above
appear during their respective periods of
excess.
Pulse Before Fever- a short period that exhibits a
frog-like pulse.
Intermittent Fever- the pulse is felt at the root of
the thumb or at its side, on alternating days.
When fevers appear every three or four
days, the pulse is hot, gyrating, and reced
ing.
Fever with Hot and Sour Foods- raises the pulse
rate.
Pulses That Determine Causal Doßha
Váyu Fever with Air Accumulation: Soft, thin,
steady, slow, and faint.
Váyu Fever with Air Excess: Large, hard, and rapid.
Pitta Fever with Fire Accumulation: Full, straight,
felt under all three fingers, and quick.
Pitta Fever with Fire Excess: Hard, fast, piercing,
and pulsing upwards.
Kapha Fever with Kapha Accumulation: Hard,
slow, and cool
Kapha Fever with Kapha Excess: Thread-like,
slow, and cool.
Váyu=Pitta Fever: Unsteady, wavy, thick, and hard.
Váyu/Kapha Fever: Slightly warm, and slow.
Kapha/Váyu Fever: Hard and rough.
Pitta=Kapha Fever: Thin, cool, and steady.
Fever Caused by Negative Thoughts (Spirits):
Speedy, flowing, and hot.
If a person’s pulse is continuously
cool and slow in the morning,
hot at noon, and fast in the evening,
It is a healthy pulse.
Organ Pulses
     Pulses at the three wrist positions also reveal
the health of 12 different body organs. This infor-
mation can be found by taking the pulse at a light
and deep level. This is possible because certain
“meridian” or energy lines connect the organ en-
ergy currents to corresponding wrist positions.
Superficial or light pulses generally relate to the
hollow organs, while the deep positions mostly
reveal the solid organs.
     The same three fingers and wrist positions are
used as before, except the organ pulses are taken
on both wrists. [Of the two finger placement sys-
tems described earlier, i.e., just under the thumb
joint and under the bone, the latter positioning is
used for taking the organ pulse.] The practitioner
first gets a feel for the general pulse by using all
three fingers. Then, they press one finger to an or-
gan pulse site. The two pulses (general and spe-
cific) are then compared for strength (i.e., decid-
ing if the organ pulse is stronger or weaker than
the general pulse). Practitioners can even deter-
mine conditions such as noting smoke in the lungs.
This may reveal that the person is a cigarette
smoker. Fire organ positions, like the liver, spleen,
and gall bladder can feel hot or electric when Pitta
is excessive in these organs. The urinary bladder
pulse may reflect an urgency or fullness if the blad-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
52
der is full. This would suggest the need for per-
sons to attend to nature’s call.
     Some practitioners use the right hand at super-
ficial and deep positions to gain spiritual insights
about the patient. (An approach used by some prac-
titioners is mentally to ask the “pulse” what it is
that the patient needs to hear right now. The first
thought entering their head thereafter is the an-
swer.) It is said that the various pulse methods take
10-15 years to master.
     Again, no one indication is used by itself when
deciding the health of an organ. Only after assess-
ing the total person does the practitioner reach a
decision as to the patient’s prak^iti and vik^iti. The
practitioner looks at all the mental and physical
traits found through observation, questionnaire, and
discussion.
Organ Pulse Positions
     A more advanced determination of the organ
pulse analysis also exists. The index, middle, and
ring fingers relate to Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha doßhas
respectively. The upper, middle, and lower areas
of each finger tip show which doßha is imbalancing
which organ.
     The index finger pressing at the superficial po-
sition of the right hand (colon) is such an example.
If the pulse is felt in the middle of the index finger,
a Pitta imbalance exists in the colon. If the pulse is
felt on the upper portion of the index finger, Váyu
is causing the disorder. Colon disorders caused by
Kapha are noted in the pulse felt at the lower por-
tion of the index finger. Should the pulse be felt at
two areas (e.g., the upper and middle of the finger
tip), then two doßhas are causing the excess.
Questionnaire
     Another Áyurvedic doßha analysis tool is a self-
test filled out by the patient. The self-test ques-
tions reflect the patient’s total life span (not just
the newor current symptoms caused that day, week,
or year). Some practitioners offer two different
questionnaires, one to learn the prak^iti and one to
learn about the cause of the illness (vik^iti). (Dur-
ing consultation discussions the current illness
(vik^iti) is discussed.)
     To find out one’s doßha, questions are asked
about the patient’s mind, body, and emotional well
being. Below is a sample of the questions that of-
fer insight into the patient’s prak^iti (nature).
     [Note: V stands for Váyu, P stands for Pitta,
and K stands for Kapha.] After checking the cat-
egory that best describes one’s total life experi-
ences, the practitioner totals the number for each
category V, P, K. The result will decide the doßha.
For example, if there are 10-V, 20- P, and 30- K,
the person is a Kapha doßha. If the sum is 25-V,
25-P and 10- K, the person is Váyu/Pitta doßha. If
the sum is 20-V, 20-P, and 20-K, the person is
Tridoßhic. Separate totals for the mental and physi-
cal questions reveal any differences between the
doßhas of the mind and body.
Outer Conditions
Frame:
V- tall or short, thin, bony
P- medium, average development
K- wide, stocky, stout, big, well-developed body
Weight:
V- low, protruding veins and bones, can’t keep
weight on; may be heavy but with fluctu
ating weight and spongy tissues.
P- moderate, muscular; excess red meat and greasy
foods add excess weight.
K- heavy, hard to keep weight off, obesity
d
n
a
H
tfe
L
n
oitis
o
P
th
gi
L
p
e
e
D
ts
1
e
nits
etni
lla
m
s
tra
e
h
d
n
2
h
c
a
m
ots
n
e
elp
s
d
r
3
y
ra
nir
u
y
e
n
dik
re
d
d
alb
d
n
a
H
t
h
gi
R
n
oitis
o
P
th
gi
L
p
e
e
D
ts
1
n
olo
c
s
g
n
ul
d
n
2
re
d
d
alb
lla
g
re
vil
d
r
3
m
uid
ra
cire
p
e
slu
p
la
utirip
s

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 53
Head:
V- thin, long, small, unsteady, stiff necks
P- moderate
K- stocky, large, square-ish, steady
Hair:
V- curly, brown, dry, coarse, sparse, full bodied
P- straight, blond or reddish, early gray or bald,
soft, fine
K- oily, thick, very wavy, dark brown or black,
lustrous, abundant
Forehead:
V- small, wrinkles
P- moderate with folds
K- large and broad
Face:
V- long, thin, wrinkled, small, dull
P- moderate, sharply contoured
K- large, round, fat, pale, softly contoured
Skin:
V- thin, cold, rough, cracked, dry, prominent veins
P- warm, pink, freckles, acne, moles, moist, rashes,
easy sunburn, delicate, sensitive
K- thick, cold, smooth, white, soft, moist, oily,
edema, fatty
Complexion:
V- dull, darkish brown, lackluster
P- flushed, reddish, freckled, glowing, discolora-
tion
K- pale, whitish
Eyes, Lashes, and Brows:
V- small, dry, brown, unsteady
P- medium, red, thin, green, piercing, light sensi-
tive
K- wide, oily, white, attractive, prominent, cry
easily, discharge in eyes, steady but dull
focus
Nose:
V- thin, long, and pointed, small, dry, crooked
P- average, sharp, and pointed
K- thick, firm, big, oily
* Nose, eyes, and complexion will vary depend-
ing on racial/cultural characteristics.
Lips:
V- thin, small, dry, unsteady, darkish, biting
P- medium, soft, red
K- large, thick, oily, smooth, firm, attractive
Teeth/Gums: (varies according to hygiene)
V- thin, small, dry, rough, crooked, spaces, buck
teeth, receding gums
P- medium, soft pink, gums bleed easily
K- large, white, attractive, thick, soft pink, oily
Neck:
V- thin, long, loose tendons
P- moderate
K- large, thick, square
Shoulders:
V- small, thin, flat, hunched
P- medium
K- broad, thick, firm
Frame:
V- small, thin bones
P- average
K-large bones
Upper Torso:
V- small, thin, narrow, underdeveloped, doesn’t
gain weight easily
P- moderate, wiry
K- large, broad, well developed, overdeveloped,
gain weight easily
Arms:
V- small, thin, long, low development, bony el
bows
P- moderate, wiry
K- large, thick, round, well developed, fleshy
Hands:
V- small, narrow, dry, rough, cold, unsteady, fis-
sured, lines, bony knuckles
P- moderate, warm, pink
K- large, thick, cool, firm, oily, square, unlined

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
54
Legs:
V- very short or long legs, thin, bony knees, runs
and walks a lot, walking coordination is
unsteady
P- average
K- large, stocky, can stand for long periods
Thighs:
V- thin, narrow
P- moderate
K- fat, round, well developed, cellulitis
Calves:
V- small, tight, hard
P- soft, loose
K- firm, shapely
Feet:
V- small, thin, rough, long, dry, unsteady, fissured,
need to be oiled daily
P- moderate, soft pink, good circulation and com-
plexion
K- large, thick, firm
Joints:
V- small, thin, dry, unsteady, cracking, prominent
P- moderate, loose, soft
K- large, thick, well built
Nails: (mineral absorption)
V- small, thin, dry, rough, cracked, fissured, dark
P- medium, soft, pink
K- large, thick, white, smooth, oily, firm
Sweat/Odor: (vegetarians sweat less than meat
eaters do)
V- odorless, scanty
P- strong smell, profuse, hot
K- pleasant smell, moderate when exercising, cold
Feces:
V- scanty, dry, hard, painful, or difficult, gas, con-
stipation
P- abundant, loose, yellowish, burning diarrhea
K- moderate, solid, pale, mucus in stool
* Pitta persons with fevers get constipation. Kaphas
may get constipation but stool is not hard.
Urine:
V- scanty, colorless, bubbly, difficult
P- profuse, yellow, red, burning
K- moderate, whitish, milky
Inner Conditions
Appetite/Food:
V- erratic, variable, eats quickly, likes warm, oily
food
P- sharp, strong, eats moderately fast, likes cold
food
K- low, constant, eats slowly, likes warm, dry food
Taste:
V- sweet, sour, salty, oily, spicy foods
P- sweet, bitter, astringent, raw or steamed, bland
foods
K- pungent, bitter astringent, spicy, non oily foods
* Áma (toxins) in the system causes one not to follow
the above natural inclinations.
Circulation:
V- low, variable, palpitations, aggravated by wind,
cold, and dryness
P- excellent, warm, aggravated by heat, fire, and
sun
K- slow, steady, aggravated by cold and dampness
Life Pace:
V- fast, unsteady, erratic, hyperactive
P- moderate, purposeful, goal-oriented
K- slow, steady, regal
Endurance:
V- low or fluctuating
P- moderate to high, heat intolerance, pushes until
one burns out
K- strong, steady, slow starters, moderate perfor-
mance
Disease Tendency:
V- nervous and immune system diseases, pain, ar-
thritis, mental, bones
P- infections, febrile, blood, inflammatory dis-
eases, yellow or green mucus
K- respiratory diseases, clear or white mucus,
edema, and obesity

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 55
Disease Resistance:
V- poor, weak immune systems
P- moderate, infections, bleeding
K- good, strong immune system, consistent
Medicinal Healing Tendency:
V- quick, low dosages, nervous reactions
P- moderate
K- slow, higher dosages
Pulse: (quality is the most important thing)
V- 80-100, irregular, rapid, snake-like quality
P- 70-80, wiry, frog-like quality
K- 60-70, slow, warm, steady, wide, swan-like
quality
Sexual Nature:
V- variable, strong desire but low energy, few chil-
dren
P- moderate, passionate, domineering, quarrel
some
K- constant, low, devoted, many children
Pain: (blocked or wrong movements in the srotas
cause the severest pain)
V- severe - sharp, shocking, disruptive, churning,
beating, throbbing, tearing, variable, colic,
migratory, intermittent
P- moderate - burning, steaming, swelling, bleed-
ing
K- mild - heavy, dull, constant, congestion
Fever:
V- moderate heat, variable, irregular, thirst, anx-
ious, restless
P- highest heat, burning, thirst, sweating, irritable,
delirious
K- lowest heat, dull, heavy, constant
Discharges:
V- noises (joint cracking, moaning, sighing), gas
P- blood, bile, yellow or green pus
K- mucus, clear or white pus, salivation, water
Mouth:
V- dry, astringent taste
P- bitter, pungent taste, salivation
K- sweet, salty tastes, excess salivation, discharge
of mucus
Throat:
V- dry, rough pain, constricted esophagus
P- sore, inflamed, burning
K- swollen, dilated, edema
Stomach:
V- frequent belching, and/or hiccuping, feeling a
sense of constriction, variable appetite, less
secretions
P- cancer, ulcers, burning, sour or pungent (eruc-
tations) belches or hiccups, excess appe-
tite, heart burns
K- slow digestion, sweet or mucoid belching, nau-
sea, vomiting
Liver/ Gall Bladder:
V- dry, rough, irregular activity, scanty secretions
P- soft, inflamed, abscesses, increased activity,
excess bile, gall stones (most liver and gall
bladder problems are Pitta related)
K- enlarged, heavy, firm, little bile, lower activity
Intestines:
V- dry, distention, gas, constipation, disorders of
peristalsis
P- excess secretions, inflamed, ulcers, abscesses,
tumors, cancer, bleeding, perforation, rapid
peristalsis
K- coated with mucus, obstructed, edema, tumors,
distention, slow peristalsis
Initial Signs of Disease:
V- variable, irregular rapid onset
P- high fevers, moderate onset
K- constant, slow onset from congestion
Mental Traits
Sensitivities:
V- noise
P- bright lights
K- strong odors

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
56
Voice/Speaking:
V- low, weak, whining, monotone, quick,
talkative, rambling, imaginative
P- high, sharp, clear, precise, organized, detailed,
orators, moderate, argumentative
K- deep, tonal, singers, slow, silent
Dreams/Sleep:
V- flying, running, fearful, light sleep
P- fighting, in color, moderately deep
K- romantic, water, few, heavy, deep sleep
Mind/Senses:
V- fear, anxiety, apathy, sorrow, delusion, uncon-
sciousness, insomnia, needing heat,
strongly dislikes cold things, loss of coor-
dination indecisive
P- violent, delirious, dizzy, fainting, needing cold,
poor senses, intoxicated, restlessness,
heated head, impatient, hot tempered, criti-
cal
K- calm, lethargic, stupor, excessive sleep, slow
perception, desires heat, dull, inert
Memory/Learning:
V- quick to learn ideas but also forgets quickly,
likes to study many things but becomes un-
focused, learns by listening
P- focused, penetrating, discriminating,
goal oriented, learns best by reading and
with visuals
K- slow to learn but never forgets, learns by asso-
ciation
Nature:
V- adaptable, quick, indecisive
P- penetrating, critical, intelligent
K- slow, steady, dull
Memory:
V- understands ideas quickly, then forgets quickly
P- clear, sharp
K- slow to learn, but once learns, never forgets
Faith:
V- erratic, rebellious, changeable
P- leader, goals, fanatical
K- loyal, constant, conservative
Emotions:
V- anxious, nervous, fearful
P- angry, irritable, argumentative
K- content, calm, sentimental
Habits:
V- travel, culture, humor, eccentric
P- politics, sports, dance, competitive
K- water sports, flowers, cosmetics, business, lazy
Mental Disorders:
V- anxiety attacks, hysteria, trembling
P- rage, tantrums, excess temper
K- depression, sorrow, lethargic
Discussion
     Once the doßha has been determined, the
present illness or health concern (vik^iti) is dis-
cussed. Through a series of questions regarding
the degree of air, fire, and water affecting the con-
dition, the vik^iti will become clear.
     It is more crucial to learn what the patient ex-
periences than merely naming the illness. Another
way of cross-referencing disease is finding the site
of the condition. For example, dryness, or general
weakness in the colon, bones, and thighs; anxi-
eties; and worry are symptoms of Váyu. Heat, in-
fection or acid of the liver, spleen, heart, blood,
gall bladder; yellow or green mucus, anger, impa-
tience, and irritability are symptoms of Pitta. With
dampness, water (e.g., in the lungs), white or clear,
abundant mucus, overweight, and lethargy, Kapha
is the cause. If symptoms include more than one
doßha, then it is possible that both doßhas are the
cause.
     Different physical and mental imbalances may
exist. The practitioner investigates “the cause of
the cause.” For example, if a person wants to lose
weight, therapy can begin in one of three ways.
First, one may address the symptom with allopathic
weight loss pills. Obviously, this is the most su-
perficial method. Second, one may realize that the

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 57
cause of the weight is a Kapha tendency and fol-
low appropriate Kapha-reduction therapies. Yet, a
deeper level still exists. What is the cause of the
overeating? Perhaps it is an Váyu-imbalanced
mind, producing worry or anxiety. Kapha imbal-
ances create a need for love and contentment. These
factors may cause a person to eat more. Therapies
include herbs and foods to reduce weight, calm
the mind, and culture the heart. Sádhaná (medita-
tion) is also advised to develop inner calm and Self-
love.
     When viewing weight gain from another van-
tage point, finding out what causes anxiety in the
person may uncover dharmic (life-purpose), kamic
(spiritual relationship), or spiritual situations, that
are making the person unhappy.
     The dharmic reasons are easily discovered when
asking patients if they love the career in which they
are presently working. They specifically need to
say they love it. When they acknowledge that they
do, the practitioner can focus more deeply into
kama and mokßha (Self-Realization) questioning.
     If they admit they are unhappy with their ca-
reers, a deeper question is asked; “What is it you
would love to do if you could, regardless whether
it seems possible or practical?”  Often patients re-
alize that once, before they stopped doing some-
thing they loved, they did not have a weight prob-
lem; only after they stopped doing what they love
(e.g., teaching dancing) did the weight gain occur.
Thus, the practitioner uncovers the ultimate cause
of the weight problem. People doing what they love
to do find their lives are transformed in a very short
time.
     Spiritual lacking is yet another dimension that
may cause overeating and overweight. It is the
cause of all causes of diseases. An inner lack of
fulfillment may exist in one’s career, relationship
or in their self worth. These persons are urged to
begin taking small steps towards involving them-
selves in whatever they need for inner nourishment.
These three topics will be discussed in detail later
in the book.
     So we see that the discussion portion of the
consultation covers mind, body, career, relation-
ships, and spirituality. This makes for a truly ho-
listic investigation.
Nutrition
     We have briefly touched upon the topic of tastes,
as they are related to the seasons. This may seem
quite an unusual way to look at the seasons, but
nonetheless, a useful one when considering health.
To better understand the idea of taste from the
Áyurvedic viewpoint, it needs to be examined more
deeply. These insights offer an explanation of the
role of tastes in healing. Unique to Áyurveda is a
scientific breakdown of tastes, discussed accord-
ing to energies or energetics. Áyurveda classifies
herbs, foods, and drinks into five categories. Each
has its own therapeutic effects:
1. Taste
2. Element (property)
3. Heating or cooling effect
4. Post-digestion effect (final taste after digestion)
5. Special properties
     Taste: Is considered therapeutic for several rea-
sons. The Sanskrit word for taste is “Rasa”. It
means delight or essence, both of which are heal-
ing. A nerve channel extends from the mouth into
the head that brings the essence (one definition of
taste) to the brain. This essence stimulates práòa,
which in turn stimulates the agni or digestive fires.
If the taste of the food is not pleasing, the gastric
fires may not digest the food and one will not re-
ceive proper nutrition. That is why Áyurvedic
cooking is a science unto itself, blending the right
amount of herbs for the right taste. In our society,
we have mixed our sense of taste with unwhole-
some (artificial) objects of food (one of the two
fundamental causes of disease).
     Element: Six tastes originate from the five ele-
ments, transmitting their properties: sweet sour,
salty, pungent, bitter, astringent. All tastes essen-
tially belong to the water element, having their
origin here. No food consists only of one taste; all
five elements are contained in all substances. So
when it is said that a food has a certain taste (e.g.,
sweet), it means predominantly that taste. Simi-
larly, no illness is caused purely by one doßha.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
58
However, when a doßha predominates, it is said
that an illness is caused by that specific doßha.
*Astringents can either aggravate or
pacify Kapha due to its earth and
air elements, respectively.
     All persons need some of each of the six tastes
in their daily diet. However, depending on one’s
constitution, health condition, and the season, they
will take varying amounts of the tastes to balance
their doßha. The key is to have a moderate amount
of each taste.
     The benefits listed on the next page result from
ingesting foods that develop these healing mea-
sures. However, they relate primarily to the
doßha(s) listed. If used by a doßha not listed, they
will create excess.
ets
a
T
t
n
e
m
el
E
d
o
o
F
te
e
w
s
reta
w
/htra
e
s
e
h
crats
,ra
g
u
s
r
u
o
s
erif/htra
e
s
dic
a
,d
etn
e
m
ref
ytla
s
erif/reta
w
e
nila
kla
,tla
s
tn
e
g
n
u
p
ria/erif
,dirc
a
,y
cip
s
cita
m
o
ra
rettib
ria/re
hte
s
b
re
h
tn
e
g
nirts
a
*
ria/htra
e
g
nitcirts
n
o
c
hti
w
ytila
u
q
nin
n
at

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 59
ets
a
T
(
a
s
a
R
)
tc
eff
E
la
cis
y
h
P
tc
eff
E
la
t
n
e
M
te
e
w
s
-
P
V
,)s
ajo
(
p
a
s
efil
,s
e
u
ssit
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
&
s
dliu
b
n
oix
elp
m
o
c
s
e
n
o
b
,tn
e
m
tn
etn
o
c
er
u
s
a
elp
-
K
V
r
u
o
s
s
e
v
eiler
,s
e
h
sir
u
o
n
,s
a
g
sle
p
sid
,dia
e
vits
e
gid
d
n
a
n
oitalu
cric
s
ple
h
,s
etaita
s
,tsriht
s
e
u
ssit
lla
s
dia
,tra
e
h
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
,n
oita
ni
m
ile
ytidic
a
s
niatnia
m
,e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
er
tu
b
&
d
ni
m
s
n
e
k
a
w
s
e
s
n
e
s
-
V
ytla
s
,e
vita
d
e
s
,e
vita
x
al
,s
e
u
ssit
s
eta
cir
b
ul
,g
nin
etf
o
s
,e
vita
g
r
u
p
,g
nita
e
w
s
s
eto
m
o
r
p
,dia
e
vits
e
gid
d
ra
h
sts
e
g
n
o
c
e
d
,sr
o
m
ut
d
ra
h
s
n
etf
o
s
,cite
m
e
,e
c
n
ala
b
lare
ni
m
s
niatnia
m
,
m
g
elh
p
ets
at
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
,reta
w
s
dlo
h
,s
e
v
re
n
s
m
la
c
yteix
n
a
s
p
ots
tn
e
g
n
u
p
-
K
V
,s
e
h
s
ar
cig
rella
K
V
d
n
a
s
e
s
a
e
sid
ta
o
r
ht
sla
e
h
;taf
d
n
a
,e
s
a
er
g
,reta
w
sretn
u
o
c
,s
e
s
a
e
sid
nik
s
,a
m
e
d
e
s
e
v
o
m
er
,s
a
g
sle
p
sid
,dia
e
vits
e
gid
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
,ta
e
w
s
s
eto
m
o
r
p
,ets
at
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
p
u
s
k
a
er
b
,s
n
oitc
n
u
f
cin
a
g
r
o
d
n
a
m
silo
b
ate
m
,s
e
ss
a
m
d
ra
h
re
hto
d
n
a
stolc
r
o
d
o
olb
tn
a
n
g
ats
d
n
a
nia
p
e
v
re
n
s
e
v
eiler
,sle
n
n
a
h
c
sra
elc
n
ois
n
et
elc
s
u
m
d
ni
m
s
n
e
p
o
s
e
s
n
e
s
d
n
a
rettib
-
K
P
,re
v
ef
,s
e
s
a
e
sid
nik
s
,tsriht
,aix
er
o
n
a
sla
e
h
d
o
olb
;airetc
a
b
d
n
a
,s
etis
ara
p
,g
n
n
r
u
b
,a
e
s
u
a
n
,taf
s
e
c
u
d
er
,s
eifix
ote
d
,s
e
s
n
a
elc
,reifir
u
p
,citoibitn
a
;s
e
ss
e
c
x
e
reta
w
d
n
a
,e
u
ssit
,kli
m
ts
a
er
b
s
e
s
n
a
elc
,dia
e
vits
e
gid
,citp
e
sitn
a
taf
d
n
a
ra
g
u
s
sts
e
gid
d
n
a
s
e
s
n
e
s
sra
elc
s
n
oito
m
e
tn
e
g
nirts
a
-
K
P
,ta
e
w
s
,d
o
olb
s
e
s
n
a
elc
d
n
a
g
nid
e
elb
s
p
ots
,s
e
n
ar
b
m
e
m
s
u
c
u
m
d
n
a
nik
s
sla
e
h
,a
e
h
rraid
,citer
uid
,tn
ar
otc
e
p
x
e
;sre
clu
d
n
a
,e
s
p
alo
r
p
taf
d
n
a
er
utsio
m
s
eir
d
,s
e
u
ssit
s
n
eth
git
y
reif
slo
o
c
sra
elc
d
n
a
s
d
ni
m
d
n
a
s
e
s
n
e
s
s
n
oito
m
e
y
g
ra
htel
s
e
v
o
m
er
V = Váyu, P = Pitta, K = Kapha, ‘-’ means reduces that doßha

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
60
Negative Effects Due To Excess
In the table below are the diseases that result
from ingesting foods that create excesses in the
doßhas. In excess, eventually any doßha will
develop these ailments.
     It is interesting that Áyurveda is not concerned
with naming diseases. It determines illness accord-
ing to the excesses and deficiencies of the elements
or doßhas (air, fire, and water). When doßhas are
balanced, illness does not exist. From this point of
view, one can see that by understanding the effects
of the six tastes upon the doßhas, nutrition becomes
an elemental and effective measure in maintain-
ing the balance of health. The charts shown above
also reveal how various diseases are seen to be di-
rectly related to tastes and doßhas. Thus, by fol-
lowing an appropriate food plan for one’s consti-
tution, a person may maintain health and prevent
future illness.
Energy (Vírya)
     This energy causes the activation of tastes.
Foods and drinks possess either cool or hot energy
(in the body). Each taste has an associated energy.
* Yogurt is sour, sweet, and heavy. Pure forms of the
tastes will aggravate one’s doßha more easily than
complex versions and thus should be used with care.
ets
a
T
(
a
s
a
R
)
tc
eff
E
la
cis
y
h
P
tc
eff
E
la
t
n
e
M
+
K
te
e
w
s
;s
e
s
a
e
sid
taf
ss
e
c
x
e
s
ete
b
aid
,ytis
e
b
o
,n
oits
e
gid
ni
,sr
o
m
ut
tn
a
n
gila
m
d
n
alg
k
c
e
n
tn
e
m
e
g
raln
e
:a
h
p
a
K
,y
g
ra
htel
yteix
n
a
:u
y
á
V
+
P
r
u
o
s
ss
ol
,ss
e
nib
b
alf
,re
v
ef
,htg
n
ertsf
o
,ss
e
n
d
nilb
,tsriht
atti
P
,r
olla
p
,g
nih
cti
lla
m
s
,s
e
p
re
h
,ai
m
e
n
a
x
o
p
,ss
e
nid
dig
,re
g
n
a
to
h
,e
c
n
eita
p
m
i
re
p
m
et
+
K
P
ytla
s
-s
e
n
dla
b,n
ois
n
etre
p
y
h
nik
s
,ria
h
y
ar
g
,s
,s
elk
nir
w
,s
e
s
a
e
sid
f
o
ss
ol
,s
e
p
re
h
,tsriht
s
e
ss
e
c
s
b
a
,htg
n
erts
,re
g
n
a
,e
c
n
eita
p
m
i
y
g
ra
htel
tn
e
g
n
u
p
+
P
n
oitelp
e
d
,tsriht
diulf
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
erf
o
f,htg
n
erts
d
n
a
,sr
o
m
ert
,g
nitnia
nia
p
k
c
a
b/tsia
w
,re
g
n
a
e
c
n
eita
p
m
i
+
V
rettib
u
y
á
V
,n
oitelp
e
d
e
u
ssit
s
e
s
a
e
sid
,ra
ef
,yteix
n
a
ain
m
o
s
ni
tn
e
g
nirts
a
+
V
,s
d
o
o
f
d
ets
e
gid
n
u
,tsriht
,nia
p
tra
e
h
,n
oitaic
a
m
e
,ss
olytiliriv
d
e
k
c
olb
,n
oita
pits
n
o
c
sle
n
n
a
h
c
,y
rr
o
w
,yteix
n
a
ain
m
o
s
ni
,ra
ef
ets
a
T
y
g
r
e
n
E
s
d
o
o
F
te
e
w
s
dlo
c
ra
g
u
s
r
u
o
s
to
h/*
cidic
a
,e
ni
w
,tr
u
g
o
y
s
elk
cip
ytla
s
to
h
,tla
s
elb
at
d
e
e
w
a
e
s
tn
e
g
n
u
p
to
h
,sre
p
p
e
p
to
h
e
ni
w
,s
eillih
c
rettib
dlo
c
n
e
dlo
g
,
m
ula
m
e
e
n
,la
e
s
tn
e
g
nirts
a
g
nitcirts
n
o
c
k
a
o
,
m
ula
k
ra
b

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 61
Post Digestive (Vipáka)
     Tastes may change at the end of the digestive
process. This is due to the digestive agni fire juices
in the alimentary tract (metabolism). For example,
foods or liquids, initially sweet, develop an after-
taste. This taste may be any of the six tastes. These
after tastes also affect a person’s constitution. Be-
low is the general determination of vipáka tastes
(however there are always exceptions).
[Throughout this text, the following abbreviations
will occur; ‘V’ ‘P’ ‘K’ stands for Váyu, Pitta, and
Kapha respectively. ‘-’ stands for reducing a doßha
and ‘+’ means increasing a doßha]
Sweet VP- K+ (moist) promotes secretion of
Kapha, semen, easy and comfortable gas,
and helps the discharge of urine and feces.
Produces saliva.
Sour P+ increases the tissues (except the repro-
ductive dhátu, which is reduced). It pro
duces bile, acid.
Salty P+ produces saliva.
Pungent P+ (in time) causes gas, constipation, pain-
ful urine, reduces semen with difficult dis
charge.
Bitter PK- V+ produces dryness and gas in the
colon.
Astringent PK- V+ constricts, bothers Váyu.
Emotions and Taste
     Each of the six tastes produces or enhances a
certain emotion when eaten. Thus, emotional dis-
orders may be balanced by eating and avoiding
foods according to their tastes.
Doßhas, Nutrition, and the 6 Tastes
     Váyu is balanced by supplementing with moist
tastes, sweet, sour, and salty (balancing dryness),
and some warm tastes as well. Pitta is balanced by
using sweet (moist), and bitter and astringent (cool-
ing) tastes. This helps counter heat-related illness
(e.g., infection, rash, anger, impatience). Kapha
diseases are removed by using sour and pungent
tastes (i.e., they heat and burn up water). Bitter
tastes, by causing a drying action, also reduce
Kapha.
Sweet: Generally, food is sweet in taste, neutral in
energy, and sweet in its post-digestive effect. It
g
n
it
a
v
a
r
g
g
A
g
n
iy
fic
a
P
ra
g
u
s
s
etar
d
y
h
o
b
ra
c
x
elp
m
o
c
tla
s
elb
at
d
e
e
w
a
e
s
)e
n
n
e
y
a
c
,.g.e(
sre
p
p
e
p
to
h
,.g.e(
s
e
cip
s
dli
m
)
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
lo
h
o
cla
tiu
rf
r
u
o
s
,tr
u
g
o
y
,.g.e(
srettib
er
u
p
)la
e
s
n
e
dlo
g
)le
g
e
ola(
srettib
dli
m
g
n
o
rts(
stn
e
g
nirts
a
er
u
p
)s
nin
n
at
d
er
,.g.e(
stn
e
g
nirts
a
dli
m
)
y
rre
b
p
s
ar
s
ets
a
T
6
e
vits
e
gi
D
-ts
o
P
ets
a
T
ytla
s
,te
e
w
s
te
e
w
s
s
e
m
o
c
e
b
r
u
o
s
r
u
o
s
s
nia
m
er
,rettib
,tn
e
g
n
u
p
tn
e
g
nirts
a
tn
e
g
n
u
p
s
e
m
o
c
e
b
ets
a
T
s
n
oit
o
m
E
s
e
ss
e
c
x
E
te
e
w
s
eris
e
d
a
h
p
a
K
r
u
o
s
y
v
n
e
atti
P
ytla
s
d
e
er
g
atti
P
/a
h
p
a
K
tn
e
g
n
u
p
re
g
n
a
atti
P
rettib
feir
g
u
y
á
V
tn
e
g
nirts
a
ra
ef
u
y
á
V

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
62
decreases Váyu and Pitta, and increases Kapha. It
nourishes and maintains humors, dhátus (tissues),
and malas (wastes).
Sour: Examples of sour tastes include sour fruit,
tomatoes, and pickled vegetables. All tissues are
nourished by sour tastes—except reproductive tis-
sue (of the sour tastes, only yogurt nourishes all
tissues).
Salty: Seafood or condiment. In moderation, salt
strengthens all tissues. When used in excess, it
depletes tissues.
Pungent: Spices and spicy vegetables do not offer
much nutrition, but they stimulate digestion.
Bitter: Such vegetables offer little nourishment.
They are useful in clearing and cleansing diges-
tive organs, and in aiding digestion, especially if
taken before meals (for Pitta and Kapha doßhas).
Astringent: This is mainly a secondary taste. As-
tringent foods, like green vegetables or unripe
apples, provide minerals but do not build tissue.
Energy: Most foods are neutral in heating and
cooling effects. To apply hot or cold therapeutics,
appropriate spices and foods are eaten cooked or
raw.
Heavy/Light: Most foods tend to be heavy, though
many light foods also exist. Spices can make foods
lighter. Oils can make them heavier.
Dry/Moist: Foods are also dry or moist. Eating
dry foods or toast can increase dryness. Frying
foods or adding liquids can increase moistness.
Special Properties: (Prabháva)
     Herbs also have some subtler, more specific
qualities, beyond their traditional rules and defini-
tions. For example, basil, although a heating herb,
reduces fever. Herbs with similar energies will have
different special properties.
     Certain external actions affect the herbs’
prabháva; mantras, gems, or just the intention or
love imparted by the practitioner alters the herbs
beyond the general classifications. For example,
ámalakí (embellica officinalis) and barhal (a vari-
ety of ficus bengalensis, linn.) both have the same
taste, property, energy, and post-digestive taste. Yet
ámalakí alleviates the doßhas and barhal aggra-
vates the doßhas. Also til (sesame seeds) and madan
(randia dumetorum, lamk.) have predominantly
sweet, astringent, and bitter tastes. Both are oily
and sticky. Yet, madan is an emetic, while sesame
is not. Similarly, wearing specific stones like to-
paz, ruby, sapphire, etc. can heal different diseases.
Dual Doßhas
     It is simply a matter of balance. When doßhas
are not in a balanced state, one has to increase the
depleted doßha and/or decrease the aggravated
doßha. When a person has a dual doßha (e.g., Váyu/
Pitta) they are advised to ingest foods and herbs
that increase the third or deficient element (e.g.,
Kapha). Simultaneously, one reduces the intake of
foods and herbs that increase the two excessive
doßhas (e.g., Váyu and Pitta).
     Foods affect the surface nutrition, while herbs
aid the subtle nutrition. There also may be instances
when one doßha is greatly excessive, and a second
is mildly aggravated. Thus, proper consideration
of the degree of derangement is necessary as well.
Tastes and Organs
     Each of the six tastes also produces effects on
each of the internal organs as well. Again, through
ingesting the proper tastes, the health of the or-
gans may be maintained.
Physiology of the 6 Tastes
     Áyurveda says that each taste, when found in
excess in the body will adversely affect certain
organs in the body. This information is used as a
cross-reference to the five-element view of health
and balance, stated earlier.

Section 2: Analysis
                                                 Chapter 3: Analysis of Constitution and Illness
 63
     Thus, Áyurveda offers a unique view of the
energetics of taste: six tastes (the initial taste, its
hot or cold energy, and its after taste), how tastes
are related to the doßhas, organs, diseases, and
emotions and their special properties. It is a com-
plete science of the mechanics and energies of
nutrition. Further, it reveals a causal relationship
between food and health; how one feels is greatly
decided by what one eats.
     As discussed earlier, Áyurveda aims to remove
the cause of an illness. Rather than ‘curing’ a spe-
cific disease, this science addresses the balance of
the whole individual. It always considers the three
levels of health: body, mind, and external causes.
This chapter has examined the Áyurvedic view of
how the tastes and energies of foods play a direct
role in creating health or illness.
     Life habits (external) are considered another
essential Áyurvedic healing measure when life
style changes are gradually adapted. In the origi-
nal Áyurvedic texts, people are cautioned to gradu-
ally change their habits. Starting or stopping hab-
its (even healthy ones) too suddenly, causes shock
to the system. In the chapter on the seasons, a subtle
seven-day transition period between seasons is
noted and utilized to help people avoid disease
during the shift. In the spiritual texts, we find simi-
lar wisdom about the transition points at sunrise,
noon, sunset, and midnight. It is suggested that
these are points of weakness and that the person is
better advised to spend these transitional times in
sádhaná (meditation). [Astrologically, the 1st, 8th,
15th, and 16th days, starting with the new and full
moon cycle, are also transitional days best suited
for sádhaná —or at least reduced activity.]
     Even for a healing science that suggests veg-
etarianism to those who are healthy, Áyurveda does
not advise giving up meat “cold-turkey “ (no pun
intended). Even if a food is bad for one’s constitu-
tion (e.g., one’s favorite vegetables or desserts), or
good for their doßha, gradual stopping and start-
ing of any life habit is advised. Gentleness is the
key. Similarly, if one too radically undertakes a
detoxification program, one may experience un-
comfortable cleansing, like diarrhea or excess tox-
ins aggravating the body as they come out.
Áyurveda has the unique position of offering a
healing process that does not have to make one
feel bad before feeling better; one needn’t feel
punished for changing to a healthier way of life.
Thus, healing becomes enjoyable. It makes life
better, simpler, more natural, and it enhances spiri-
tual growth as well. It may take some months be-
fore a healing effect is felt. Making one or two
changes for health, and consistently following
them, is better than experimenting here and there
without a foundation for growth and healing. The
Áyurvedic motto is, “no pain - no pain.”
     Also, people often look for quick healing—
magic medicine that allows them to continue with
their bad habits. In fact, illness is a sign (i.e., a
teacher) that life is not being lived in balance. Herbs
are a food supplement, not magic pills that instantly
remove discomfort. Some people may be impa-
tient with this ‘gradual’ lifestyle development, but
it is enhanced lifestyle and not a quick, topical cure
that Áyurveda achieves.
     Chronic indigestion also needs a slow change.
One week of kicharí (rice and beans) may be
needed for those with severe conditions. Again,
some people may be disinclined to make changes,
but the alternatives (i.e., illnesses) are less pleas-
ant. Eventually one finds a food plan that feels
comfortable.
     As discussed earlier, food essence rises through
the channel to the brain, so it is crucial that whole-
some foods are taken for its sattwic (pure) essence.
Organic is also very good. Sattwic essence posi-
ets
a
T
n
a
g
r
O
te
e
w
S
)s
a
erc
n
a
p
(
n
e
elp
s
r
u
o
S
re
vil
ytla
S
s
y
e
n
dik
tn
e
g
n
u
P
s
g
n
ul
retti
B
tra
e
h
tn
e
g
nirts
A
n
olo
c

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
64
tively affects the mind. A completely Sattwic mind
is the first stage of samádhi (Saibikalpa).
Suggested Reading
Amber, B.B. Pulse Diagnosis. Santa Fe, NM: Au-
     rora Press; 1993.
Lad, V. Áyurveda; The Science of Self Healing.
     Santa Fe, NM: Lotus Press; 1984.
Murthy, K.R. Srikantha. (transl.) Aßhþáñga
     H^idayam. Varanasi, India: Krishnadas Acad-
     emy; 1991.
Frawley, D. Áyurveda Certification Course. Santa
     Fe, NM: American Institute of Vedic Studies;
    1992.
Frawley, D. Áyurvedic Healing. Salt Lake City, UT.
     Passage Press; 1989.
Frawley, D., Lad,V. The Yoga of Herbs. Santa Fe,
     NM: Lotus Press; 1986.
Gupta, K.R.L. Science of Sphygmica or Sage
     Kanad on Pulse. Delhi, India: Sri Satguru
     Publications; 1987.
Sharma, P.V. (transl.) Charaka Saåhitá. Varanasi,
     India: Chaukhambha Orientalia; 1981.
Sharma, R.K., Dash, B. (transl.) Charaka Saåhitá.
     Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series
     Office; 1992.
Sikdar, J.C. (editor/transl.) Náæívijñanam and
     Náæíprakaßham. Prakrit Bharti Academy:
     Jaipur, India; 1988.
Singh, Dr. R.H. Pañcha Karma Therapy.
     Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series: Varanasi, India;
    1992.
Tirtha, S.S.S. Áyurveda Certification Course.
     Bayville, NY: Áyurveda Holistic Center Press;
    2004.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 65
Section 3
Ãyurvedic Therapeutics
AayuvRed icikTsaSwanmœ
     Each therapy discussed in this section reveals
Áyurveda’s unique “personalized” approach, in the
same way the fundamentals and analysis sections
revealed individualization according to the three
doßhas. Once learned, all other healing therapies
from all other cultures may be integrated into this
Áyurvedic framework, and can be made more per-
sonalized.
     This section will cover the following topics:
1. Herbology
2. Nutrition
3. Pañcha karma
4. Abhyañga
5. Aromatherapy
6. Haóha yoga therapy
5. Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, and Music
6. Color, Gem, and Ash Therapies
7. Lifestyle counseling and Exercise
8. Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
66

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 67
All our sorrows arise because we do not love or establish friendship with the One with whom we
should. We place our love and friendship in people instead of God.
-Swami Shankar Puruähottam Tírtha
erbs represent the most effective
Áyurvedic approach to healing illness.
Their action is strongest when they are
fresh, but they may also be used as decoctions,
infusions, teas, powders, and pills. Pills have the
least power, but retain their potency the longest.
Below are some of the most commonly used
Áyurvedic herbs available in America today.
     Herbs are classified according to which doßha
they decrease and increase. Decreasing a doßha is
useful for a person of that body type, while an herb
that increases one’s doßha will aggravate it. For
example, a Váyu person will be helped by ginger,
a warm herb, but be irritated by goldenseal, a dry,
bitter herb. This is yet another reason the Áyurvedic
paradigm is so extraordinary. This personalizing
aspect of Áyurveda can be integrated into all other
healing systems. Here we will see an example of
this by classifying some Western herbs according
to the Áyurvedic framework.
     Áyurveda uses herbs according to their ener-
gies or “energetics.” The same five unique classi-
fications discussed under nutrition in the last chap-
ter also apply to herbs. Each herb has its own thera-
peutic effects.
     1. Initial taste
     2. Element
     3. Hot or cold effect
     4. Post digestion effect
     5. Special properties
     Taste is considered therapeutic for several rea-
sons. The Sanskrit word for taste is rasa. It means
delight or essence, both of which are healing. If
the taste of the food is not pleasing, the gastric
fires may not digest the food, and thus proper nu-
trition is not received. That is why Áyurvedic cook-
ing is a science unto itself, blending the right
amount of herbs for the right taste. In our society,
we have confused our sense of taste with unwhole-
some (artificial) objects of food, thereby creating
disease.
The Six Tastes
     According to Áyurveda, all foods and liquids
contain six tastes: sweet, salty, sour, pungent, bit-
ter, astringent, or combinations. As discussed in
the previous chapter, each of the six tastes either
increase, or decrease, each doßha. To review;
Sweet: Reduces Váyu and Pitta and increases
     Kapha
Sour: Reduces Váyu and increases Pitta and Kapha
Salty: Reduces Váyu and increases Pitta and Kapha
Pungent: Reduces Kapha and increases Pitta and
     Váyu
Bitter: Reduces Pitta and Kapha and increases
     Váyu
Astringent: Reduces Pitta and Kapha and increases
     Váyu
     Everyone needs some of each of the six tastes
every day. Depending on one’s constitution, how-
ever, persons mostly eat from the tastes that bal-
ance their doßha. The key is moderation. In fact, a
general rule of thumb in life is
Everything in moderation,
including moderation.
Chapter 4
Herbology

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
68
Physical and Mental Properties
of the Six Tastes
     The symbols V, P, K stand for Váyu, Pitta, and
Kapha. For example, VP- K+ is read the following
way: Váyu and Pitta are reduced; Kapha is
increased.
Sweet VP- K+
     Physical: Strengthens tissues, good for com-
plexion, hair, throat, sense organs, ojas, children,
and the elderly. It heals broken bones, effects lon-
gevity, is an emollient, expectorant, and a mild
laxative. Sweet tastes build the body, increase
breast milk, and are difficult to digest.
     Mental: Provides contentment and is harmoniz-
ing.
     In Excess: Causes overweight, indigestion, dia-
betes, fainting, enlarged glands, and cancer.
Salty V- PK+ (V+ in excess)
     Physical: Clears channels and pores, improves
digestion, produces sweat, enhances taste, pen-
etrates tissues, causes lacerations, and bursting of
tissues and abscesses.
     Mental: Sedative, calms nerves, stops anxiety
     In Excess: Increases blood, causes balding, gray
hair, wrinkles, thirst, skin diseases, herpes, weak-
ens body strength.
Sour V- PK+
     Physical: Good for the heart, digestion, relieves
burning sensations, satiating, moistens, is easily
digested, oily, dispels gas, nourishes, relieves thirst,
aids circulation, aids all tissues except reproduc-
tive, maintains acidity.
     Mental: Awakens the mind and senses.
     In Excess: Flabbiness, loss of strength, blind-
ness, giddiness, itching irritation, pallor, herpes,
swellings, smallpox, thirst, fevers.
Pungent K- P+ (V+ in excess)
     Physical: Heals throat diseases, allergic rashes,
skin disorders, edema, ulcer swelling; dries oili-
ness, fat, and water; promotes hunger, taste, and
digestion; eliminates doßha excesses, breaks up
hard masses, expands body channels.
     Mental: Opens the mind and senses.
     In Excess: Causes thirst, fainting, tremors and
pains, depletes reproductive fluid and strength.
Bitter PK- V+
     Physical: Heals anorexia, parasites, thirst, skin
disorders, fever, nausea, burning sensations,
cleanses breast milk and throat, is easily digested,
promotes intelligence, and is drying.
     Mental: Clears the senses the emotions.
     In Excess: Depletes tissues.
Astringent PK- V+
     Physical: Cleanses blood, stops bleeding, sweat,
diarrhea, heals ulcers, is drying, difficult to digest,
causes indigestion, tightens tissues, heals prolapse.
     In Excess: Causes gas, thirst, emaciation, loss
of virility; obstructs channels, causes constipation
and pain in the heart area, inhibits digestion.
Tastes, Energy and Properties
t
o
H
r
ett
o
H
ts
ett
o
H
ytla
s
r
u
o
s
tn
e
g
n
u
p
d
lo
C
r
e
d
lo
C
ts
e
d
lo
C
te
e
w
s
tn
e
g
nirts
a
rettib
y
r
D
r
eir
D
ts
eir
D
tn
e
g
nirts
a
rettib
tn
e
g
n
u
p
n
oita
pits
n
o
C
s
e
s
u
a
C
yli
O
r
eili
O
ts
eili
O
r
u
o
s
ytla
s
te
e
w
s
f
o
n
oita
ni
m
ile
s
eto
m
o
r
P
s
a
g
d
n
a
,e
nir
u
,s
e
c
ef
y
tili
b
its
e
gi
D
tl
u
ciffi
D
e
r
o
M
tl
u
ciffi
D
ts
o
M
tl
u
ciffi
D
ytla
s
tn
e
g
nirts
a
te
e
w
s
el
b
its
e
gi
D
y
s
a
E
r
eis
a
E
ts
eis
a
E
r
u
o
s
tn
e
g
n
u
p
rettib

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 69
     With this information in mind, let us look at
the various therapies, beginning with herbs. For
each herb, the energetic description offers the
trifold effect of ‘taste—energy—post-digestive
taste.’ Below are 85 Áyurvedic herbs with uses.
85 Important Áyurvedic Herbs
1. Akarkará
2. Ádrak (Fresh Ginger) & £huòþhí (Dry Ginger)
3. Ámalakí
4. Amlavetasa (Rhubarb)
5. Apámárga
6. Arjuna
7. Arka
8. A¤hoka
9. A¤hwagandhá
10. Ativißhá
11. Bákuchí
12. Bh^i´garáj
13. Balá (Indian Country Mallow)
14. Bhút^ina (Lemon Grass)
15. Bhúámalakí
16. Bibhítakí
17. Bilwa
18. Bola
19. Bráhmí (Gotu Kola)
20. B^ihatí
21. Chakra Marada
22. Cháògerí, Amliká
23. Chiráyatá
24. Chitrak
25. Dáruharidrá/Dáruhaldi (Barberry)
26. Devadaru (Himalayan Cedar)
27. Dhányak (Coriander/Cilantro)
28. Dhátakí
19. Elá (Cardamom)
30. Eraòæa (Castor Oil)
31. Gauriphal (Red Raspberry)
32. Gokßhura (Caltrops)
33. Guæmár
34. Guæúchí
35. Guggul (Indian Bedellium)
36. Haridra (Turmeric)
37. Harítakí
38. Í¤habgol (Ispaghula or Spogel Seeds)
39. Jaóámáò¤hí
40. Kákamáchí
41. Kákaná¤há
42. Kañchanar
43. Kaòókárí
44. Kapikachhú (Átmaguptá)
45. Kaóuká
46. Kumari (Aloe Vera)
47. Kumkum (Saffron)
48. Ku¤há (Durba)
49. Kußhtha (Kút)
50. Laghu Patha (Jal Jamní)
51. Mamírá (Gold Thread)
52. Mañjißhþhá (Indian madder)
53. Maricha (Black Pepper)
54. Musta (Nutgrass)
55. Nágke¤har
56. Nimba (Neem)
57. Nirguòæí
58. Paßhana Bheda
59. Pippalí (Long Pepper)
60. Pravál (mineral)
61. Punarnavá
62. Rasonam (Garlic)
63. Rechanaka (Raktam)
64. Sálam-Mi¤hrí
65. Sárivá (Sarasparilla)
66. Sarpagandha
67. £ha´kh Pußhpí
68. £hatávarí
69. £hilájit (mineral)
70. £hwetamusali (White Musali)
71. Snuhi (Vajra)
72. Tagara (Valerian)
73. Tejbal (Tumburu)
74. Tila (Sesame)
75. Tráymán (Wild Violet)
76. Tulsí (Holy Basil)
77. Twak (Cinnamon)
78. Vachá (Calamus)
79. Vaμ¤ha Lochana (Bamboo Manna)
80. Váráhíkand (Yam)
81. Vásáka (Vásák)
82. Vatsnábh (Aconite)
83. Viæa´ga
84. Vidárí Kanda
85. Yaßhóímadhu (Licorice)

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
70
Ten Traditional Herb Mixtures
1. Triphalá- VPK=, for all tridoßhic diseases, con-
stipation, diarrhea, eyes, cleansing or
detoxing the colon, good for Kapha con-
ditions, gas, distention, diabetes, parasites.
2. T^ikatu- VK- P+, for colds, flu, fevers, stimu-
lates appetite, cough, congestion, for low
agni and áma, thyroid, detoxification.
3. Chyavan Prá¤h- VPK=, general tonic, cough,
strengthening lungs from asthma etc., long-
term healing migraines, good for pregnant
mothers, post-partum strength, and for
babies; anemia, debility, T.B.
4. Sitopaladi- VPK=, colds, flu, fevers, increases
appetite, reduces burning sensations in the
extremities.
5. Lavaò Bhaskar- VK- P+, stimulates appetite,
malabsorption, constipation, abdominal
pain, tumors.
6. Mahásudarßhan- P- VK+, for Pitta fevers, nau-
sea, enlarged liver and spleen.
7. Da¤hmúl- VPK = V-, arthritis, strengthens tis-
sues, debility, postpartum condition of fe-
males, cold, flu, body pain, and stiffness.
8. Ávipattikar Chúròa- P- VPK=, used for hypera-
cidity, heartburn, ulcers, colitis, stomach
pains, indigestion, chronic constipation.
9. Hi´gwasták- VPK= mainly V-, indigestion,
bloating (upward-moving apána).
10. Yogaraj Guggul- VK- P+ (in excess), arthritis,
joint pains, stiffness, cholesterol, arterio-
sclerosis, rheumatism, gout, lumbago, back pain,
hernia, goiter, sciatica, acts on the pituitary gland
and hormone swelling, immune system, all Váyu
disorders including nerve disorders, depression,
and insomnia; heals bone fractures.
     It is also good for circulation, blood purifying,
reduces masses, breaks up stagnation, cardiac tonic
(reduces myocardial necrosis), antiseptic, respira-
tory conditions, pulmonary TB, enlarged and in-
flamed lymph glands, urinary disorders, endometri-
tis, hemorrhoids, inflamed colon, hepatitis, ulcer-
ated mouth, throat, tooth, and gum problems
(gargle), skin conditions, increases white blood cell
count. Do not use with acute kidney infections or
acute stages of rashes.
     (Kaißhore Guggul is for Pitta-gout, inflamma-
tions, burning joints, herpes, and all blood diseases;
Pure Guggul is for Kapha. They have similar ac-
tions). Triphalá Guggul is best for weightloss and
cholesterol. Kañchanar Guggul is best for lymph
glands
[VPK= means good for all doßhas]
Empowering Herbs
     When herbs are mixed or prepared, a bíj (seed)
mantra is often recited to empower the herb’s prop-
erties by enlivening all five elements: ether, air,
fire, water, and earth. Bíj are the essence of all other
mantras. Thus of all the mantras they have the most
power. One such mantra is
Aum Íng Hríng Çhríng
Klíng Sanga Çhamboah Namah
     This mantra can be repeated once, seven, 31,
or 108 times. It may also be repeated in intervals
of 108 times. The number 108 is a mystical num-
ber in the Vedic sciences. Thus, chanting 108 times
further empowers the herbs.
An Áyurvedic Story
     Two brothers came to their guru. “Baba,”
said one brother, “our Pitta is excessive in our
mouths. Thus, we always argue with each other.
Please give us some Áyurvedic medicine to relieve
our aggravated Pitta.”
     Their guruji responded, “Whenever you feel
the Pitta rising, each of you are to take a mouthful
of water. Neither swallow nor spit it out, as water
calms fire and the fire is in the mouth. So long
as you keep the water in the mouth, you will not
be plagued by arguing.”

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 71
Áyurvedic Materia Medica
Under the energetics category, the symbols V, P, K
stand for Váyu, Pitta and Kapha respectively. A
‘+’ means an herb increases the doßha, a ‘-’means
the herb reduces the doßha. ‘=’ means it is good
for all three doßhas.
Sanskrit: Akarkará
•krkra
Hindi: Akarakara
English: Pellitory
Latin: Anacyclus
pyrethrum 
DC.
(Pyrethrum radix)
Part Used: Root
Habitat: Himalayas:
3,000-12,000 feet;
Bengal, Arabia
Energetics: pun-
gent/hot/pungent
VKP+
Tissues: Nerves, bones
Systems: Nervous, excretory, reproductive
Action: Stimulant, sialagogue, nerve tonic
Uses: Nerve disorders, bowel conditions, seminal
debility, gargle for tooth problems (e.g., toothache),
sore throat and tonsils; paralysis, hemiplegia, epi-
lepsy, rheumatism, promotes talking in retarded
children, with honey for epilepsy (internal and as
snuff), diabetes. Promotes saliva.
Preparation: Powders, pills, paste
Sanskrit: Árdrakam/£huòþha (£huòóhí)
•a]kma / fau<O =fau<OI+
Hindi: Ádrak/Suòóh
English: Fresh Gin-
ger/dry Ginger
Latin: Zingiberis
officinale roscoe.
Part Used: Rhizomes
Energetics: Pungent,
sweet-hot-sweet VK-
P+
Tissues: All
Systems: Digestive,
respiratory
Action: Analgesic,
antiemetic, aromatic,
aphrodisiac, carmina-
tive, diaphoretic, digestive, expectorant, nervine,
sialagogue, stimulant.
Uses: Ginger is truly a wonder drug, having so
many healing properties. It was called the univer-
sal medicine. Taken with rock salt it reduces Váyu;
with rock candy it reduces Pitta; with honey it re-
duces Kapha.
     Fresh: Mixed juice with water and cane sugar,
boiled to a syrup—add saffron and powders of car-
damom, nutmeg, and clove and preserve well. This
ginger-jam, called Allaepauk, is useful indigestion,
flatulence, colic, vomiting, spasms, stomach and
bowel pains with fever, colds, cough, asthma, and
increasing Pachaka Agni (responsible for diges-
tion).
     For indigestion, mix equal parts juice with
lemon juice and rock salt (found in Indian grocer-
ies), and take just before meals. Taking the juice
with rock salt, before meals, cleanses the throat
and tongue, and increases the appetite. For bile and
delirium due to biliousness, take ginger juice with
cow’s milk (2:7 ratio), boil to half volume and add
rock-candy powder, and take before bed. Or mix
juice with mango juice, cane sugar, and cow ghee;
mix and melt to half the quantity and take morn-
ings and evenings.
     For sore throats, hoarseness, and laryngitis,
sometimes chewing a piece of fresh ginger pro-
duces saliva and soothes these conditions. Juice
rubbed on navel relieves diarrhea. Ginger and on-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
72
ion juice relieve nausea, vomiting, and retching.
Juice with rock candy (twice daily) remedies dia-
betes (mellitus and insipidus), For nervous head-
ache, mix ginger juice with milk, let dry, and use
as snuff.
     Dry: With black and long peppers (t^ikatu) it is
a carminative. Added to purgatives, it prevents nau-
sea and the gripe. For indigestion and low appe-
tite, mix with ghee or hot water. With painful bow-
els or stomach make an infusion of dry ginger, and
mix with 1-2 tbs. castor oil. Alternatively, mix some
asafoetida with ginger powder. For chronic rheu-
matic pain (Váyu or Kapha), colds, excess mucus,
take ginger powder tea before bed, and cover up
with blankets to promote sweating. In cases of
headaches, make a paste of ginger and aloe gel or
water, and apply to the head and take a nap or be-
fore evening sleep. The same paste maybe applied
to the face for tooth or face aches. For headaches
caused by nerves, mix a paste of ginger, cinna-
mon, castor root, and cloves (equal parts); and ap-
ply to the head.
     For fainting, apply a thin paste of ginger and
water to the eyelids, or place a mix of suòóh, black
pepper and pippalí under the nostrils in small
pinches. This will also help stupor, delirium and
senselessness caused by brain fever.
     Other uses: Arthritis, belching, heart disease,
laryngitis (use as a tea and an external paste on
throat), vomiting, constipation, strengthens
memory, removes obstructions in the vessels, in-
continence, flatulence, colic, spasms, fever, eye
diseases, and asthma. Juice is better for colds,
cough, vomiting, deranged Váyu, and as a dia-
phoretic. Dry ginger is better for increasing agni
and reducing Kapha.
Spiritual Uses: Most sattwic (spiritually pure) spice
Precautions: Aggravates Pitta (i.e., inflamed skin
diseases, fever, bleeding, ulcers, etc.)
Preparation: Fresh juice, infusion, decoction, pow-
der, pill, paste
Sanskrit: Ámalakí (meaning: the nurse)
•amalakI
Hindi: Ámla
E n g l i s h :
Emblic my-
robalan; Indian
Gooseberry
Latin: Emblica
o f f i c i n a l i s
Euphorbiaceae
Part 
Used:
Fruit
H a b i t a t :
Himalayas, sea
coasts, Kash-
mir, Deccan
Energetics: Mostly sour, but include all tastes (ex-
cept salty)-cold-sweet VP- (K+ and áma in excess)
Tissues: All; increases ojas
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, excretory
Action: Aphrodisiac, astringent, hemostatic, laxa-
tive, nutritive tonic, refrigerant, rejuvenative (for
Pitta), stomachic
Uses: All Pitta diseases, all obstinate urinary con-
ditions, anemia, biliousness, bleeding, colitis, con-
stipation, convalescence from fever, diabetes, gas-
tritis, gout, hair (premature gray/balding), hepati-
tis, hemorrhoids, liver weakness, mental disorders,
osteoporosis, palpitation, spleen weakness, tissue
deficiency, vertigo; rebuilds blood, bones, cells, and
tissues. It increases red blood cell count and regu-
lates blood sugar; heart tonic, cleanses mouth, stops
gum bleeding, stops stomach and colon inflam-
mation; cleanses intestines, strengthens teeth, aids
eyesight, highest natural source of vitamin C (3,000
mg. per fruit), worms, acidity, eye and lung inflam-

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 73
mations, ulcerations, G.I. disorders, painful urina-
tion, internal bleeding.
Spiritual benefits: It is sattwic (pure) in quality,
gives love, longevity, and good fortune. For moth-
ers who behave angrily towards their children, it
calms and balances their emotions. For children
who have lost their mother, it fills them with the
sense that their mother is there. Thus, ámalakí has
another name, dhatri, meaning “mother” in San-
skrit
Precautions: May cause acute diarrhea in Pitta
doßhas. Pregnancy
Prepared: Decoction, powder (1/4-3 tsp.), sweets
Sanskrit: Amla-vetasa, Aml Parni
•mla vaetasa
Hindi: Revand-chini, Archu
English: Rhubarb
Latin: Rheum emodi Wall., (R. officinale, R.
acuminatum, R. speciforme, R. webbianum, R.
moorcroftianum, R australe).
Part Used: Root (dried rhizomes)
Habitat: Himalayas: 8,000-13,000 feet; Kashmir,
Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan, China, Tibet, Russia, Tur-
key, and many other countries
Energetics: Bitter-cold-pungent PK- V+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, fat
Systems: Excretory, digestive
Action: Purgative, alterative, hemostatic, anti-
pyretic, anthelmintic, stomachic, bitter tonic, ca-
thartic, laxative, atonic indigestion Uses: Consti-
pation (with fevers, ulcers, infections), diarrhea,
Pitta dysentery, jaundice, liver disorders. One of
the best purgatives (milder than senna), protects
colon tone, used with licorice and psyllium in older
and dryer persons (ginger or fennel is added to re-
move griping action—4 parts rhubarb:1 part gin-
ger or fennel); purges bile, áma, stagnant food and
blood; reduces weight and fat; is safe for children
(also for teething and nutritional balancing), atonic
dyspepsia, or indigestion; duodenal catarrh. It is
stronger when used with Epsom salt.
Preparation: Infusion, powder (1 gm.—laxative; 3
gms.—purgative), pill
Precaution: Pregnancy, chronic diarrhea, chills, not
for Váyu hemorrhoids; not used with gout, rheu-
matism, epilepsy, or uric acid diseases. It turns the
urine yellow but there is no cause for concern
Sanskrit: Apámárga
•paamaagaá
Hindi: Apamara
English: Rough Chaff Tree, Prickly Chaff Flower
Latin: Achyranthes aspera Linn.
Part Used: Herb, leaves, seeds, root flower (whole
plant)
Habitat: Small herb throughout India under 4,000
feet
Energetics: Pungent, bitter-cold-pungent VK- P+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, fat, nerves
Systems: Circulation, digestion, nervous
Action: Diuretic, expectorant, antibilious

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
74
Uses: Decoction; diuretic for renal edema, stom-
ach ache, hemorrhoids, boils, skin eruptions; with
honey or rock candy for early stages of diarrhea
and dysentery; leaves mixed with jaggery or black
pepper into a paste as pills for fevers, cough, in-
sect bites, and bee stings. Leaf juice applied to skin
for overexposure to the sun. Leaves or seeds are
used for poisonous animal bites. Seeds are used as
an expectorant, or mixed with rice water for bleed-
ing hemorrhoids. Khír or Payasam with seeds in
milk for brain diseases. Seeds soaked in yogurt/
water overnight and ground into an emulsion the
next morning heals bilious complaints.
Preparation: Decoction, powder, paste, oil, infu-
sion
Precaution: Do not use while pregnant
Sanskrit: Arjuna
•jauána
Hindi: Arjun
Latin: Terminalia
arjuna W. & A.,
Pentaptera glabra;
P. angustifolia
English: Arjuna
Myrobalan
Part Used: Bark
Energetics: Astrin-
gent-cold-pungent
VPK= V+ arrhyth-
mia
Tissues: Reproductive, plasma, blood
Systems: Digestive, circulatory, reproductive
Action: Cardiac stimulant, rejuvenative, astringent,
hemostatic, alterative
Uses: Best herb for heart disease (prevents and
helps in the recovery of), angina, heals heart tis-
sue scars after surgery, bile, edema, fractures, con-
tusions, broken bones, diarrhea, malabsorption,
venereal disease, heals tissues. Externally —ulcers,
acne, skin disorders.
Spiritual Uses: May help the spiritual heart
Preparation: Decoction, herbal wine, powder (1/
4-3 tsp.)
Precaution: May aggravate arrhythmia
Sanskrit: Arka
•kà
Hindi: Aka
English: Gigantic Swallowort
Latin: Caltropis gigantea R. Br.
Part Used: Root, root bark, leaves, juice, and flow-
ers [two varieties; purple/red flowered or white
flowered (C. procera)]
Habitat: Shrub is mainly found in wastelands in
lower Bengal, Himalayas, Punjab, Assam, Madras,
South India, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Malay Islands,
South China
Energetics: Pungent, bitter-hot-pungent Red KP-
White V-
Tissues:Plasma, muscles, fat, nerves
Systems: Digestion, circulation, nervous, urinary,
water metabolism
Action: Special care is taken while using this herb,
as it is poisonous. Mucilaginous, digestive, sto-
machic, tonic, antispasmodic, emetic (large doses),
diaphoretic, (root bark—alterative), purgative, ex-
pectorant, anthelmintic, acrid, antiparasitical
Uses: Promotes secretion (especially of bile), in-
testinal muscle sedative, heart (used like digitalis),
phlegm purge, depilatory, parasitic infection, re-
duces pain, difficult/painful urination, skin dis-
eases, abdominal disorders, dysentery, syphilis,
fevers with enlarged liver and cough; intermittent
fevers, hemorrhoids, edema. Leaves are for paraly-
sis, anesthesia, and toxic asthma. Flowers—diges-
tive tonic and stomachic, small doses stimulate
capillaries, skin (including elephantiasis, leprosy),
asthma. Milky juice—violent purgative, G.I. irri-
tant.
Preparation: Paste, powder, pill

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 75
Precaution: Special care is to be taken while using
this herb, as it is poisonous. Do not use while preg-
nant. Use only with the advice of an Áyurvedic
specialist
Sanskrit: A¤hoka
•faaek
Hindi: A¤hoka, Anganapriya
English: Ashoka Tree
Latin: Saraca indica Linn.
Part Used: Bark,
Habitat: Found throughout India; cultivated in gar-
dens for its beautiful flowers
Energetics: Bitter, astringent-cold-pungent
Tissues: Blood, fat, reproductive
Systems: Reproductive
Action: Astringent, sedative
Uses: A main herb for uterus health; uterine/ova-
rian fibroid and tumors, menorrhagia, dysmenor-
rhea, colic or abdominal pain, uterine prolapse, in-
flammatory conditions, colitis, urinary stones,
bleeding hemorrhoids, bleeding dysentery. Bark for
skin conditions. Prevents miscarriage (ghee-form)
from 2nd trimester).
Preparation: Decoction, powder, pill, ghee, paste,
herbal wine
Sanskrit: A¤hwagandhá (vitality of the horse)
•fvaganDaa
Hindi: A¤hgandh
Latin: Withania somnifera dunal (Physalis
flexuosa); Solanaceae
English: Winter cherry
Part Used: Root
Habitat: This shrub is in Himalayas, 6,000 feet;
common in Bombay, Western India, sometimes in
Bengal
Energetics: Astringent, bitter-hot-sweet VK- (P and
áma + in excess)
Tissues: Mainly muscle, fat, bone, marrow/nerves,
reproductive, but works on all.
Systems: Nervous, reproductive, respiratory
Action: Aphrodisiac, astringent, nervine,
rejuvenative, sedative, tonic, antiinflammatory
Uses: A main immune-boosting and brain tonic
herb. AIDS, general debility, nerve exhaustion,
pain killer, convalescence, problems of the elderly,
sexual debility, emaciation, memory loss, muscle
energy loss, marrow, overwork, tissue deficiency
(and promotes tissue healing), insomnia, paraly-
sis, MS, weak eyes, rheumatism, skin afflictions,
cough, difficult breathing, anemia, fatigue, infer-
tility, swollen glands, immune system problems,
alcoholism, lumbago. Known as Indian ginseng,
builds marrow and semen; inhibits aging; one of
the best herbs for the mind (clarity, nurturing).
Externally—skin diseases, obstinate ulcers, car-
buncles, rheumatic swellings. For women, it sta-
bilizes fetus, regenerates hormones, cancer—
strengthens one from and for chemotherapy.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic, produces ojas

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
76
Precautions: Do not take if congested. For cancer
and other serious illness, use one or more ounces
daily
Preparation: Decoctions, ghee, oil, powder (1/4 to
3 tsp.) herbal wine
Sanskrit: Ativißhá
•itaivaSaa
Hindi: Atís; Atis
English: Indian Atees
Latin: Aconitum hetrophyleum Wall. (A.
Cordatum.)
Part Used: Dried tuberous roots
Habitat: Sub-alpine and alpine regions; Himalayas
from Indus to Kumaon
Energetics: Bitter, astringent VPK=
Tissues: Plasma, blood
Systems: Digestive, immune, respiratory
Action: Tonic, stomachic, antiperiodic, aphrodi-
siac, carminative
Uses: Hemorrhoids, vomiting, edema, liver disor-
ders, Kapha and Pitta diseases; convalescing after
fever, debility, diarrhea, dysentery, acute inflam-
mations, cough, indigestion, chronic fevers, with
honey for coryza.
Preparation: Tincture, decoction, powder
Sanskrit: Bákuchí
baakucaI
Hindi: Babchi
English: Babchi Seeds
Latin: Psoralea
corylifolia Linn.
Part Used: Seeds
Habitat: Common herbaceous weed found in Ben-
gal, Bombay, throughout the Indian plains
Energetics: Pungent, bitter-hot-pungent, bitter
VKP= (P+ in excess)
Tissues: Muscles, plasma, blood
Systems: Respiratory, circulatory, muscular, lym-
phatic
Action: Aromatic, anthelmintic, antibacterial, an-
tifungal, diuretic, diaphoretic, laxative, stimulant,
aphrodisiac
Uses: A main herb fo skin conditions—especially
leukoderma, psoriasis (used both internally and
as an external paste or ointment), fevers, internal
ulcers, bile conditions, improves the color of skin
(including removing white spots), hair, nails; tones
liver, spleen, and pancreas; impotency, frequent or
involuntary urine, cold or painful extremities,
joints, or lower back; difficulty breathing, diarrhea,
abdominal pain.
Precautions: May increase Pitta when taken alone;
do not take with low body fluids; do not use with
licorice root
Preparation: Five grams powder twice daily be-
fore meals with some coriander and honey (to
taste); as an external paste
Sanskrit: Balá (meaning: strength giving)
balaa
Hindi: Bariar
English: Country Mallow
Latin: Sida cordifolia Linn. (S. herbacea, S.
rotundifolia, S. althaeitolia.)
Part Used: Root
Habitat: Grows wild along roadsides throughout
the tropical and sub-tropical plains of India and

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 77
Sri Lanka
Energetics: Sweet-cold-sweet VPK= (K and áma+
in excess)
Tissues: All—especially marrow/nerves
Systems: Circulatory, nervous, reproductive, uri-
nary, respiratory
Action: Analgesic, aphrodisiac, demulcent, di-
uretic, nervine, rejuvenative, stimulant, tonic, vul-
nerary
Uses: A main herb for heart and body strength.
Heart disease and stimulant; facial paralysis, TB,
urinary conditions, heals tissues of chronic inflam-
mation, sciatica, insanity, neuralgia and nerve in-
flammation; removes deep seated, chronic, and in-
termittent fevers (with ginger), chronic rheuma-
tism, asthma, bronchitis, emaciation, muscular
strength, exhaustion, sexual debility, cystitis, dys-
entery, leukorrhea, convalescence, arthritis. Exter-
nally it is good for numbness, nerve pain, muscle
cramps, skin disorders, tumors, joint diseases,
wounds, and ulcers. For cancer, it strengthens per-
sons before and after chemotherapy.
Precautions: Do not take in excess if congested
Preparation: Decoction, powder, medicated oil. For
serious illness like cancer, use one or more ounces
daily
Sanskrit: Bh^i´garáj (or Ke¤harája)
Ba^Mgaraja
Hindi: Bhangra (meaning, “ruler the hair”)
English: None
Latin: Eclipta alba Hassk. or Eclipta erecta Linn.
Parts used: Herb, roots, leaves
Habitat: Throughout India and the southwestern
U.S.
Energetics: Bitter,
astringent, sweet/
cold/ sweet VPK=
Tissues: 
Blood,
bone, 
marrow,
plasma
Systems: Circula-
tory, digestive, ner-
vous
Actions: Herbs—al-
terative, antipyretic,
hemostatic, laxa-
tive, 
nervine,
rejuvenative, tonic,
vulnerary. Roots
and leaves are
c h o l a g o g u e s .
Root—tonic, alterative, emetic, purgative. Leaf
juice—hepatic tonic and deobstruent
Uses: This is the main herb for the hair and cir-
rhosis. It prevents aging, maintains and rejuvenates
hair, teeth, bones, memory, sight, and hearing. It
is a rejuvenative for Pitta, kidneys, and liver. As an
oil, it removes graying, balding, makes the hair
darker, and promotes deep sleep. Externally, it
draws out poisons and reduces inflammations and
swollen glands. It also improves complexion. The
root powder is used for hepatitis, enlarged spleen,
and skin disorders. Mixed with salt, it relieves burn-
ing urine. Mixed with a little oil and applied to the
head, it relieves headache. Two drops of expressed
juice is mixed with eight drops raw honey and given
to newborn children with colds and excess mucus.
Mixed with castor oil, it removes worms. Juice
placed in the ears removes earaches. A leaf decoc-
tion is useful for uterine hemorrhaging (two to four
ounces twice daily). Leaf paste applied to swollen
glands and skin conditions helps them to heal. Leaf
juice boiled in coconut oil makes a hair oil to re-
move gray hair and balding. For pitariasis, alope-
cia, and other skin diseases: Bh^i´garáj (16 parts),
triphalá, arka, and sárivá (all equal parts) are all
mixed with four times as much sesame oil and
boiled into a medicated oil.
Preparations: Infusions, decoction, powder, medi-
cated oil and ghee
Precautions: Can cause severe chills

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
78
Sanskrit: Bhút^iò
BaUta^ó
Hindi: Gandhatrana, Harí-chaha
English: Lemon grass
Latin: Andropogon citratus DC. (A. Shoenanthus)
Part Used: Essential oil, herb
Habitat: Grows wild in gardens in India, Sri Lanka
and other tropics, in cultivated areas
Energetics: Pungent, bitter-cold-pungent PK- (V+
excess)
Tissues: Fat, nerves
Systems: Nervous, metabolic
Action: Antispasmodic, diaphoretic, diuretic, em-
menagogue, stimulant; oil—carminative, refriger-
ant, stomachic, tonic
Uses: Bowel spasms, colic, diarrhea, dysmenor-
rhea (neuralgic), fever, gas, colds, G.I. spasms,
intestinal mucus membrane tonic and stimulant;
vomiting. Oil/external—bath, perfume, and hair
oils; with coconut for lumbago, rheumatism, neu-
ralgia, sprains, pains, ringworm; excellent tea for
Pitta and kidneys.
Precautions: None
Preparation: Infusion or decoction of leaves, pow-
der
Sanskrit:
Bhúámalakí
BaU•amalakI
Hindi: 
Bhúy
ámalakí; Niruri
English: None
Latin: Phyllanthus niruri Linn. (P. urinaria)
Part Used: Leaves, root, whole plant
Habitat: A perennial herb in Central and Southern
India, to Sri Lanka
Energetics: PK- V+
Tissues: Semen, plasma, blood, fat
Systems: Digestive, reproductive, urinary
Action: Bitter, astringent, de-obstruent, stomachic
Uses: The main herb for the liver; colitis, cer-
tain edema, gonorrhea, menorrhagia, urogenital
diseases, dysentery, diabetes, dyspepsia; jaundice.
Externally—poultice for ulcers, inflammations,
sores, swellings, itch and other skin diseases;
spongy and bleeding gums; uvulitis, tonsillitis.
Preparation: Infusion, juice, poultice, powder, pill
Sanskrit: Bibhítakí
ibabHItakI
Hindi: Bhaira
English: Beleric
Myrobalan
Latin:
Te r m i n a l i a
belerica Roxb.
Part Used: Fruit
Habitat: A tree
found through-
out the Indian
forests 
and
plains
Energetics: As-
tringent-hot-
sweet KP- ( V+
in excess)
Tissues: Plasma, muscle, bone
Systems: Digestive, excretory, nervous, respiratory
Action: Anthelmintic, antiseptic, astringent, expec-
torant, laxative, lithotriptic, rejuvenative, tonic
Uses: Nausea, cold, vomiting, cough, bronchitis,
catarrh, chronic diarrhea, dysentery, eye disorders,
laryngitis, headache, hemorrhoids, parasites,
stones, Kapha digestive disorders, urinary tract
stones, stomach, liver disorders, G.I. tract diseases,
increases appetite; mixed with honey it is good for
sore throats and voice (or used as a gargle). Brain

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 79
and stomach tonic, Part of the triphalá formula.
Externally—as an antiseptic lotion; paste for Pitta
swellings, eye diseases; dried ripe fruit—edema;
with honey for ophthalmia.
Preparation: Infusion, decoction, powder, paste
Precaution: High Váyu
Sanskrit: Bilwa
ibalva
Hindi: Belaphal
English: 
Bael
Fruit
Latin: Aegle marmelos Corr.
Part Used: Fruit, root-bark, leaves, rind, flowers
Habitat: Throughout India from the sub-Himalayan
forests to Burma (Myanmar)
Energetics: Sweet-cold-bitter, pungent (fresh juice)
VPK=
Tissues: Plasma, blood, nerves, semen
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, reproductive, ner-
vous
Action: Aromatic, alterative, nutritive, astringent;
hemostatic, tonic, laxative, digestive stimulant, sto-
machic, stimulant, antipyretic, aphrodisiac,
antibilious, febrifuge, antiparasitical
Uses: A main digestive herb. Unripe is better than
ripe; heart, stomach, Kapha disorders, intestinal
tonic, chronic  constipation and dysentery; some
forms of indigestion; mucus membrane, chronic,
obstinate mucus and catarrhal diarrhea; early stages
of sprue and consumption; typhoid, debility, in-
testinal disorders, prevents cholera and hemor-
rhoids; intermittent fever (stem bark); hypochon-
dria, melancholia, heart palpitation. Leaf poultice
is applied to inflammations; with black pepper for
edema, constipation, and jaundice; with water or
honey  it is good for catarrh and fever. Rind is used
for acute and amoebic dysentery, griping pain in
the loins and constipation, gas, and colic; sprue,
scurvy. Pulp heals Váyu, Kapha, áma, and colic,
is constipative.
Sanskrit: Bola
baaela
Hindi: Bol
English: Myrrh
Latin: 
Balasmodendron 
myrrha 
Nees.
(Commiphora Myrrha)
Part Used: Resin
Habitat: Indigenous to North-East Africa, collected
in Southern Arabia and Iran
Energetics: Bitter, astringent, pungent, sweet-hot-
pungent KV- (P+ in excess)
Tissues: All
Systems: Circulatory, lymphatic, nervous, repro-
ductive, respiratory
Action: Alterative, analgesic, antiseptic, antispas-
modic, emmenagogue, expectorant, stimulant,
rejuvenative

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
80
Uses: Amenorrhea, anemia, arthritis, asthma, bron-
chitis, cough, dysmenorrhea, menopause, rheuma-
tism, traumatic injuries, ulcerated surfaces, as an
infusion with rose petals (50 parts) used as a mouth-
wash, mouth inflammations, as a gargle for spongy
gums, used in tooth powder, indigestion, wasting
diseases, prevents loss of hair, menstrual disorders,
and chlorosis problems of young girls.
Precautions: Can create excess Pitta
Preparation: Infusion, powder, pill, paste
Sanskrit: Bráhmí
baRa×I
Hindi: Brahma-manduki, Mandukaparni
English: Gotu Kola, Indian Pennywort
Latin: Hydrocotyle asiatica Linn. Umbelliferae
Part Used: Herb
Habitat: Common throughout India and the world,
in shaded, watery places.
Energetics: Bitter-cold-sweet VPK=
Tissues: All except reproductive; mainly blood,
marrow, nerve
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, nervous, respira-
tory, reproductive, excretory
Action: Alterative, diuretic, febrifuge, nervine,
rejuvenative
Uses: Best rejuvenative herb for brain cells and
nerves, intelligence. Adrenal purifier, AIDS, blood
purifier, eczema, epilepsy, insanity, hypochondria,
fevers (intermittent), hair loss, immune system
boost (cleansing and nourishing), liver, longevity,
memory, nervous disorders, psoriasis, senility, skin
conditions (chronic and obstinate), venereal dis-
eases, tetanus, convulsions, rheumatism, elephan-
tiasis, bowel disorders.
Spiritual Uses: The most sattwic herb
Precautions: Large doses may cause headaches,
spaciness, or itching
Preparation: Infusion, decoction, powder, ghee, oil
Note: Similar use as Bacopa Monniera
Sanskrit: B^ihatí
ba^HtaI
Hindi: Kaòþakárí, Birhatta
English: Indian Nightshade
Latin: Solanum indicum Linn.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 81
Part Used: Fruit, root, plant, seeds
Habitat: Common throughout India
Energetics: Astringent
Tissues: Plasma, blood, reproductive
Systems: Respiratory, reproductive, urinary, circu-
latory
Action: Plant—cordial, aphrodisiac, astringent,
carminative, cardiac tonic, resolvent; root—di-
uretic, expectorant, stimulant, diaphoretic.
Uses: Asthma, dry and spasmodic cough; difficult
childbirth, chronic fevers, chest pains, colic, gas,
worms, scorpion stings, difficult urination, edema,
enlarged and spleen; catarrh. Burning seed smoke
is used for toothache (it is usually used along with
other herbs). The root is one of the da¤hmúl ingre-
dients, and is usually mixed with other roots. It is
good for edema, cough, mucus. Decoctions help
dysuria.
Preparation: Decoction, powder
Sanskrit: Chakra Marda (ringworm destroyer)
caq madà
Hindi: Chakunda
English: Cassia
Latin: Cassia tora Linn.
Part Used: Leaves, seeds, roots
Habitat: This small plant grows in dry soil in tropi-
cal India and in Bengal.
Energetics: Plasma
Systems: Circulatory
Action: Externally—germicide, antiparasitical;
Internally—gentle laxative
Uses: Seeds and leaves are used for skin diseases.
Mixed with lime juice, eases skin itch and erup-
tions; ringworm (used externally). Leaf decoctions
(1 part leaves : 10 parts water) given in two ounce
doses to children, removes fevers during teething.
Leaves boiled in castor oil are applied to foul ul-
cers and inflammations. As a poultice, leaves has-
ten suppuration. Warmed they reduce gout, sciatica,
and joint pains. Seeds are used as a substitute for
tea and coffee.
Preparation: Decoction, paste, poultice, oil
Sanskrit: Cháògerí, Amliká
caaMgaerI, •milak
Hindi: Amrul
English: Sorrel
Latin: Oxalis corniculata Linn.
Part Used: Leaves
Habitat: Common weed throughout India
Energetics: Astringent-cold-pungent
Tissues: Plasma, blood
Systems: Digestive, excretory, circulatory
Action: Cold, refrigerant, antiscorbutic, appetiz-
ing, astringent
Uses: Leaves—fever, inflammations, pain, appe-
tite, scurvy, digestion, dyspepsia, intoxication,
poisoning, difficult urination, bilious headaches,
removes fibers over cornea or opacities of the cor-
nea; Leaves boiled in yogurt/water (lassi), or mixed
with honey or cane sugar for chronic dysentery,
rectum prolapse, thirst and enteritis (small intes-
tine inflammation), hemorrhoids; as a soup for
convalescence from diarrhea. Juice—made into
sherbet with honey or cane sugar for dysentery,
rectum prolapse, thirst. Externally  removes warts,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
82
corns, etc.; applied locally as a poultice to inflamed
areas and pain. Leaf juice with pepper and ghee
are applied externally to red spots or other skin
eruptions due to bile, removes warts. Mixed with
onions and applied to the head for bilious head-
aches.
Precautions: Not taken with gout
Preparation: Juice, powder, paste, poultice, pill,
soup, confection
Sanskrit: Chiráyatá (Kirata-tikta)
icarayataa
Hindi: Kiryat-
charayatah
English: None
Latin: Swertia
chirata Ham.
Part Used:
Leaves 
and
whole plant
Habitat:
Himalayas; over
4,000 feet
Energetics: PK-
V+ (King of the
Bitters)
Tissues:
Plasma, blood,
muscle, fat
Systems: Circulatory, respiratory
Action: Anthelmintic, astringent, bitter tonic, feb-
rifuge, stomachic, antidiarrhetic, antispasmodic
Uses: Excellent for fever, skin diseases, blood pu-
rifier, worms, wounds, malaria; tonic for heart,
liver, and eyes, cough, scanty urine, sciatica, a gen-
tian substitute, toxic blood, enlarged spleen and
liver, catarrh, intestinal spasms, anemia, indiges-
tion, obstinate urinary disorders (some say diabe-
tes also), cleanse ulcers; the best form is (Tinnevelly
Nilavembu).
Precautions: High Váyu
Preparation: Powder
Sanskrit: Chitrak
icatrk
Hindi: Chitra
English: White
Leadwort
Latin: Plum-
bago zeylanica
Linn.
Part Used:
Root, root bark,
seeds
Habitat:
Throughout In-
dia
Energetics: VK-
P, agni +
Tissues:
Bones, plasma,
blood, reproductive
Systems: Nervous, female reproductive
Action: Stimulant, caustic; digestion, antiseptic,
antiparasitical
Uses: Sprue, worms, dysmenorrhea, small doses
stimulate the central nervous system, externally
used as paste it opens abscesses and used for skin
diseases and ulcers; colitis, indigestion, hemor-
rhoids, anasarca, diarrhea, gas, rheumatism, and
all joint pains, promotes sweating. Tincture of root
bark- intermittent fevers.
Preparation: Paste, powders, pills, tincture
Precaution: Do not use when pregnant; use only in
small doses. Due to its very hot nature, it can cause
abortion
Sanskrit: Dáruharidrá, Dáruhaldí
daüHir]a, daüHldI
Hindi: Kingor
English: Barberry
Latin: Berberis vul-
garis Linn.
Part Used: Berries
Habitat: 
Found
throughout the

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 83
Himalayas, Nepal, Tibet, Afghanistan
Energetics: Bitter, astringent-hot-pungent PK- V+
Tissues: Blood, fat, plasma
Systems: Circulatory, digestive
Action: Diuretic, antibilious, refrigerant, sto-
machic, bitter tonic, antiperiodic, alterative, anti-
pyretic
Uses: For bile and urinary conditions, Pitta detoxi-
fication, and congestion of abdomen and pelvic
cavities; rheumatism, scarlet fever, brain disorders,
heat, thirst, nausea; small amounts— tonic; large
doses—purgative; excellent herb for jaundice, dur-
ing pregnancy, mild laxative, periodic neuralgia,
fevers, skin diseases, vomiting in pregnancy; fruit
mild laxative/purgative for children, fevers, blood
purifier, malaria, gastric and duodenal ulcers; sores,
jaundice, enlarged liver and spleen, and regulates
liver functioning, diabetes, and toxins/áma (with
twice as much turmeric); destroys toxins, reduces
body fat (with turmeric); renal calculi, abdominal
and pelvic congestion; G.I. stimulant, reduces
blood pressure.
Precautions: High Váyu, tissue deficiency
Preparation: Decoction, powder, eyewash, medi-
cated ghee, paste
Sanskrit: Devadaru
devadü
Hindi: Deodar; Túna
English: Hima-
layan Cedar
Latin: 
Cedrus
deodara
Part Used:
Leaves, wood,
bark, turpentine
Habitat: Northern
Himalayas
Energetics: PK-
V+
Tissues: Plasma,
blood, muscle, fat
Systems: Circula-
tory, respiratory
Action: Wood—carminative; bark—astringent,
febrifuge; Leaves—mild turpentine properties
Uses: Inflammation, antispasmodic, anti-poison,
paralysis, kidney stones, fevers, external injuries.
Bark—bilious, remittent and intermittent fevers,
diarrhea, dysentery. In powder form it is applied
to ulcers. The dark oil, or tar from the leaves (tur-
pentine), is applied to skin ulcers and other skin
diseases. (It is also used for mange on horses and
on cattle with sore feet).
Preparation: Oleoresin (oil or tar), powder
Sanskrit: Dhányak
Daanyak
Hindi: Dhania
English: Cori-
ander/Cilantro
Latin:
Coriandrum
sativum Linn.
Part Used:
Seeds, leaves
Habitat: Com-
mon throughout
India
Energetics: Bit-
ter, pungent-
cold-pungent
VPK=
Tissues: Blood,
muscle, plasma
Systems: Diges-
tive, respiratory,
urinary
Action: Alterative, antibilious, aphrodisiac, aro-
matic, carminative, diaphoretic, diuretic, stimulant,
stomachic, tonic
Uses: Main herb - digestive and skin/rash prob-
lems. Griping, flatulent colic, rheumatism, neural-
gia, indigestion, vomiting, intestinal  disorders, re-
moves excess Kapha, eyewash, conjunctivitis, re-
lieves internal heat and thirst, urogenital system
(burning urethra, cystitis, infections, etc.), sore
throat, allergies, for all Pitta disorders, burning,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
84
juice for allergies, hay fever, and skin rashes (and
externally as well); antidotes hot pungent foods,
bleeding hemorrhoids. Externally—eye disorders.
Preparation: Cilantro juice, infusions (hot and
cold), powder
Precautions: Not to be used in extreme Váyu nerve
tissue deficiency
Sanskrit: Dhátakí
DaatakI
Hindi: Dhai-phul
English: None
Latin: Woodfordia floribunda Salisb. (W. frut
icosa; kurz; Lythrum fruticosum Linn.)
Part Used: Flowers, leaves
Habitat: Large shrub found throughout India
Energetics: Astringent, slightly pungent-cold-sweet
PK- V+ Tissues: Plasma, blood, reproductive
Systems: Reproductive, excretory
Action: Stimulant, astringent, tonic
Uses: Herpes, flowers in milk—dysentery, diar-
rhea, etc. Flower powder—mucus membrane dis-
orders, hemorrhoids, liver disorders, internal hem-
orrhage; leukorrhea, menorrhagia. Leaves—bil-
iousness, headache, fever. Externally, flower pow-
der—ulcers, wounds; decoction as a lotion.
Preparation: Infusion, powder
Sanskrit: Elá
Alaa
Hindi: Elachi
English: Carda-
mom
Latin: Elatarria
cardamomum
Maton 
(E.
repens)
Part Used:
Seeds
Habitat: Found
t h r o u g h o u t
N o r t h e r n ,
Western, and
Southern India,
Sri Lanka, and
Burma (Myanmar).
Energetics: Pungent, sweet-hot-pungent VK- (P+
in excess - Large elá) In the U.S.
only the small or choti elá is available. Choti elá is
slightly cold and better for Pitta than for Váyu and
Kapha).
Tissues: Blood, marrow, nerve, plasma
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, nervous, respira-
tory
Action: Carminative, diaphoretic, expectorant, di-
gestive stimulant, stomachic
Uses: Main digestive herb. Absorption of nutri-
ents, asthma, bronchitis, colds, cough, excellent
for stomach complaints, hoarseness, indigestion,
loss of taste, helps the spleen and pancreas, reduces
Kapha in lungs and stomach, stimulates the mind,
with milk it reduces mucus formation, detoxifies
caffeine in coffee, nervous digestion, vomiting,
headache, belching, acid indigestion, nausea, ex-
pels Váyu in colon and digests foods in colon, con-
valescing from diarrhea, biliousness, respiratory
disorders, involuntary urination.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic, gives clarity and joy
Precautions: Ulcers, high Pitta
Preparation: Infusion (don’t boil seeds), powder,
milk decoction

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 85
Sanskrit: Eraòæa, Vátári
Ar<z, vaataair
Hindi: Rendi
English: Castor
Oil  Plant
Latin: Ricinus
c o m m u n i s
Linn. 
(R.
dicoccus)
Part Used: [two
varieties —pe-
rennial bushy
plant with large
fruits and red
seeds—yield
more 
oil;
smaller annual
shrub 
with
small gray or
white 
seeds
with brown spots] oil, leaves, roots, seeds, fruit.
Habitat: Common throughout India
Energetics: Pungent, sweet-hot-pungent VPK+
Tissues: All
Systems: Excretory, urinary, nervous, female re-
productive, digestive
Action: Cathartic, demulcent, analgesic, nervine,
purgative (in the duodenum); root bark—purga-
tive
Uses: Main herb for swellings and purgation.
Colic, headache, abdominal disorders, coagulates
blood; fruit—enlarged liver and spleen; bark—
nervous diseases, rheumatism, lumbago, sciatica;
dried root—fevers; leaves—warmed and applied
to nursing mother’s breasts acts as a galactagogue.
When applied to the stomach, promotes menstrual
discharge. Applied to painful joints, relieves pain;
leaves internally—purgative. Seed decoction—
lumbago, sciatica. Seed poultice is applied to ma-
ture boils to promote bursting and to reduce gouty
and rheumatic swellings. Oil—the “king of the
purgatives”, “king of Váyu disorders”, inflamed
bowels, infantile diarrhea, irritable conditions in
debilitated adults and children; to facilitate deliv-
ery of baby; after childbirth to mother; in opera-
tions for urinary stones; peritonitis, jaundice, dys-
entery, urinary organ inflammation, articular rheu-
matism. For rectum disorders and hemorrhoids, it
is given in small doses to soften feces and lubri-
cate the passage. Also helps with ingested glass.
As a purgative, it is taken with ginger or daßhmúl
teas. Externally used for sore nipples during breast
feeding. In constipation it is used as an enema (2
oz.: 1 pint water). Dropped into the eyes for con-
junctivitis and irritations. It increases cow’s milk
when they eat the leaves. Externally—oil mixed
with rice water for leg swelling; oil mixed with
coconut oil and water (1:2:6) for itching skin.
Preparation: Oil doses: children- 1 tsp.;
adults—2 tsp. - 3 tbs. in tea or boiled milk.
Decoction, infusion, poultice, leaf, paste
Precaution: Oil not used for kidney, bladder, bile
duct, or intestine infections; jaundice, dysuria
Sanskrit: Gauriphal
gaaEirPla
Hindi: None
English: Red Rasp-
berry
Latin: 
Rubus
wallichii
Part Used: Leaves
Habitat:
Energetics: Astrin-
gent, sweet-cold-
sweet PK- (V+ in
excess)
Tissues: Blood, muscles, plasma
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, female reproduc-
tive
Actions: Alterative, antiemetic, astringent, hemo-
static, tonic
Uses: Diarrhea, dysentery, female reproductive
organs, heartburn, thirst, cholera  hemorrhoids,
hemorrhage in stomach, inflamed mucous mem-
branes, intestinal flu, menstruation (irregular or
excess), kidneys, liver, nausea, Pitta disorders, pre-
childbirth toning, prolapse of uterus or anus, sores,
spleen, vomiting, tones lower abdomen muscles,
uterine bleeding, sore throats, wounds, ulcers, pas-
sive stomach hemorrhage, summer heat.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
86
Precautions: Most varieties promote abortion ex-
cept American red raspberry; Váyu constipation
Preparation: Hot or cold infusion, powder, paste
Sanskrit: Gokßhura (emphasize ‘go’. Meaning:
shape of the cow’s-hoof)
gaaexaur
Hindi: Chota-gokhru
English: Small Caltrops, Goats head, Puncture Vine
Latin: Tribulis terrestris Linn. (T. lenuginosus, T.
aeylanicus)
Part Used: Fruit
Habitat: Trailing plant common in sandy soil
throughout India, Sri Lanka, Madras.
Energetics: Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet VPK=
Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow/nerve, reproduc-
tive
Systems: Nervous, reproductive, respiratory, uri-
nary
Action: Analgesic, aphrodisiac, diuretic, lithotrip-
tic, nervine, rejuvenative, tonic
Uses: Best herb for genitourinary conditions in-
cluding difficult or painful urination, stones, bloody
or burning urine, etc. Best herb to flush toxins
from body. Back pain, cough, cystitis (chronic),
diabetes, difficult breathing, Váyu edema, gout,
uterine disorders, hemorrhoids, impotence, infer-
tility, kidney disease (acute inflammation), lum-
bago, nerve pain, Bright’s disease with edema,
rheumatism, sciatica, seminal debility, kidney
stones, venereal diseases. Strengthens the postpar-
tum woman. Can be used with Punarnavá
(boerhavia diffusa; nyctagineae) for kidney health.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic, promotes clarity, opens
crown chakra (energy center)
Precautions: Do not use if dehydrated
Preparation: Decoction, powder
Sanskrit: Sarpa-darußhtrika
Hindi: Guæmár (meaning: sugar destroying)
gauzmaar (common name)
English: None
Latin: Gymnemasylvestre
Part Used: Roots, leaves
Habitat: Climbing  plant found in the Himalayas,
Central and Southern India, and on the Western
Ghats in Goa
Energetics: Astringent, refrigerant, tonic PK-V+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, fat, reproductive
Systems: Circulatory, urinary, reproductive
Action: Antiperiodic, diuretic, stomachic
Uses: A main herbs diabetes mellitus; removes
sugar from pancreas, restores pancreatic function;
leaves stimulate the circulatory system; increases
urine secretion; activates the uterus; swollen
glands; cough; fever.
Precautions: Leaves stimulate the heart
Preparation: Decoction, powder

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 87
Sanskrit: Guæúchí
gauzUcaI
Hindi: Am^itá, Giloy
English: None
Latin: Tinosporia cordifolia Miers; (Menisper mum
cordifolium, Cocculuc cordifolia, E. Tinospora)
Part Used: Roots, stems
Habitat: Himalayas, throughout Madras Presidency
districts
Energetics: Bitter, sweet-hot-sweet VPK=
Systems: Circulatory, digestive
Action: Alterative, antiperiodic, bitter tonic, di-
uretic, febrifuge
Uses: One of the few tridoähic immune-boost-
ing herbs (with £hilájit). AIDS, Pitta diseases,
blood purifier, fever and convalescence from fe-
vers, jaundice, digestion, gout, chronic rheuma-
tism, constipation, hemorrhoids, dysentery, Kapha
jaundice, skin disease, chronic malarial fevers, tu-
berculosis, cancer (strengthens persons before and
after chemotherapy).
Spiritual Uses: Produces ojas
Preparation: Extract, powder, for serious illnesses
like cancer, use one or more ounces daily
Sanskrit: Guggul
gauggaula
Hindi: Gugal
English: Indian Bedellium
Latin: Balsamodendron mukul Hook. (B.
agollocha., Commiphora mukul; C. africana)
Part Used: Resin
Habitat: Eastern Bengal, Mysore, Rajputan, Sind,
Assam, Berars, Khandesh
Energetics: All but sour and salty-hot-pungent KV-
(P+ in excess)
Tissues: All
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, nervous, respira-
tory
Action: Alterative, analgesic, antispasmodic, as-
tringent, expectorant, nervine, rejuvenative, stimu-
lant
Uses: Best herb for arthritis, hyper-cholesterol,
bronchitis, cystitis, debility, diabetes, disinfects
secretions (e.g., mucus, sweat, urination), en-
dometritis, fat reducing, gout, heals skin and mu-
cus membranes; hemorrhoids, increases white
blood cell count, indigestion, leukorrhea, lumbago,
menstrual regulator, nervous disorders, neurosis,
obesity, plaster for gums and throat ulcers, pus dis-
charges, skin diseases, sores, tissue regenerating
catalyst, heals bone fractures, toxin reducing, tu-
mors, ulcers, whooping  cough, edema, enlarged
cervical glands, parasitic infection, abscesses, rheu-
matic disorders.
Precautions: Acute kidney infections and rashes;
avoid eating sour, sharp indigestible things; exhaus-
tion, sex, sun exposure, alcohol, and anger when
taking this herb
Preparation: Powder, pill
Sanskrit: Haridrá, Gauri
Hir]a, gaaEir
Hindi: Haldi
English: Turmeric
Latin: Curcuma longa Linn.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
88
Part Used: Rhi-
zome, tubers
Habitat: Through-
out India
Energetics: Bitter,
astringent, pun-
gent-hot-pungent
K- (VP+ in ex-
cess)
Tissues: All
Systems: Circula-
tory, digestive,
respiratory, uri-
nary
Action: Alterative,
anthelmintic, anti-
bacterial/antibi-
otic, aromatic, carminative, stimulant tonic, vul-
nerary
Uses: Amenorrhea, anemia, arthritis, blood puri-
fier, blood tissue formation, circulation, cooking
spice, cough, diabetes, worms, jaundice, eye prob-
lems, fevers, gas, hemorrhoids, edema, indigestion,
ligament stretching, metabolism regulator; mucus
relief, and hysteria (from inhaling fumes); phar-
yngitis, protein digesting, skin disorders, abscess,
urinary diseases, wound and bruise healer; a natu-
ral antibiotic which also improves intestinal flora;
inflammatory bowel syndrome (e.g., ulcerative
colitis), Crohn’s Disease, chronic hepatitis, chronic
bronchial asthma, psoriasis, all inflammatory con-
ditions. External  acne, insect bites, sore eyes, with
honey or aloe gel for bruises or sprains.
Spiritual Uses: Gives one the Divine Goddess’s
energy and prosperity; chakra and subtle body
cleanser; limbers for yoga ásana practice
Precautions: Do not use if pregnant, with excess
Pitta, with acute jaundice or hepatitis.
Preparation: Infusion, decoction, milk decoction,
powder, external paste (with sandalwood).
Sanskrit: Harítakí
HrItakI
Hindi: Hardh, Har
English: Myrobalan, Indian Gall Nut
Latin: Terminalia chebula Retz., (T. reticulata)
Part Used: Fruit
Habitat: 
Tree
grows wild in the
forests of North-
ern India, central
provinces, Ben-
gal,  Madras,
Mysore, southern
Bombay presi-
dency
Energetics: All
except salty-hot-
sweet VPK=
Tissues: All
Systems: Diges-
tive, excretory,
nervous, respira-
tory, female reproductive
Action: Rejuvenative, tonic, astringent, laxative,
nervine, expectorant, anthelmintic, alterative (un-
ripe—laxative/ripe—astringent)
Uses: Jaundice, colic, anemia, cough, asthma,
hoarse voice, hiccup, vomiting, hemorrhoids, di-
arrhea, malabsorption, abdominal distention, gas,
fevers, urinary diseases parasitic infection, tumors,
blood purifier, spleen and liver disorders; gargle
for sore throat, mouth, or spongy, ulcerated gums;
muscular rheumatism, with sugar water for oph-
thalmia; heart, skin, itching, edema, nervous dis-
orders, rejuvenative, feeds the brain and nerves;
small doses—good for both diarrhea and consti-
pation (also chronic); digestion, atonic indigestion,
bleeding hemorrhoids, longevity, paralysis, head-
ache, epilepsy, melancholy, memory, wisdom, in-
telligence, organ prolapse, excessive discharges
(cough, sweat, sperm, menorrhagia, leukorrhea);
one of the three herbs in triphalá. Externally for
Váyu swellings, burns, scalds, skin disorders.
Spiritual Uses: Gives pure awareness (£hiva en-
ergy)
Preparation: Decoction, powder, paste, gargle
Precaution: Pregnancy, dehydration, severe exhaus-
tion, emaciation, Pitta if taken in excess
Sanskrit: Í¤habgol, Snigdhajírá
[fabgaaela, isngDajaIra

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 89
Hindi: Isapghul
English: Ispaghula or Spogel Seeds
Latin: Plantago ispagula; P. ovata Forsk.
Part Used: Seeds
Habitat: Throughout India
Energetics: Cold, astringent VPK=
Systems: Digestive/Excretory
Action: Demulcent, emollient, laxative, diuretic
Uses: Excellent for constipation (with warm wa-
ter) and diarrhea (with cold water). Seed swell
and thicken (mucilage) when soaked in water. It
passes through the small intestine undigested, lin-
ing the mucus membrane (demulcifying and lu-
bricating). May inhibit intestinal organism growth.
The thickened jelly absorbs toxins (áma) and bac-
teria. It is useful for catarrh, chronic dysentery,
intestinal problems, bladder, kidney and urethra
problems (including inflammations and burning),
digestive disorders, and fevers. Further uses include
gonorrhea, gastritis, gastric and duodenal ulcers,
cystitis, a demulcent for coughs and colds (espe-
cially for children).
Preparation: 1-2 tbs. in warm or cold water, stirred
until it thickens into a gel
Sanskrit: Jaóámáòçhí
jaoamaaMfaI
Hindi: Jatamashi, Balchar
English: Muskroot; Indian Spikenard
Latin: Nardostachys jatamansi DC.
Part Used: Rhizome, rhizome oil
Habitat: Himalayas: 9,000-17,000 feet; India,
Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkim
Energetics: Bitter, sweet, astringent-cold-pungent
VPK=
Tissues: Blood, marrow/nerve
Systems: Circulatory, nervous, digestive, respira-
tory, reproductive
Action: Aromatic, antispasmodic, diuretic, emme-
nagogue, nervine, tonic, carminative, deobstruent,
digestive stimulant, reproductive
Uses: Complexion, strength, kidney stones, jaun-
dice, removes blood impurities, spasmodic hyste-
ria and other nervous convulsive ailments; heart
palpitations, nervous headache, flatulence, epi-
lepsy, convulsions, respiratory and digestive dis-
eases, skin conditions, typhoid, gastric disorders,
seminal debility.
Spiritual Uses: Increases awareness
Precautions: None; its sedative properties increase
awareness, whereas its cousin, valerian, dulls the
mind
Preparation: Infusion, powder
Sanskrit: Kákamáchí
kakmaacaI
Hindi: Makoy
English: Garden nightshade
Latin: Solanum nigrum Linn. (S. rubrum, S.
incertum)
Part Used: Fruit, leaf
Habitat: Throughout India
Energetics: Bitter, sweet, astringert-cold-pungent
VPK=
Tissues: Plasma, blood, bones, fat, reproductive

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
90
Systems: Circulatory, reproductive
Action: Leaf—alterative, sedative, diaphoretic,
diuretic, hydragogue, expectorant; fruit—alter-
ative, tonic, diuretic
Uses: Heart disease (with leg and foot swelling),
skin diseases, fruit for edema  hemorrhoids, gon-
orrhea, inflammatory swellings, enlarged spleen
and liver, fevers, promotes perspiration, cough.
External—painful, swollen testicles; poultice for
rheumatic and gouty joints.
Precaution: Berries may be poisonous for some
people
Preparation: Powder, extract, leaves, poultice,
syrup, decoction
Sanskrit: Kákná¤há
kaknaafaa
H i n d i :
Kakatundi
English:
B l o o d
Flower
Latin: As-
c l e p i a s
Curassavica,
Linn.
Part Used:
L e a v e s ,
root, flowers
Habitat: Bengal and throughout South India; West
Indies, Jamaica
Energetics: Astringent
Tissues: Plasma, blood, muscle, reproductive
Systems: Circulatory, respiratory, excretory, repro-
ductive
Action: Root—purgative, emetic, styptic
Uses: Organic muscular system (especially heart
and blood vessels), dysentery  hemorrhoids, gon-
orrhea.
Preparation: Juice, powder
Precaution: Difficult breathing, vomiting
Sanskrit: Káñchanar kañcanar
Hindi: Kanchnar
English: Mountain
Ebony
Latin: Bauhinia
variegata Linn. (B.
racemosa)
Part Used: Bark,
root, bud, gum,
leaves, seed, flow-
ers
Habitat: Sub-Hima-
layan tract, forests
of India and Burma
(Myanmar)
Energetics: Sweet,
bitter, astringent
PK- V+
Tissues: Plasma,
blood,
Systems: Digestive,
reproductive
Action: Bark—alterative, tonic, astringent; root—
carminative; flowers
—laxative.
Uses: Best for lymphatic system/glands Worms,
gargle with bark liquid for sore throat; bud decoc-
tion for cough, bleeding hemorrhoids, hematuria,
menorrhagia. Bark emulsified with rice water and
ginger for TB, enlargement of neck glands. Bark
and ginger paste for TB tumors. Bark decoction
for ulcer wash, skin diseases, diarrhea. Buds—di-
arrhea, worms, hemorrhoids, dysentery. Root de-
coction—indigestion, heartburn, gas, malaria,
weight loss (anti-fat); flowers with sugar—gentle
laxative; Kañchanar guggul—TB tumors, ulcers,
skin diseases, gonorrhea, edema, increase white

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 91
blood cells. [Ingredients; kañchanar bark (10
parts): ginger, black pepper, long pepper, carda-
mom, cinnamon, tejpatra leaves (cassia cinnamon),
triphalá (1 part of each of the above herbs)]. This
is taken every morning with triphalá or khadira/
(catechu/ acacia catechu, willd.) decoction.
Preparation: Emulsion, paste, gargle, decoction
Sanskrit: Káòþkárí
kaMokarI
Hindi: Choti Katheri
English: None
Latin: Solanum xanthocarpum Schrad and Wendil
Part Used: Stems, roots, flowers, fruit
Habitat: Grows abundantly throughout India
Energetics: Pungent, bitter VP- K+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow, reproductive
Systems: Respiratory, reproductive
Action: Aperient, digestive, alterative, astringent;
stems, fruits, flowers—bitter, carminative; root—
diuretic, expectorant, febrifuge.
Uses: One of the da¤hmúl roots; fever, asthma, TB
and other lung diseases; kidney disorders, cough,
constipation, fumigation for toothache; juice with
whey for diuretic; root with chiráyatá and ginger
as a febrifuge, berry juice for sore throat, juice with
black pepper for rheumatism; decoction for gon-
orrhea, conception; fruit powder with honey for
chronic coughs in children; root decoction with
guæúchí for cough and fever.
Preparation: Decoction, powder, juice, fumes
Sanskrit: Kapikachhú, Átmaguptá
kipakcCU , •atmagauptaa
Hindi: Kavach
E n g l i s h :
Cowitch 
or
Cowhage Plant
Latin: Mucuna
pruriens Bak.
M. 
prutita
(Carpopogon
p r u i e n s ;
D o l i c h o s
pruiens)
Part Used:
Seeds, root, legumes
Habitat: Annual climbing shrub common in the
tropics of India; legumes are eaten as
vegetable
Energetics: Sweet-cold- sweet VP- K+
Tissues: Reproductive
Systems: Nervous, reproductive
Action: Anthelmintic, aphrodisiac, astringent,
nervine, tonic, rejuvenative, (root is nervine/tonic)
Uses: Seeds—Main herb for Parkinson’s. One
of the best tonics and aphrodisiacs for the repro-
ductive system. Indigestion, colic, debility, edema,
impotence, infertility, leukorrhea, menorrhagia,
roundworm, spermatorrhea.  Generally, it is used
with ámalakí, a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, gokßhura,
white and black musali to make pills and jellies.
Roots—fevers, edema, elephantiasis (externally),
nervous disorders, including facial paralysis.
Precautions: Do not use when congested
Preparation: Decoction, powder, confections
Sanskrit: Kaþuká
kouka

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
92
Hindi: Kuþki, Kaþki
English: None
Latin: Picrorrhiza kurroa Benth.
Part Used: Dried rhizome
Habitat: North -Western Himalayas, from Kash-
mir to Sikkim
Energetics: Bitter PK- V+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow/nerves, female re-
productive
Systems: Excretory, female reproductive, digestive,
circulatory, nervous.
Action: Small doses—bitter stomachic and laxa-
tive; large doses—cathartic; anti-periodic, chola-
gogue
Uses: Metal toxicity, liver, epilepsy, paralysis, em-
menagogue, emetic, abortifacient, skin diseases,
improves eye sight, bilious fever, constipation due
to small intestine secretion; with equal parts lico-
rice, raisins, neem bark; with aromatics for worms
in children, fever, malaria.
Preparation: Tincture, extract, powder, pills
Sanskrit: Kumárí (Ghirita)
kumaarI
Hindi: Kumari,
Gawarpaltra
English: Indian
Alces, Aloe Vera
Latin: 
Aloe
barbadensis Mill.,
Aloe Indica, A.
Barbados, 
A.
Vera, Varieties:
Officinalis
(Liliaceae)
Part Used: Ex-
tract, dried juice of
leaves and pulp
root
Habitat: Throughout India and the world
Energetics: Bitter, astringent, pungent, sweet/cold/
sweet VPK= (gel and small doses of powder; pow-
der—PK- V+
Tissues: All
Systems: Circulatory, female reproductive, diges-
tive, nervous, excretory
Action: In small doses—stomachic tonic; large
doses—purgative, emmenagogue, anthelmintic;
laxative, refrigerant, bitter tonic, alterative, vulner-
ary, rejuvenative. Aperient, digestive, alterative,
astringent; stems, fruits, flowers—bitter, carmina-
tive; root—diuretic, expectorant, febrifuge.
Uses: Intestinal worms, hair dye and growth; eye
problems, colds, hemorrhoids (confection of leaf
pulp); pulp with honey and turmeric —coughs and
colds; juice with asafoetida gum—colic, infant
pneumonia; external leaf juice for skin inflamma-
tions and chronic ulcers, brain tonic, Anti-Váyu
rib pain, heart pain, swellings from injury, enlarged
spleen (internal and external paste); tender leaves
with cumin and rock candy— dysentery with
bloody stools; juice and ginger oil—hair oil for
insomnia; leaf pulp— conjunctivitis; with small
amounts of rock candy and cooked alum (in fry-
ing pan)— ophthalmia; with butter—applied to
skin ulcers to relieve burning sensation; with tur-
meric —spleen disorders and enlarged glands; tu-
ber paste with turmeric paste—externally applied
to inflamed or diseased breasts; fever, constipa-
tion, bursitis, jaundice, hepatitis, enlarged liver,
venereal diseases, herpes, amenorrhea, dysmenor-
rhea, menopause, vaginitis, tumors, regulates fat
and sugar metabolism; blood tonic, tones diges-
tive enzymes, kidney disorders, asthma, TB and
other lung diseases, ear infections, obesity, Pitta
reducing, wasting diseases. Externally for burns,
herpes, skin rashes, sores. One of the da¤hmúl
roots. Fumigation for toothache; juice with whey
for diuretic; root with chiráyatá and ginger as a
febrifuge, berry juice for sore throat, juice with
black pepper for rheumatism; decoction for gon-
orrhea, conception; fruit powder with honey for
chronic coughs in children; root decoction with
guæúchí for cough and fever.
Precaution: Do not use when pregnant
Preparation: Confection, tincture, lotion, juice
(gel), powder, decoction, paste, pulp, herbal wine,
fumes

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 93
Sanskrit: Kum Kuma
kumkuma
Hindi: Zaffran,
Kesar
English: Saffron
Latin: Crocus
sativus Linn. (C.
saffron)
Part Used: Dried
stigmas
Habitat: Com-
mon wild dwarf-
flower in India,
U.S. and else-
where
Energetics: Pungent, bitter, sweet-cold-sweet
VPK=
Tissues: All, especially the blood
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, female reproduc-
tive, nervous
Action: Alterative, antispasmodic, aphrodisiac,
carminative, emmenagogue, rejuvenative, stimu-
lant, stomachic
Uses: Amenorrhea, anemia, asthma, cold, cough,
depression, diarrhea, dysmenorrhea, hysteria, fe-
male reproductive blood circulator, food assimila-
tion, impotence, infertility, headache, G.I. disor-
ders, leukorrhea, menstrual pain and irregularity;
liver enlargement/regulator, lumbago, menopause,
neuralgia, Pitta reducer, rheumatism; seminal
weakness, spleen regulator, tissue growth stimu-
lator of the reproductive systems, uterus toner.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic, develops love, compassion,
and devotion
Precautions: Do not use when pregnant; large doses
is narcotic
Preparation: Infusion, milk decoction, powder
Sanskrit: Ku¤há
kufaa
Hindi: Dúrba
English: Sacred Creeping Grass
Latin: Eragrostis cynosuriodes Beauv.
Part Used: Grass, root
Habitat: Grows wild throughout the Himalayas
Energetics: Astringent
Tissues: Plasma, reproductive
Systems: Reproductive, urinary
Action: Grass—hemostatic, coagulant, diuretic;
[note: even local grasses (without chemicals
sprayed on them) are useful]
Uses: Root—dysentery, menorrhagia, other bleed-
ing disorders like hemorrhoids, purpura, etc.
Preparation: Infusion

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
94
Sanskrit: Kußhtha
kuSTa
Hindi: Kút
English: Costus, Kut Root
Latin: Saussurea lappa Clarke.
Part Used: Root
Habitat: Himalayas, Kashmir Valley
Energetics: Pungent, Bitter-hot-rasáyana VPK=
Tissues: Plasma, Blood, Bone
Systems: Circulatory, respiratory
Action: Anthelmintic, antiseptic, aphrodisiac, as-
tringent, antispasmodic, alterative, aromatic, car-
minative, diuretic, expectorant, insecticidal, pro-
phylactic, stimulant, tonic
Uses: Best for bronchial asthma (especially vago-
tonic), gas, phlegm, wasting, cough, loss of hun-
ger (dyspepsia), rib pain, edema, skin diseases,
jaundice, all diseases due to Váyu and Kapha, and
asthma; rheumatism (with choti elá), cholera, qua-
train malaria, leprosy, persistent hiccup, blackens
gray hair; with musk for toothache, hair wash. As
an ointment it is applied externally to wounds, se-
vere ulcerations, tumors, angina.
Preparation: Powder, paste
Precaution: Narcotic effects when smoked. Use
only under supervision of a qualified practitioner
Sanskrit: Laghu Páþá, Jal Jamní
laGau paaoa, jala jamanaI
Hindi: Patha, Harjori
English: Velvet Leaf
Latin: Cissampelos pareira Linn.
Part Used: Root, bark, leaves
Habitat: Tropical and subtropical India (From  Sind
and Punjab to South India and Sri Lanka)
Energetics: Very pungent, astringent-hot VK- P+
Tissues: Plasma, fat, reproductive
Systems: Urinary, digestive, excretory, female re-
productive
Action: Mild stomachic, bitter tonic, diuretic,
lithotriptic
Uses: Fever, diarrhea, dysentery, acid indigestion,
edema, kidney inflammation, Bright’s Disease,
chronic cystitis, urethral discharge, urinary and
bladder diseases, later stages of bowel complaints
(taken with aromatics like cardamom); leaves and
root paste with bland oil—topically for sores, si-
nuses, and itches. Recipe for colic; 4 parts laghu
páóá: 5 parts pepper: 3 parts asafetida: 6 parts gin-
ger; mix and add honey to make into a pill. The
dose is three to five grains.
Preparation: Decoction, powder, extract
Sanskrit: Mamírá, Mißhamitita
mamaIra, imaSHimaitata
Hindi: Mamira
English: Gold Thread
Latin: Coptis teeta all.
Part Used: Dried root
Habitat: Himalayas, Mishmi mountains east of
Upper Assam
Energetics: Bitter-cold-pungent PK- V+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, fat
Systems: Digestive, circulatory
Action: Bitter tonic, antipyretic, alterative

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 95
Uses: Improves appetite, restores digestion, gas,
visceral obstructions, jaundice, improves bile flow,
chronic gall bladder inflammation, debility, con-
valescence after fevers, debilitating diseases, atonic
indigestion, mild forms of intermittent fevers, ca-
tarrhal and rheumatic conjunctivitis, dries exces-
sive body moisture (e.g., water retention), all Pitta
disorders, anal fissure, ulcerative colitis, vaginal
infections, tumors, boils, carbuncles, inflammatory
skin conditions; externally applied to sores (includ-
ing mouth sores). Preparation: Paste, eye salve,
powder, infusion,
extract
Precaution: Drying; do not use with nausea or vom-
iting caused by a stomach hypoactivity or diarrhea
due to spleen or kidney deficiency. Long term use
aggravates the spleen and stomach
Sanskrit: Mañjißhþhá
maiÔa*a
Hindi: Mañjiþ
English: Indian Mad-
der
Latin: 
Rubia
cordifolia Linn. (R.
manjishta, R. se-
cunda)
Part Used: Root
Habitat: A climbing
plant found in the
North- West
 Himalayas, Nilgiris and other hilly districts of In-
dia
Energetics: Bitter, sweet-cold-pungent PK- V+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, muscles
Systems: Circulatory, female reproductive
Action: Alterative, antitumor, astringent, diuretic,
emmenagogue, hemostatic, lithotriptic
Uses: The best herb for blood purification. Blood
circulation, controls bleeding, mends broken bones,
amenorrhea, cancer, cleanses and regulates liver,
spleen, pancreas, and kidneys; diarrhea, dysentery,
dysmenorrhea, edema, destroys kidney and gall
stones, heart disease, hepatitis, herpes, jaundice,
menopause, menorrhagia, painful menstruation,
post partum uterus stimulation, paralysis, skin
problems, tissue healing, traumatic injuries, skel-
etal disease, Kapha disorders, joint pain, rheuma-
toid arthritis, improves complexion and voice,
helps destroy benign and malignant tumors.
Precautions: Severe chills, aggravates Váyu
Preparation: Decoction, powder, paste, ghee
Sanskrit: Maricha (meaning: sun due to its large
amounts of solar energy)
mairca
Hindi: Gulmirch
English: Black
Pepper
Latin: 
Piper
nigrum Linn.
Part Used: Dried
unripe fruit
Habitat: Peren-
nial 
climbing
shrub is found
throughout India
Energetics: Pun-
gent-hot-pungent VK- P+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, fat, marrow, nerve
Systems: Digestive, circulatory, respiratory
Action: Stimulant, expectorant, carminative, anti-
pyretic, anthelmintic, antiperiodic; externally —
rubefacient, stimulant, resolvent
Uses: Asthma, chronic indigestion, colon toxins,
obesity, sinus congestion, fever, intermittent fever,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
96
cold extremities, colic, cooking spice, cholera,
gastric ailments, gas, diarrhea, hemorrhoids,
worms, sore throat; externally—applied as a paste
to boils, skin diseases.
Preparation: Infusion, powder, milk decoction,
medicated ghee
Precaution: Digestive inflammations, high Pitta
Sanskrit: Musta, Mustaka
mausta, maustak
Hindi: Mutha
English: Nutgrass
Latin: 
Cyperus
rotundus Linn.
Part Used: Rhizome
Habitat: 
Found
throughout 
the
plains of India (espe-
cially South India)
Energetics: Pungent,
bitter, astringent-
cold-pungent PK-
(V+ in excess)
Tissues: Plasma,
blood, muscle, mar-
row/nerve
Systems: Digestive, circulatory, female reproduc-
tive
Action: Alterative, anthelmintic, antifungal, anti-
parasitic, antirheumatic, antispasmodic, aphrodi-
siac, astringent, carminative, demulcent, dia-
phoretic, diuretic, emmenagogue, stimulant, sto-
machic
Uses:  Best herb for PMS, yeast, and candida.
Parasites, menopause, menstrual disorders (includ-
ing pain and cramps), dysmenorrhea, diarrhea,
dysentery, fevers, gastritis, indigestion, liver (slug-
gish) harmonizes the liver, spleen, and pancreas;
malabsorption, colic, bloody stool, urine, and vom-
iting blood, promotes memory, convulsions,
moodiness, and depression,  increases appetite,
palpitation, vomiting, colds, flu, mucus, reduces
breast tumors, lowers high blood pressure.
Precautions: Constipation and excess Váyu
Preparation: Decoction, powder
Sanskrit: Nágke¤har naagakèfar
Hindi: Nagakesara
English: Cobra’s Saffron
Latin: Mesua ferrea Linn. (M. Roxburghii, M.
coromandalina
Part Used: Flower buds, flowers, fruit, seed, root,
bark, oil
Habitat: Throughout India
Energetics: dried blossoms, root and bark—bitter;
bark—mild astringent; dried flowers and blos-
soms—astringent; fruit skin—astringent
Tissues: Plasma
Systems: Respiratory, digestive, excretory
Action: Root—aromatic, sudorific
Bark—aromatic, sudorific,
Bark oleo-resin—aromatic, demulcent
Unripe fruit—aromatic, acrid, purgative
Fresh blossoms —stomachic, bitter, aromatic, su-
dorific
Dried flowers—stomachic, stimulant, carminative
Uses: Leaves—poultice for head colds. Bark and
root—decoction, infusion, or tincture  for gastritis
and bronchitis. Seed Oil—externally for skin con-
ditions (e.g., wounds, sore, etc.), and rheumatism.
Dried flowers—oil or decoction fragrance; as a
powdered paste or with ghee, they are used for
bleeding hemorrhoids and dysentery with mucus.
Flowers are also used for thirst, excessive perspi-
ration, expectorating cough, indigestion.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 97
Sanskrit: Nimba
inamba
Hindi: Nimb
English: Neem
Latin: Melia azadirachta Linn. (Azadiracta Indica)
Part Used: All
Habitat: This tree grows wild in Iran, the Western
Himalayas of India, and is cultivated in other parts
of India
Energetics: Bitter/astringent-cold-pungent PK-
V++
Tissues: Plasma, blood, fat
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, respiratory, urinary
Action:
Root bark—astringent, antiperiodic (prevent recur-
rence of diseases), tonic
Bark—astringent, antiperiodic, bitter, tonic, ver-
mifuge, antiviral
Fruit—purgative, emollient, anthelmintic
Leaves—discutient, emmenagogue, antiviral, dis-
infectant
Juice—anthelmintic
Nut Oil—local stimulant, insecticide, antiseptic
Flowers—stimulant, tonic, stomachic
Uses: Arthritis, blood purifier and detoxifier, con-
valescence after fever, cough, diabetes, eczema,
fever (used with black pepper and gentian), inflam-
mation of muscles and joints, jaundice, leukorrhea,
malaria, mucus membrane ulcerations, nausea,
obesity, parasites, rheumatism, skin diseases/in-
flammations, cleanses liver, syphilis, thirst, tissue
excess, tumors, vomiting, worms, drowsiness, loss
of appetite. Leaves—heal ulcers in urinary passage,
emmenagogue, skin diseases. Fruit—skin diseases,
bronchitis. Kernel powder —washing hair. Effec-
tive as a pesticide.
Precautions: Causes harshness for people on spiri-
tual paths, Not with emaciation
Preparation: Infusion, decoction, powder, medi-
cated ghee, or oil
Sanskrit: Nirguòæí
inagauá<zI
Hindi: Sambhalu
English: Five Leafed Chaste Tree
Latin: Vitex negundo Linn.
Part Used: Roots, root, flowers, leaves, bark
Habitat: Bengal, Southern India, Himalayas;
Burma (Myanmar)
Energetics: Leaves—bitter; flowers—cold, astrin-
gent P- V+ (K+ in excess)
Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow/nerve, reproduc-
tive
Systems: Circulatory, female reproductive, nervous
Action: Leaves—antiparasitical, alterative, aro-
matic, vermifuge, pain reliever. Root—tonic, feb-
rifuge, expectorant, diuretic. Fruit—nervine,
cephalic, emmenagogue. Dried fruit—vermifuge
Uses: Hair, eyes, colic, swelling, worms, nausea,
ulcers, ear disorders, malaria, hemorrhoids, spleen,
uterus, removes obstructions, hemicrania. Exter-
nal: leaves— inflammatory joint swellings in acute
rheumatism and of the testes from suppressed gon-
orrhea or gonorrheal epididymitis and orchitits;
sprained limbs, contusions, bites (used as heated

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
98
leaves or as a poultice). Pillows stuffed with leaves
are slept on to remove catarrh and headache (they
are also smoked for relief). Crushed leaves or poul-
tice is applied to temples for headaches. As a plas-
ter on the spleen, it removes swelling; as a juice
discharges worms from ulcers. A juice oil is ap-
plied to sinuses and neck gland sores (scrofula),
or for washing the head for glandular tubercular
neck swellings. Oil is also good for syphilis, vene-
real diseases, and other syphilitic skin disorders.
A leaf decoction with pippalí is used for catarrhal
fever with heaviness of head and dull hearing. A
warm bath in a leaf decoction removes pains after
childbirth. For rheumatism it is taken as a juice,
with the juice of tulsí and bh^i´garáj (eclipta alba),
mixed with crushed ajwan seeds; or these persons
can bathe in a nirguòæí leaf decoction. A tincture
of root-bark is good for irritable bladder and also
rheumatism. Powdered root—good for hemor-
rhoids and as a demulcent for dysentery. Root—
dyspepsia, colic, rheumatism, worms, boils, skin
disorders. Flowers—diarrhea, cholera, fever, liver
disorders, cardiac tonic; seeds—cold for skin dis-
orders; flowers and stalk powder—for blood dis-
charge from stomach and bowels.
Preparation: Fruit powder—sugar/water or honey
paste, decoction; powder, tincture, decoction, poul-
tice
Sanskrit: Paßhana Bheda
paSana Baed
Hindi: Pakhanbed, Dakachru
English: None
Latin: Saxifraga ligulata Wall.
Part Used: Rhizome
Habitat: Found in temperate the areas of the
Himalayas, from Bhutan to Kashmir and the
Khassia Mountains.
Energetics: Astringent, sweet-cold-sweet PK-V+
Tissues: Plasma, fat, female reproductive
Systems: Female reproductive, urinary
Action: Astringent, demulcent, diuretic, lithotrip-
tic
Uses: Best herb for dissolving uric acid, urinary
stones/gravel (especially phosphate; also oxalate);
cough, diarrhea, safer (less irritating) diuretic, fe-
vers, vaginal diseases, Váyu tumors, pulmonary
teething irritation, scurvy, tumors, enlarged pros-
tate. External —paste for boils.
Precautions: Amenorrhea
Preparation: Decoction, powder, paste
Sanskrit: Pippalí
ipappalaI
Hindi: Pippalí, Pipal
English: Long Pepper, Dried Catkins
Latin: Piper longum Linn.
Part Used: Fruit
Habitat: Indigenous to North-Eastern and South-
ern India; Sri Lanka, cultivated in Eastern Bengal
Energetics: Pungent-hot-sweet VK- P+
Tissues: All but bone

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 99
Systems: Digestive, reproductive, respiratory
Action: Analgesic, anthelmintic, aphrodisiac, car-
minative, expectorant
Uses: Abdominal tumors and distention, to improve
the digestive fire, Kapha disorders, asthma, bron-
chitis, colds, coughs, epilepsy, flatulence, gout,
laryngitis, paralysis, rheumatic pain, sciatica,
worms, immune system, for áma.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic
Precautions: Causes high Pitta
Preparation: Infusion, powder, oil
Sanskrit: Pravál
paRvaala
Hindi: Parvara
English: Red Coral
Latin: Corallium rubrum
Part Used: Shell
Habitat: Oceans, seas, and gulfs
Energetics: Its red color is due to large amounts of
iron content. Best for Pitta; VPK=
Tissues: Plasma, blood, fat, muscle, reproductive
Systems: Digestive, nervous, excretory, respiratory,
circulatory, reproductive
Action: Antacid, astringent, nervine tonic, laxative,
diuretic, emetic, antibilious
Uses: Best source of easily digestible calcium,
osteoporosis. It is mainly used for coughs, wast-
ing, asthma, low fever, urinary diseases, carbuncles,
scrofula, spermatorrhea, gonorrhea and other geni-
tal inflammation with mucus discharge. Other main
uses include nerve headaches, giddiness, and ver-
tigo. Also, it is used for chronic bronchitis, pul-
monary tuberculosis, vomiting, dyspepsia, bilious
headache, weakness, and debility. It is also used
in tooth powders as an astringent. Pravál piähti—
for ulcers.
Preparation: Ash powder
Sanskrit: Punarnavá, Raktpunarnava (red) [see
also £hweta punarnarvá (white)]
paunanaávaa
Hindi: Beshakapore, Lal Punarnava
English: Red Hogweed, Spreading Hogweed
Latin: Boerhavia diffusa Linn.
Part Used: Herb, root
Habitat: Throughout India, especially during the
rainy season
Energetics: Red—bitter-cold-pungent
Tissues: Plasma, blood, muscle, fat, marrow/
nerves, reproductive.
Systems: Digestive, female reproductive, circula-
tory, respiratory, nervous.
Action: Bitter, stomachic, laxative, diuretic, expec-
torant, rejuvenative, diaphoretic, emetic
Root—purgative, anthelmintic, febrifuge; White—
laxative, diaphoretic; Red—vermifuge.
Uses: A main herb for kidney stones.
White—edema, anemia, heart disease, cough, in-
testinal colic, kidney disorders; same uses as red.
Red—nervous system, heart disease, hemorrhoids,
skin diseases, edema, rat and snake bites; chronic
alcoholism, wasting diseases, insomnia, rheuma-
tism, eye diseases, asthma (moderate doses), in-
duces vomiting in large doses, jaundice, ascites due
to early liver and peritoneal concerns; urethritis.
Leaf juice— jaundice; Root—decoction or infu-
sion as a laxative, gonorrhea, internal inflamma-
tions; Externally—edema, rat and snake bites. Leaf

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
100
juice with honey, dropped into the eyes for chronic
ophthalmia.
Preparation: Juice, decoction, infusion, powder,
paste, oil, sugar water, or honey paste
Sanskrit: Rasonam (lacking one taste)/La¤huna
rsaaenama, lafauna
Hindi: La¤han
English: Garlic
Latin: Allium sativum Linn.
Part Used: Bulb and oil
Habitat: Cultivated all over India, the U.S. and other
countries
Energetics: All except sour; pungent-hot-pungent
VK- P+
Tissues: All
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, nervous, reproduc-
tive, respiratory
Action: Alterative, anthelmintic, antiparasitic, an-
tispasmodic, aphrodisiac, carminative, disinfectant,
expectorant, rejuvenative, stimulant
Uses: Arteriosclerosis, asthma, blood and lymph
cleanser (anti-áma); nerve and bone tissue
rasáyana (rejuvenative); cholesterol, colds, colic,
convulsions, cough, detoxifier, ear problems (ex-
ternal use), edema, flu, gas, heart disease, hemor-
rhoids, hypertension, hysteria, impotence, indiges-
tion, lung/bronchial antiseptic and antispasmodic,
memory, paralysis, rheumatism, skin diseases,
T.B., tremor, tumors, Váyu fevers, Váyu/Kapha
rasáyana, worms (round). Used effectively on
parasites in dogs. Spiritual Uses: It is tamasic, and
only suggested as medicine; not as a food for the
healthy. Harítakí is its spiritual substitute.
Precautions: Hyperacidity, toxic blood heat, excess
Pitta, cause mental dullness, not for spiritual devo-
tees—except as medicine.
Preparation: Juice, infusion (don’t boil), powder,
medicated oil.
Sanskrit: Rechanaka, Raktang
recanak, r½nga
Hindi: Kamala
English: Kamala
Latin: Mallotus philippinensis Muell, Arg. (Cro-
ton philippinesis, C. punctatus, C. coccineum
(Glandulae rottlerae)
Part Used: Glands and hairs from the capsules or
fruits
Habitat: This small evergreen shrub of the Spurge
family is found all over India, Sri Lanka, East
Indies, Malay Archipelago, Australia, and more.
Energetics: VPK=, P
Tissues: All, blood
Systems: Digestive, excretory
Action: Cathartic, anthelmintic, aphrodisiac, lithot-
riptic
Uses: Tapeworms, aperient, purgative (may cause
nausea or gripping before purging, but no after-
effects; good for children, adults, and pets.
Preparation: Ripe fruits are placed in a cloth and
beaten until the glandular pubescence is removed;
or fruits are rubbed between one’s palms or feet.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 101
Sanskrit: Sálam-mi¤hrí
saalama imaXaI
Hindi:
Salabmishri
English: Salep
Orchid
Latin: Orchis
mascula Linn.
(O. latifolia, O.
Laxiflora, Allium
Macleani)
Part Used: Root
Habitat: Iran, Af-
ghanistan
Energetics:
Sweet/sweet/
sweet P
Tissues: Blood, marrow/nerve, reproductive
Systems: Nervous, reproductive, excretory
Action: Restorative/invigorative tonic
Uses: Wasting diseases, diabetes, chronic diarrhea,
dysentery, nervous or sexual debility, hemiplegia,
paralysis, general weakness, impotence.
Preparation: One teaspoon of powdered root to one
cup of boiled milk
Precaution: Avoid chilies, acids, very spicy foods,
intoxicants, staying awake through the night, and
sexual acts, when taking this herb
Sanskrit: Sárivá
saairvaa
Hindi: Kalisar, Dudhilata, Sugandhi
English: Black Creeper, Sarsaparilla
Latin: Ichnocarpus fruitescens (Apocymene
frutescens, Echites frutscens)
Part Used: Root, milk, stalk, leaves
Habitat: A climbing plant throughout India; in the
Himalayas under 5,000 feet.
Energetics: Sweet. bitter-cold-sweet P- VK+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow/nerves
Systems: Circulatory, nervous
Action: The root is an alterative tonic, diuretic,
diaphoretic
Uses: Stalks and leaves—decoction for skin erup-
tions, hearing disorders, fevers. Root decoction —
skin diseases, syphilis, elephantiasis, loss of sen-
sation, hemiplegia, loss of appetite, blood purifier,
kidney and urinary disorders. It is best taken with
other herbs.
Preparation: Decoction, powder, pills
Sanskrit: Sarpa-gandha (serpentine species)
sapaá-ganDa
Hindi: Nakuli, Chota-chand
English: None
Latin: Rauwolfia serpentina Benth.
Part Used: Root
Habitat: Climbing shrub in tropical Himalayas;
moderate altitudes in Sikkim, North Bihar, Patna,
Bhagalpur, Assam, Pegu, Tenasserim, Deccan Pen-
insula, Sri Lanka, Java, Malay
Energetics: Root—bitter
Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow/nerves
Systems: Excretory, nervous, circulatory, respira-
tory
Action: Bitter tonic, sedative, febrifuge
Uses: It contains Reserpine alkaloid which is used
for hypertension. This is the main herb for high
blood pressure. Insanity with violent maniacal

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
102
symptoms (doses; 20-30 grains of root powder),
insomnia, insect stings, dysentery, painful bowel
disorders, fevers, insanity, sedative, hypochondria,
irritative conditions of the CNS (central nervous
system); leaf juice—in eyes heals cornea opaci-
ties.
Preparation: Decoction, powder, pills
Precautions: Lethal in large doses; not yet allowed
in the U.S. Prolonged use over 10 years can cause
sterility
Sanskrit: £ha´kh Pußhpí
faMKa pauSpaI
Hindi: Shankhini
English: None
Latin: Canscora decussata Roem. etc. Sch.
Part Used: Entire plant and juice
Habitat: Found throughout India and Burma
(Myanmar)
Energetics: Bitter-hot-pungent VPK=
Tissues: Nerves
Systems: Mind, nervous
Action: Alterative, nervine
Uses: One of the main Áyurvedic nervines with
bráhmí, jaóámáò¤hí, and vachá. Juice for epilepsy,
insanity, nervousness, memory.
Preparation: Juice, infusion, decoction, powder,
paste
Sanskrit: £hatávarí, £hatamúlí
fataavarI, fatamaUlaI
Hindi: £hatávarí
English: Hundred Husbands
Latin: Asparagus racemosus Willd. (A.
sarmentosus, Willd; A. gonoclados, Baker; A.
adscendens, Roxb.)
Part Used: Root
Habitat: This climber is found in the jungles around
8,000 feet throughout India, especially Northern
India
Energetics: Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet PV- (K, áma
+ in excess)
Tissues: All Systems: Circulatory, digestive, repro-
ductive, respiratory
Action: Mucilaginous, antidiarrhetic, refrigerant,
diuretic, antidysenteric, nutritive, tonic, demulcent,
galactagogue, aphrodisiac, antispasmodic, sto-
machic
Uses: A main herb for the immune and female
reproductive systems. Cancer, convalescence,
female organ debility, sexual debility, leukorrhea,
menopause, impotence, infertility, cough, dehydra-
tion, diarrhea, dysentery,  fevers (chronic),
hematemesis, herpes, hyperacidity, lung abscess,
ulcers, rheumatism, soothes dry, inflamed mem-
branes of kidneys, lungs, sexual organs, and stom-
ach. External application—emollient for stiff joints
and neck, and muscle spasms. Increases breast milk
and semen, nurtures mucous membranes, blood
cleanser, supplies female hormones, nourishes the

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 103
ovum. Immune system boost—good for AIDS,
Epstein Barr, etc., cancer—strengthens one from
and for chemotherapy.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic, increases love and devo-
tion, increases ojas
Precautions: Do not use if congested or with áma
Preparation: Decoction, powder, ghee, oil; for se-
rious diseases like cancer, use one or more ounces
daily.
Sanskrit: £hilájit (meaning: sweat of the rock)
ifalaaijata
Hindi: £hilájita
English: Mineral Pitch; Vegetable Asphalt
Latin: Asphaltum
Part Used: The oozing from the rocks
Habitat: Himalayas, near the source of the holy
Ganga river
Energetics: Pungent, bitter, hot-pungent VPK=, P+
in excess
Tissues: All
Systems: All, especially the urinary and nervous
Action: Alterative, diuretic, lithotriptic, antiseptic,
rejuvenative
Uses: The main tridoähic immune-boosting herb
(with Guæúchí). A main herb for diabetes. Espe-
cially useful as a Váyu tonic and rejuvenative, aph-
rodisiac, and for the kidneys; kidney, and gall
stones, obesity, jaundice, dysuria, cystitis, edema,
hemorrhoids, sexual debility, menstrual disorders,
asthma, epilepsy, insanity, skin diseases, parasites,
heals broken bones, mental work. Of the varieties
of ¤hilájit, the black is used for healing. Although
it is expensive in comparison to herbs, it can heal
most diseases.
Production: In the Himalayan region known as
Gangotri (the northern region of the Ganga river),
¤hilájit drips from the rocks. In other areas, foot-
long scorpions sting the rocks. The poison from
their stingers causes the ¤hilájit to ooze from the
stones. In still other places, it appears in coagu-
lated form. Monkeys use this natural remedy for
various health ailments. They stay healthy and live
a long time
Precautions: Do not use with high uric acid count,
or with febrile diseases
Preparation: Powder, with milk. 1 oz or more a
day for severe diseases; 1/4-1 tsp.- 3 times daily,
otherwise
Sanskrit: £hweta Musali
fvaeta mausaila
Hindi: Safeta Musali
English: White Musali
Latin: Asparagus adscendens Roxb.
Part Used: Tuberous root or rhizome
Habitat: Western Himalayas, Punjab, Gujarat,
Bombay, Oudh, Central India
Energetics: Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet VP- K+
Tissues: Reproductive
Systems: Reproductive, respiratory
Action: Demulcent, galactagogue, nutritive tonic
Uses: Debility (general and sexual), diarrhea, leu-
korrhea, spermatorrhea, wasting diseases. It helps
during pregnancy and postpartum, nourishing fe-
tus and increasing breast milk flow. A relative of
¤hatávarí.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
104
Precautions: Áma, congestion
Preparation: Milk decoction, powder, confection
Sanskrit: Snuhí, Thohar
snauHI, TaaeHr
Hindi: Thohar
English: 
Milk
Hedge
Latin: Euphorbia
neriifolia Linn. (E.
lingularia)
Part Used: Stem
juice, root
Habitat: Leafless
shrubs are found in
Northern and Cen-
tral India
Energetics: Very
hot VKP+
Tissues: Marrow/
nerves, plasma, fat,
Systems: Nervous,
excretory
Action: Juice—purgative, expectorant; locally—
rubefacient Root—antispasmodic
Uses: Milky juice—cathartic to relieve earache,
liver and spleen disorders, syphilis, edema, skin
diseases, asthma, cough, remove warts (externally
used), with soot of ghee lamp as an eye salve for
ophthalmia; externally with ghee applied to ulcers
and scabies; glandular swellings —prevents pus
formation and oozing; with turmeric—applied to
hemorrhoids. Mainly used externally.
Preparation: Juice, powder, pill, syrup, paste, tinc-
ture, decoction, salve
Precaution: It is very irritant and strong alkalis use
under the supervision of an Áyurvedic specialist
Sanskrit: Tagara
tagar
Hindi: Tagar, Bala-tagra, Sugandh-bala
English: Indian Valerian
Latin: Valeriana wallichii DC. (V. leschenauitic,
V. brunoniana)
Part Used: Rhizome (root)
Habitat: Himalayan temperate regions, Kashmir,
Bhutan; Afghanistan
Energetics: Bitter, pungent, sweet, astringent- hot-
pungent VK- P+
Tissues: Plasma, muscle, marrow/nerve
Systems: Nervous, digestive, respiratory Action:
Stimulant, antispasmodic, stomachic,
sedative, analeptic, carminative, nervine
Uses: Diminishes irritability of the brain and spi-
nal marrow; nervous cough, dysmenorrhea, palpi-
tations, migraine, chronic skin disorders, gas, colic,
vertigo, nervous debility, failing reflexes, spasms,
menopausal spasms, menstrual cramps, G.I. fer-
mentation, insomnia, delirium, neuralgia, convul-
sions, nervous exhaustion, mental stress, and over-
work; hysteria, epilepsy. One of the best herbs for
Váyu nervous   disorders; cleanses undigested tox-
ins (áma) from the colon, blood, joints, and nerves;
clears nerve channels from excess Váyu; fainting;
mixed with calamus (vachá) it is less  dulling (4:1).
Its relative, jaóámáò¤hí, is tridoßhic, also a seda-
tive, but not tamasic  spiritually dulling).
Spiritual Uses: It is tamasic, not recommended for
meditation
Preparation: Infusion, decoction, powder, pills
Precaution: Excessive use may dull the mind. Ex-
cessive doses may cause central paralysis and other
severe conditions. Use only under the supervision
of a qualified practitioner

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 105
Sanskrit: Tejbal, Tumbru
taejabala, taumbaü
Hindi: Tumbru
English: Toothache Tree
Latin: Zanthoxylum alatum Roxb.
Part Used: Bark, carpels (ovule bearing leaf of pistil
on a flower), carpels of fruits, seeds
Habitat: Shrub common in the temperate
Himalayas,
Bhutan, Darjeeling
Energetics: Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet P- VK+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, bone
Systems: Excretory, circulatory, digestive, respi-
ratory
Action: Bark and seeds—aromatic tonic; branches,
fruit and thorns—carminative, stomachic
Uses: Bark and seeds—fever, indigestion, cholera;
fruit, branches, and thorns are used to heal tooth-
ache and other diseases of the teeth. Good for
asthma, bronchitis, Kapha disorders.
Preparation: Bark—infusion, decoction
Sanskrit: Tila
itala
Hindi: Til
English: Sesame
Latin: Sesamum indicum DC. (S. orientale, S.
trifoliatum, S luteum)
Part Used: Seed, oil, leaf. There are three variet-
ies; black, white, red (or brown). White has most
oil, black is best for healing
Habitat: Small bush throughout India
Energetics: Sweet-hot-sweet V- PK+
Tissues: All, especially bone
Systems: Excretory, reproductive, urinary, respi-
ratory
Action: Seeds—laxative, emollient, demulcent,
diuretic, promote ojas, nourishing, galactogogue,
emmenagogue, nutritive tonic, rejuvenative.
Leaves—demulcent
Uses: Seeds—excellent rejuvenative tonic for Váyu
doßhas, bones and teeth; hemorrhoids, dysentery,
constipation (decoction or sweets); decoction with
linseed for cough, aphrodisiac; as a paste, with
butter for bleeding hemorrhoids; powder for amen-
orrhea, dysmenorrhea (and a warm hip bath with a
handful of seeds placed in the water); poultice ap-
plied externally to ulcers, burns, and scalds. Ap-
plying the oil to the body and head is useful for
Váyu doßhas, calming, giving nutrition, antioxi-
dant properties, dry skin, ulcers, oozing wounds,
with equal parts of lime juice for burns and scalds,
on eyelids for eye problems; cooking/frying. In-
gesting oil—gonorrhea. Leaves— mucilage for
dysentery, cholera infantum, etc. Decoction from
leaves and root—hair wash, blackens hair, pro-
motes hair growth. Sesame stalks are good food
for cows.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic (holy)—good for yogis (up
to one ounce daily)

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
106
Preparation: Decoction, sweets, paste, poultice,
powder, medicated oil
Precaution: Large doses may cause abortion; obe-
sity, high Pitta
Sanskrit: Tráymán
#aayamaana
Hindi: Vanpsa, Banaphsa
English: Wild Violet
Latin: Viola odorata Linn.
Part Used: Flowers, root
Habitat: An herb found in the Himalayas over 5,000
feet
Energetics: Flowers astringent; bitter-cold-bitter
VPK=
Tissues: Plasma, blood, reproductive
Systems: Respiratory, excretory, female reproduc-
tive, circulatory
Action: Emetic, flowers—demulcent, diaphoretic,
diuretic, aperient
Uses: Decoction for cough, sneezing, flu, and other
respiratory problems. Bile, lung disorders, rectum
and uterus prolapse, stops oozing of pus, kidney
and liver diseases; diaphoretic for pulmonary dis-
orders, nauseating emetic, large doses—emetic,
mixed with almond oil and senna syrup—excel-
lent demulcent and aperient for children, petal
syrup—infant coughs and chest tightness; flower
infusion—fevers; root is emetic in larger doses.
Preparation: Decoction, infusion, powder, pill,
syrup
Sanskrit: Tulsí (Tulasí), K^ißhòamul
taulasaI, kìS—maula
Hindi: Kala
Tulasí
English: Ba-
sil, Holy Ba-
sil
Latin:
O c i m u m
Spp. or O.
Sanctum or
O. basilicum
Part Used:
Herb
Habitat:
Small herb
found
throughout
India and cultivated near Hindu houses and temples
Energetics: Pungent-hot-pungent VK- (P+ in ex-
cess)
Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow/nerves, reproduc-
tive
Systems: Digestive, nervous, respiratory
Action: Antibacterial, antiseptic, analgesic, antis-
pasmodic, diaphoretic, febrifuge, nervine, vermi-
fuge
Uses: Coughs (including TB-caused), colds, ex-
cellent for fevers, lung/respiratory problems
(práòavaha srotas)—liquefies phlegm, allergic
bronchitis, asthma, eosinophilia. Abdominal dis-
tention, absorption/bioavailability, arthritis, colon
(air excess), memory, nasal/sinus congestion, si-
nus headache (as snuff), blood and heart tonic;
oxygenates the body, cleanses and clears the brain
and nerves; strengthens nerve tissue, relieves de-
pression and the effects of poisons; reduces pain,
difficult urination, prevents the accumulation of fat
in the body (especially for women after meno-
pause), obstinate skin diseases, arthritis, rheuma-
tism, first stages of many cancers, builds the im-
mune system. Improves digestion and appetite and
destroys áma, good for worms, empowers other
herbs. It is chewed for gum infection. Tulsí con-
tains trace mineral copper (organic form), needed
to absorb iron. Helps prevent hair-loss and gray-
ing. Oil is used for earaches. Reduces swellings.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 107
Purifies the air (when grown in the house—a natu-
ral negative ion machine); it frees ozone from sun’s
rays
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic, opens heart and mind, gives
love, devotion, faith, compassion, and clarity; sa-
cred to Vißhòu and K^ßhòa; cleanses the aura and
gives Divine protection. It increases práòa (life
breath). One of the two most sacred plants in In-
dia. It develops pure awareness
Precautions: Excess Pitta
Preparation: Juice, infusion, powder, ghee, sham-
poo
Sanskrit: Tvak
tvak
Hindi: Dalchini, Daruchini
English: Cinnamon
Latin: Cinnamomum cassia Blume. (C.
zeylanicum; C. saigonicum; C. aromaticum; C.
laurus.)
Part Used: Bark
Habitat: Indigenous to Sri Lanka and Southern
India
Energetics: Pungent, sweet, astringent-hot-pungent
VK- P+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, muscles, marrow/nerves
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, respiratory, urinary
Action: Alterative, analgesic, antibacterial, antifun-
gal, antiseptic, antirheumatic, antispasmodic, aro-
matic, astringent, carminative, demulcent, dia-
phoretic, digestive, diuretic, expectorant, germi-
cide, hemostatic, stimulant, stomachic
Uses: Absorption, agni (digestive fire) promoting,
breathing difficulties, bronchitis, colds, congestion,
circulation, generates energy and blood, strength-
ens one’s constitution, diarrhea, dysentery, edema,
flu, gas, metabolic (spleen and pancreas) and heart
strengthening, hiccup, indigestion, warms and
strengthens the kidneys, liver problems, menor-
rhagia, melancholy, muscle tension, for debilitat-
ing pain of the waist, knees, backaches and head-
aches; palpitations, toothache, uterine muscle fi-
ber stimulant, nausea, vomiting. Assists uterine
contractions during labor, menstrual pain from low
metabolic function. External—headaches, pain.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic
Precautions: Bleeding disorders, excess Pitta
Preparation: Infusion, decoction, powder, oil
Sanskrit: Vachá (meaning: speaking)
vacaa
Hindi: Bach
English: Calamus
Latin: Acornus cala-
mus Linn.
Part Used: Rhizome
Habitat: A semi-
aquatic perennial
cultivated in damp
marshy places, or by
the edge of lakes and
streams in India and
Burma (Myanmar)
Energetics: Pungent,
bitter, astringent-hot-
pungent VK- P+
Tissues: Plasma,
muscle, fat, marrow/nerve, reproductive
Systems: Circulatory, digestive, nervous, reproduc-
tive, respiratory
Action: Antispasmodic, decongestant, emetic, ex-
pectorant, nervine, rejuvenative, stimulant
Uses: Arthritis, asthma, brain rejuvenation, cere-
bral circulation promoter, colds, coma (as snuff),
cough, deafness, detoxifies subtle channels, emetic,
epilepsy, hysteria, insanity, memory, mental sharp-
ness, nasal congestion, and polyps (as snuff); ner-
vous system rejuvenation, neuralgia, shock (as

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
108
snuff), sinus headaches/sinusitis, transmutes sexual
energy to spiritual energy; gastritis, colic pain, lar-
yngitis, Váyu and Kapha rejuvenator. One of the
best mind herbs. It removes the toxic effects of
marijuana from the liver and brain. External—paste
applied to head for headaches and arthritic joint
pain. Powder may be sprinkled in home for removal
of insects, fleas; keeps moths from woolens.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic
Precautions: Not to be used with bleeding disor-
ders (e.g., nosebleeds, hemorrhoids) and other
Pitta conditions. Excess use may cause nausea,
vomiting, rashes, and other Pitta conditions.
Preparation: Decoction, milk decoction, powder,
paste
Sanskrit: Vaμ¤ha (Lochana)
vaMfa laaecana
Hindi: Vaå¤h Lochan, Bans
English: Bamboo Manna
Latin: Bumbusa arundinacia Retz. (B. apous, B.
orientalls, B. spinosa)
Part Used: [Two varieties (blue, white)] Inner stalks
or stems of female plant (silicous deposit)/ milky
bark; leaves, young shoots, seeds, roots
Habitat: Himalayas; 4,000 feet, and throughout
India
Energetics: Sweet, astringent-cold-sweet PV- K+
Tissues: Plasma, blood, marrow/nerve
Systems: Circulatory, nervous, respiratory
Action: Demulcent, expectorant, tonic,
rejuvenative, antispasmodic, hemostatic; leaves—
emmenagogue, anthelmintic; stimulant, febrifuge,
tonic, aphrodisiac
Uses: Excellent for colds, coughs, fevers, and
asthma; bleeding, emaciation, debility, dehydra-
tion, vomiting, consumption, excellent Pitta reduc-
ing herb, lungs. Nurtures heart, liver, and soothes
the nervous system; relieves thirst, anxiety, im-
proves the blood, skin disorders, threadworms in
children, palpitation, coma, rejuvenative, strength-
ening after chronic diseases, sedative, tissue defi-
ciency. Leaves—eaten by pets. External poultice—
dislodge worms from ulcers. Young shoots—ulcer
worms (external—juice poured on bandage). Leaf
bud—decoction for discharge of menses after
delivery or when scanty.
Preparation: Decoction, milk decoction, powder
Precaution: Increases congestion if not balanced
with pungent herbs like ginger
Sanskrit: Váráhíkand
varaHIknd
Hindi: Gendhi; Zamin-kand
English: Yam
Latin: Dioscorea bulbifera Linn., var.: sativa
Part Used: Tubers

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 109
Habitat: Grows in UP, Bihar and Sub Himalayan
region of India
Energetics: Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet VP- (K+ in
excess)
Systems: Digestive, reproductive, nervous, urinary
Action: Nutritive tonic, aphrodisiac, rejuvenative,
diuretic, antispasmodic, analgesic
Uses: Main male/female reproductive tonic.
Impotency, infertility, increases semen, milk
(progesterone), and other hormonal secretions (pi-
tuitary, thyroid, estrogen); syphilis. Hemorrhoids,
dysentery, diarrhea, senility, hormonal deficiency,
colic, nervous excitability, hysteria, abdominal pain
and cramps; promotes body weight, and soothes
digestive organs.
Precautions: Glucoside in the plant is poisonous;
creates excess mucus and congestion. Only use
with the advice of an Áyurvedic specialist
Preparation: Decoction, milk decoction, powder,
bolus, candy
Sanskrit: Vásáka, Vásá
vaasaak, vaasaa
Hindi: Adosa
English: Malabar Nut
Latin: Adhatoda vasika Nees. (or Adenanthera
vasika)
Part Used: Leaves, roots, flowers, bark
Habitat: A bush growing throughout India, espe-
cially the lower Himalayan ranges
Energetics: Bitter/astringent-cold-pungent PK- V+
Tissues: Plasma, blood
Systems: Respiratory, circulatory, nervous, elimi-
nation
Action: Expectorant, diuretic, antispasmodic, al-
terative
Uses: The main respiratory herb: asthma
(bronchodilator), bronchitis, bronchial asthma,
cough, voice, thirst, TB; a main herb for bleeding
disorders, bleeding gums; vomiting, dysentery,
diarrhea, hepatitis, wasting, rheumatic and general
pain, swelling, urinary disorders, diabetes;
neuralgia, skin disorders, fever, epilepsy, hysteria,
insanity; repellent for fleas, mosquitoes,
centipedes, flies and other insects; Kapha disorders,
flu.
Preparation: Infusion, extract, decoction, poultice,
powder, cigarette
Sanskrit: Vatsnábh
vatsanaaBa
Hindi: Mídhavis
English: Aconite, Monk’s Hood
Latin: Aconitum felconeri Stapf.
Part Used: Leaves, seeds, roots
Habitat: Throughout India

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
110
Energetics: VP+ K
Tissues: All, mainly blood/nerves
Systems: All systems, especially the nervous sys-
tem
Action: Small doses—Anodyne, antidiabetic, an-
tiperiodic, antiphlogistic, antipyretic, diaphoretic,
diuretic. Large doses—poison, sedative, narcotic;
metabolized quickly. It is related to and acting with
Vyán Váyu.
Uses: Enhances the properties of herbs, making
them work faster (i.e., for emergencies and imme-
diate relief). Leaves—indigestion, sedative; Exter-
nally—neuralgia (especially facial), tetanus (acute
and chronic), rheumatism (articular and muscular),
gout, erysipelas, heart disorders. Internally—fe-
vers, pain, increase urine flow. Root (external)—
lepa for neuralgia, muscular rheumatism, itching
with erythema, nasal catarrh, tonsillitis, sore throat,
coryza, acute gout, leprosy, paralysis (alterative and
nervine tonic), spermatorrhea, incontinence, and
diabetes (decreases urine and sugar quantity). Root
(internal)—fever, rheumatism, cough, asthma,
snake bites, inflammations of mucus membranes
of the throat, nose, stomach, and intestines.
Preparation: Tincture, extract from fresh leaves and
flower tops; external liniment, poultice, homeo-
pathic formula
Precaution: Poisonous without proper purification.
The root is not used internally with heart disease.
May cause severe headaches. Use only with the
advice of a qualified practitioner.
Sanskrit: Viæa´ga
ivazÑŠ
Hindi: Vira´ga
English: None
Latin: Embelia ribes Burm. (E. Indica, E.
Glandulifera, E. Robusta, Roxb.)
Habitat: Climbers in hilly parts of India ; Central
and Lower Himalayas, to Sri Lanka and Singapore
Part Used: Berries (fruit), leaves, root-bark
Energetics: Pungent, astringent-hot-pungent PK-
(V+ mildly)
Tissues: Plasma, blood
Systems: Digestive, excretory
Action: Alterative, anthelmintic, carminative,
stimulant
Uses: Main herb for worms (intestinal—espe-
cially tape, ring) and fungus [Kuóaj is best for
amoebacidal parasites]; good for all abdominal
disorders, constipation, gas, indigestion, hemor-
rhoids. Root-bark powder—toothache. External
paste—lung disease (pneumonia). Powdered berry
paste— headache or as oil in nose for headache,
obesity.
Precautions: Can cause sexual debility
Preparation: Decoction, powder, paste, confections,
cigarettes
Sanskrit: Vidárí-kanda
ivadarI knd
Hindi: Bilai-kand
English: None
Latin: Ipomoea digitata Linn. (I. paniculata)
Part Used: Tuberous root
Habitat: The hotter regions of India
Energetics: Bitter, sweet-cold-sweet VP- K+
Tissues: Fat, muscle, reproductive
Systems: Digestive, reproductive
Action: Tonic, alterative, aphrodisiac, demulcent,
mucilaginous, diuretic, galactogogue, nutritive
tonic, cholagogue, emmenagogue, rejuvenative
Uses: Relative of the sweet potato, increases se-
cretion of milk, emaciation, debility, poor diges-
tion, increases weight, enlarged liver and spleen;
moderates menstrual discharge, good for weak

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 4: Herbology
 111
children.
Preparation: Powder, confection, decoction, milk
decoction
Sanskrit: Yaßhóímadhu
ya*ImaDau
Hindi: Mithi-lakdi, Mulathi
English: Licorice
Latin: Glycyzrrhiza glabra Linn.
Part Used: Root
Habitat: Found in many countries
Energetics: Sweet, bitter-cold-sweet VP- K+ (only
if used long term)
Tissues: All
Systems: Digestive, excretory, nervous, reproduc-
tive, respiratory
Action: Demulcent, emetic, expectorant, laxative,
rejuvenative, sedative, tonic
Uses: Excellent for acidity, voice, and heart tonic
(with warm milk), Váyu doßha, bronchitis, colds,
cough, laryngitis, general debility, emetic (in large
doses), inflammation, mental calming, mucus liq-
uefying and expectorating, mucus membrane toner
and soother, muscle spasms, sore throat, ulcers
(contains natural ulcer-healing steroid precursers),
urination pain. Cleanses lungs and stomach of
Kapha. For colds and flu, mix with ginger (1:1).
Blood purification, abdominal pain, nourishes the
brain—increasing cranial and cerebrospinal fluid.
Improves complexion, hair, and vision.
Spiritual Uses: Sattwic; gives contentment and
harmony
Precautions: Excess Kapha, edema, stops calcium
and potassium absorption, not for osteoporosis,
hypertension (increases water around heart). Pre-
cautions are removed when taken in boiled milk
or de-glycerized (DGL) form is used . Do not use
when pregnant.
Preparation: Decoction, milk decoction, powder,
ghee
Conclusion
Herbs were chosen for this materia medica, based
on those most commonly used, and those cover-
ing most disorders. Thousands of herbs could be
added to the list, but it was felt that a simple, man-
ageable list of herbs was more practical. Other
outstanding herbs worthy of mentioning are Kuóaj,
the best antiparasitical herb, and Garcinia (Tama-
rind) an excellent weight loss herb for Kapha
doßhas (but can cause diarrhea in Pitta people if
not blended with additional cold herbs). It is not
recommended for Váyu doßhas. Tamarind is an
inexpensive food supplement found in Indian gro-
ceries. It is also available in extract form in many
new weight loss formulas, though it is more costly.
The dose of Tamarind (Garcinia) extract is to be
within the range of 100-500 mg. (9-45 grams) per
use.
     Chandan (Sandalwood) is excellent for spiri-
tual practices, is an antiseptic, antibacterial, a seda-
tive, and cools all Pitta conditions. It was omitted
from this list at a time when it was becoming over-
harvested and was banned from export from In-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
112
dia. That situation has been corrected, and thus
will be added to this list in a future edition.
     Chandan’s energetics are PV-; K/ama +in ex-
cess. It is useful for broncitis, cystitis, dermati-
tis, eye disorders, gonorrhea, herpes zoster, pal-
pitations, sunstroke or when spening time in the
sun (e.g., playing ball or working in the summer),
urethritis, vaginitis. It relaxes and improves the
functioning of the nervous, digestive, respiratory,
and circulatory systems.   It is not to be taken with
excess Kapha conditions.
     Spiritually chandan calms the mind and body
and awakens spiritual intelligence. It opens the
third eye (ájñá chakra or eye of intuition and spiri-
tual sight), cultures devotion (bhakti), and medita-
tion (sádhaná).

Section 3: Therapeutics
                      Chapter 5: Herb Glossary
 113
Limitted power comes from knowledge and action.
Unlimitted everlasting power exists in being.
Swami Nárayan Tírtha
Chapter 5
Herb Glossary
he following is a list defining the effects
of foods, drinks, and herbs. You may
reference them as you read through the
herbal materia medica. ‘S’ stands for Sanskrit,
and ‘H’ stands for Hindi.
Abortifacient: Induces abortion Herbs: chitrak,
aloe, sandalwood
Alterative: [S- Parivartakas or Rakta Shodhana
Karma; H- Badal-de-ne-wali] PK- V+; cold, bit-
ter, astringent
Uses: Cleanses and purifies the blood; heals sores,
boils, tumors, cancers; reduces fevers and Pitta;
detoxifies the liver, kills parasites and worms; helps
in the treatment of infectious, contagious diseases
and epidemics, flu, acne, herpes, venereal disease,
lymphatics. Externally, used on wounds, sores ul-
cers, etc.
Cold Herbs: Aloe, neem, mañjißhþhá, sandalwood,
red clover, and burdock
Hot Herbs: Bayberry, black pepper, cinnamon,
myrrh, and safflower
Amoebicidal: For amoebic dysentery (e.g., kuóaj)
Analgesic: [S- Vedana shamana; H- Pidha harne
wali]
Uses: Reduces or eliminates pain (e.g., digestive,
circulatory, respiratory, nervous system, nerve,
muscle, tooth pain, nervous digestion, headaches).
Herbs: Camphor, chamomile, cinnamon, cloves,
and echinacea
Anesthetics: For surgical anesthesia
Herbs: A¤hok, calamus, guæmar, jaóamaò¤hí,
kaóuká
Anthelmintic: [S- Krumighana karma or
Krimighna; H- Kire marne wali]
Uses: Destroys and dispels worms, (round, tape,
broad, and thread worms), parasites, fungus, yeast
(e.g., candida). See vermicide, vermifuge. Váyu—
in feces, Pitta in blood, Kapha in mucus.
Cold Herbs: Pau d’arco, goldenseal, wormseed,
wormwood
Hot Herbs: Ajwan, cayenne, peppers, and pump-
kin seeds
Antibiotic: PK- V+
Uses: Bitter, antibacterial, and antiviral infections.
Herbs: Turmeric and echinacea
Antidiabetic:
Herbs: Ámalakí, blackberry, fenugreek, guæúchí,
guæmar, mica bhasma, senna, shilájit
Antidiarrhea: An alterative,
Cold Herbs: Blackberry, comfrey, gentian, red
raspberry, and yellow dock
Hot Herbs: Black pepper, ginger, harítakí, and
buttermilk/lassi
Antiemetic: [S- Chherdinashana]
Uses: Stops vomiting.
Herbs: Cloves, coriander, ginger, neem, raspberry,
and vaμ¤ha lochana

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
114
Antiperiodic: [S- Visham Jvara har; H- Malarial
Jvara’s]
Uses: Prevents the periodic return of attacks of
diseases or fevers (e.g., malaria, neuralgia).
Herbs: Barberry, chiráyatá, guæúchí, kuþaj, and
vachá
Antipyretic: [S- Jwarahara; H- Bukhar Ko Dur
Karne Wa roknewali]
Uses: Dispels heat or fever (see bitter, febrifuge)
by reducing production of heat at its centers; de-
stroying fever toxins; sweating to increase the loss
of heat; drawing out the heat (e.g., cold baths).
Herbs: Ámalakí, black pepper, b^ihatí, da¤hmúl,
mañjiähóhá, nirguòæí, safflower, sandalwood
Anodyne: [S- Sula-orasa-mana; H- Sakornwali]
Uses: Provides relief from ill-defined pains and
general discomfort. Its effects works mostly on the
sensory nerves.
Herbs: A¤hok, barberry, cedar, ginger, kuçhóhá,
licorice, vatsnab
Antiphlogistics:
Uses: An external application to reduce internal
and external inflammations.
Herbs: Aloe, barberry, white sandalwood, vatsnab
Antirheumatic: VK- P+
Uses: Relieves or heals rheumatism
Herbs: Hot diuretics: Juniper berries, guggul,
ajwan, cinnamon, and parsley
Antiseptic: [S- £hodhaníya; H- £harir Saph Karne
Wali]
Uses: Removes infection or decay, which micro-
organisms live (but does not destroy the organisms
themselves)—see bitters.
Herbs: Aloe, Chitrak, gokähura, guæmar, sandal-
wood, ¤hatávarí, ¤hilájit, turmeric
Antispasmodic: [S- Vikashí; H- Badan Ki Ainthan
Wa Maror Ko Dur Wa Kam Karnewali]
Uses: Relieves or prevents spasms of the volun-
tary and involuntary muscles (also see nervines)
by strengthening nerves and the nervous system;
cramps, 
tremors, 
convulsions, 
práòa,
bronchodilators, menstrual cramps, nerve pain,
headaches, open mind and senses, high Váyu, hy-
persensitivity, nervousness, lumbago, sciatica, pa-
ralysis, degenerative nerve disorders, Váyu emo-
tions cause weak kidneys, insomnia, mental insta-
bility, numbness, and ungroundedness.
Herbs: Váyu and Kapha—Á¤hwagandhá, basil
(tulsí), calamus, guggul, licorice, myrrh, sage, and
vásák
Pitta—betony, bráhmí (gotu kola), bh^i´garáj,
jaóámáò¤hí, peppermint, sandalwood,
and spearmint.
Antisyphilic: For relief of syphilis (usually alter-
atives).
Herbs: Black pepper, cedar, guæúchí, guggul
Aperient: [S- Bhedaníya; H- Dast Khol Kar lane
wali]
Uses: Mild purgatives or laxatives—see purgative.
Herbs: Rhubarb
Aphrodisiac: [S- Vajíkarana; H- Namardi-kidawa]
Uses: Gives great power or vitality by reinvigorat-
ing the body and sexual organs, if directed spiritu-
ally (upward), body, mind, and spiritual growth is
gained; revitalizes all seven dhátus.
     Two types exist: a) tonics, b) stimulants.
Tonics: Develop tissue substance; Stimulants: in-
crease the functioning of the reproductive organs.
[Emmenagogues—more specific for women]
Herbs: Angelica, a¤hwagandhá, asparagus,
fenugreek, fo-ti, ginseng, gokßhura, hibiscus,
kapikachhú seeds, pippalí, rose, saffron, and
¤hatávarí
     Some enhance spermatogenesis (¤hukrala) or
Nutritive tonics—increase semen and breast milk:
a¤hwagandhá, balá, fo-ti, ghee, licorice, marsh-
mallow, sesame seeds, ¤hatávarí, and raw sugar
Sattwic 
aphrodisiacs—(enhance 
ojas):
a¤hwagandhá, ghee, lotus seeds, and ¤hatávarí

Section 3: Therapeutics
                      Chapter 5: Herb Glossary
 115
Appetizer: For stimulating the appetite.
Herbs: Cardamom, coriander
Aromatic: [S- Sugandhi-tadravya; H- Kushbuen]
Uses: Provides fragrant, spicy tastes, and/or odors
that stimulate the GI mucus membrane.
Herbs: Cardamom, cinnamon, cloves, fennel,
musta, nágke¤har, peppermint, and turmeric
Astringent: [S- Sankeshaníya or Stambhana karma;
H- Bandhej-karnewali] PK- V+ cold
Uses: Dries secretions (i.e., bleeding), excessive
wastes, heals tissues externally, diarrhea, sweat,
seminal emissions, urine, (see hemostatic, vulner-
ary), antidiarrhea herbs).
Herbs: Ámalakí, arjuna, a¤hok, cinnamon, jasmine,
sandalwood, and yarrow
Bitters: PK- V++
Uses: Reduces toxins, toxins in blood and weight;
destroys infection and áma; high fever,
heat, Pitta conditions, fever in blood, internal fe-
ver, heated liver, much thirst, sweating, inflamma-
tion, infection, bile regulator (hepatitis, jaundice),
fat and sugar metabolism regulator (spleen-diabe-
tes), antitumor (malignant and benign); use only
until pathogens are destroyed.
Herbs: aloe, barberry, chiráyatá, gentian, golden
seal, kaóuká, and neem. Three types of bitters:
Bitter aromatics have properties of both bitters
(simple) and aromatics
Bitter simple herbs stimulate only the GI tract
Bitter styptic herbs add styptic and astringent prop-
erties to those of bitterness
Calmative: For soothing, sedating—see nervines.
Cardiac Stimulant: For promoting circulation when
there is a weak heart.
Carminative: [S- Vata-anuloman or Dípaníya; H-
Bao Haran]
Uses: Dispels intestinal gas and distention; in-
creases absorption of nutrients, dispels water, mu-
cus, and áma in the GI tract; promotes normal peri-
stalsis; increases agni; cleanses srotas; relieves
spasms and pain; promotes práòa flow; improves
weak digestion from anxiety, nervousness, or de-
pression. May aggravate Váyu in long-term use.
Herbs:
Cold Herbs: Chamomile, chrysanthemum, corian-
der, fennel, lime, musta, peppermint, and spear-
mint
Hot Herbs: Ajwan, basil, calamus, cardamom, cin-
namon, ginger, and turmeric
Formulations: Hi´gwasták Chúròa, Lava´ Bhaskar
Chúròa, T^ikatu, Triphalá
Cathartic: [S- Bhedana; H- Kara Julab]—see
purgatives
Laxatives—(figs, prunes, olive oil)
Simple purgatives—(that stimulate the glands—
senna, castor oil, aloe vera)
Drastics—irritate the intestinal mucus membrane
Hydrogogues—cause fluid motions—epsom salts
Cholagogue—purgatives that stimulate the liver—
rhubarb, aloe vera
Cholagogue: [S- Mridubhedana; H- Halka Julab]
Uses: For stimulating liver action, emptying the
gall bladder, and promoting or increasing bile se-
cretion or excretion; resulting in free purgation.
Herbs: Arka, bh^i´garáj, guæúchí, licorice, saf-
flower, senna, and sesame
Cordial: For stimulating or exhilarating the heart—
aromatic confections.
Decongestant: For relieving congestion—see ex-
pectorant.
Demulcent: [S- Mridukara or Kasa-Svasahara; H-
Tarkarnewali]
Uses: For softening, soothing, and protecting mu-
cus membranes and skin (i.e., protects stomach and
urinary bladder lining).
Herbs: barley, licorice; linseed, olive, and almond
oils—see expectorant—moistening.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
116
Dentifrice: For cleaning teeth and gums
Deobstruent: For removing obstructions to the
functioning of the body.
Diaphoretic: [S- Svedana Karma or Svedaníya; H-
Pasina Lanewali]
Uses: For promoting perspiration, circulation; dis-
pels fever and chills; for eliminating surface tox-
ins; relieving muscle tension, aching joints, and
inflammatory skin conditions; bringing water down
through urine; cold and drying in nature; relieving
diarrhea, dysentery (dispels damp heat), kidneys,
liver, urinary, and gall bladder disorders; dispel-
ling stones of kidney and both bladders (lithotrip-
tic); genitourinary disease (i.e., herpes), edema;
painful, difficult, or burning urination or infections;
first step in healing
the disease.
Herbs: Two kinds exist: hot and cold:
Hot: Raise body temperature, dispel chills and
colds; stimulants, expectorants, antiasthmatic, and
antirheumatic.
Hot herbs: Ajwan, basil, cardamom, cinnamon,
eucalyptus, ginger, juniper berries, and parsley.
P+++
Cold: Bitter-pungent, high fever, sore throat, tox-
ins in blood, alterative, diuretic, cleanses lymph
and plasma, subtle channels and capillaries, lungs,
respiratory, open mind, práòa,
sinuses, stimulate nervous system, liver, moistens,
soothes, and protects kidneys; fevers, infections,
liver, gall bladder, steam bath, sauna (keep head
out of box), hot bath, etc. Cold herbs: Asparagus,
barley, burdock, chamomile, chrysanthemum, co-
riander, dandelion, fennel, gokßhura, marshmal-
low, punarnavá, spearmint
Digestives: [S- Dipana-Pachana Karma]
Uses: For assisting the stomach and intestines in
normal digestion.
Herbs: Coriander, cumin, rock salt, turmeric
Disinfectant: [S- Aguntaka-roganashaka; H-Urkar
Lagnewali]
Uses: For destroying disease germs and noxious
properties of fermentation; disinfectants, bacteri-
cides, or germicides destroy pathogenic microbes
(that cause communicable diseases); some antisep-
tics are disinfectants; all disinfectants are antisep-
tics.
Herbs: Apámárga, arka, guæúchí, kaóuká, sandal-
wood
Diuretic: [S- Mutrala Karma or Mutra-virehana;
H- Peshabjari Karnewali] PK- V+
Uses: For increasing urination; promoting kidney
and urinary bladder activity; reducing and remov-
ing toxins; reducing water in all tissues (dhátus).
Three forms of diuretics:
stimulating: stimulates kidneys during their elimi-
nation (e.g., pepper, juniper)
hydragogue: raises blood pressure in the glomeruli
(e.g., digitalis, caffeine)
refrigerant: washes out the kidneys (e.g., drinking
lots of water)
Herbs: Apámárga, a¤hwagandhá, barberry, carda-
mom, cinnamon, ginger, gotu kola, gokähura,
guæúchí, licorice, musta, punarnavá, sandalwood,
¤hatávarí, shilájit, vachá
Emetic: [S- Vamakaríya; H- Qai Lanewali]
Uses: Including or causing vomiting by local ac-
tion on the nerves of the stomach and mucus mem-
brane.
Three types of emetics:
central: Acts through the vomiting center of the
brain (e.g., chamomile)
local: Locally irritates the nerves of the gastric
mucus membrane (e.g., mustard, salt water)
general: Acts through the blood on the vomiting
center (these are partly local emetics)
Herbs: Apámárga, arka, chakramarda, chitrak,
licorice, pippalí, rock salt, vachá
Emmenagogue: [S- Rajastha-paníya or
Raktabhisarana]
Pungent and bitter
Uses: For promoting and regulating menstruation
(including PMS, uterine tumors, or infections).
Clears blood congestion, blood clot; builds the
blood; moistens female reproductive organs; coun-
teracts aging and poor nutrition;

Section 3: Therapeutics
                      Chapter 5: Herb Glossary
 117
Herbs: Aloe, angelica, hibiscus, jasmine, licorice,
myrrh, peony, rose, saffron, ¤hatávarí
Cold Herbs: Menstrual or uterine infections, bleed-
ing; anger, and irritability: Blessed thistle, chamo-
mile, chrysanthemum, hibiscus, mañjißhþhá, red
raspberry, and rose
Heating Herbs: Delayed menses (from overexpo-
sure to cold), overexertion, nervous anxiety: An-
gelica, cinnamon, ginger, myrrh, safflower; used
for antispasmodics, uterine cramps; diuretic for
PMS, water retention; hemostatics tonic,
rejuvenative.
Emollient: [S- Snehopaga; H- Jalan Aur Sozish Ko
Dur Karnewali] Oils or fats—see demulcent
Uses: Externally—protect, soften, and relax the
skin (e.g., oils, honey, bread or bran poultice, car-
rots, turnips, ointments, hot fomentations).
Epispastic: [S- Doßha-ghnalepa; H- Uparnewali]
Substances locally applied to the skin—see rube-
facient
Uses: Produces blisters and redness on the surface
(e.g., mustard).
Errhine: [S- £hiro-virechana; H- Chink Lanewali
Ya Nazla Bahadenewali] herbs applied to the mu-
cus membranes of the nose \
Uses: Increases nasal secretion with or without
causing sneezing.
Herbs: Ámalakí, apámárga, arka, black pepper,
ginger, guæmar, jasmine, pippalí, vachá, viæa´ga
Exhilarant: Herbs that enliven and cheer the mind.
Expectorant: [S- Kasa-Svasahara; H- Khansi Aur
dame Ko Dur Darnewali]
Uses: Promotes phlegm and mucus discharge;
clears lungs, nasal passages, and stomach; respi-
ratory (colds, flu, asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia),
digestive problems (from mucus in GI tract) caus-
ing poor absorption of nutrients; removes phlegm
and mucus that can accumulate and cause growths
or tumors (usually benign) or nervous or circula-
tory ones.
Herbs: Two types: Drying (e.g., ginger) [hot/stimu-
lant/diaphoretic/carminative] and
moistening (e.g., licorice) which liquefy—cold and
sweet herbs. These are also demulcent and emol-
lients—see demulcent—dispel heat and dryness;
liquefy Kapha and áma for Váyu and Váyu/Pitta
respiratory illness; lung tonics, nerves, and heart
Dry herbs: Calamus, cardamom, cinnamon, cloves,
elecampane, dry ginger, pippalí, and sage
Moist herbs: Bamboo, comfrey root, licorice,
marshmallow, milk, raw sugar, slippery elm, cough
relieving: bayberry, ephedra, eucalyptus, thyme,
wild cherry. There are seven ways that they work:
1) Relieving bronchial tube spasms (lobelia, to-
bacco)
2) Through dislodging, by vomiting (see emetics—
large doses)
3) Increasing the flow from the inflamed membrane
(see emetics—small doses)
4) Promoting expectoration (onion, asafoetida/see
expectorant)
5) By soothing the irritation in the respiratory cen-
ter and promoting expectoration
6) Causing expectoration through stimulating the
nerves of the mouth
7) By stimulating the respiratory center and
strengthening the expulsive mechanistic muscles
Febrifuge: [S- Jvarahar; H- Bukhar Ko Dur Karne-
wa- roknewali] reduces fever; (see antipyretic, an-
tiperiodic, antiseptic)
Galactogogue: (S- Stanya-janana; H- Dudh
Barhanewali] increases breast milk secretion (in-
ternally or externally applied)
Herbs: Cumin, fennel, musta, pippalí, ¤hatávarí,
white musali
Germicide: Destroys germs and worms [see disin-
fectant]
Germifuge: An agent that expels germs [see ger-
micide]
Hemostatic: [S- Shonitasthapana; H- Khun Band
Karnewali] astringent, alterative PK- V+
Uses: Stops bleeding, purifies blood (styptics).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
118
Herbs: Cold herbs: Dúrba, goldenseal, mañjißhþhá,
red raspberry, turmeric
Hot herbs: Cinnamon, ginger; used with nutritives
and tonics
Irritant: Causes irritation or inflammation
Herbs: Arka, cinnamon, cardamom, ginger, myrrh
Laxative: (S- Svalpabhedana or Virechaníya; H-
Dast Khol Karlanewali] mild purgative that relaxes
the bowels
Herbs: castor oil, flax seed, psyllium, rhubarb,
senna; and triphalá (in large doses).
Lithotriptic: Dissolves and prevents kidney, urinary
and gall bladder stones (see diuretic;), nervine:
nutritive, builds tissues
Herbs: Arjuna, ámalakí, arka, gokßhura, paähana
bheda, punarnavá
Myotic: [S- Netra-kaßhitraroga; H- Ankhon Ki
Putli Ko Sakornewali] agents that cause the con-
traction of the pupil and diminution of ocular ten-
sion
Nervine: [H- Rag-aur-reshon Men Bal Karnewali]
herbs that calm excited nerves and heal nervous
diseases and the nervous system
Herbs: Açhwagandhá, balá, guæmar, ¤ha´kh
puähpí
Parasiticide: [S- Krimighna; H- Bahar Ke Kire
marnewali] destroys parasites (see germicide, an-
tiparasitic)
Parturifacient: Herbs inducing childbirth
Herbs: Barley, pippalí, punarnavá root (wrapped
around belly)
Purgative: [S- Virechaníya; H- Kara Julab] pro-
duce, hasten or increase intestinal evacuation from
the bowels
Herbs: Aloe, apápámarga, balá, bh^i´garáj, bilwa,
chitrak, epsom salts, í¤habgol, kaòóakárí, kaóuká,
licorice, punarnavá, rhubarb, safflower, senna
Refrigerant: [S- Dahanaßhaka; H- Pias
Bujhanewali]
Uses: Cools and reduces fevers; quenches thirst
and suppresses unnatural body heat.
Herbs: Aloe, chitrak, coriander, ginger, hibiscus,
orange, lemon, licorice, musta, pippalí, sandal-
wood, ¤hatávarí, cane sugar, vachá, viæa´ga
Resolvent: Causes the absorption of inflammations
and other swellings by stimulating the lymphatics
Restorative: Herbs, cordials or foods that restore
nutritive deficiencies
Rubefacient: [S- Baríyalepana; H- Lal Chakatte
Kar Denewali]
Uses: An external remedy that irritates the nerve
ends in the skin, causing distention of the capillar-
ies, inflammation and reddening of the skin; in-
creasing blood flow to that area.
Herbs: Bákuchí seeds, black pepper, cayenne,
chitrak, ginger, licorice, mañjiähóhá, mustard,
pippalí
Sialagogue: [S- Lalavardhaka; H-Ral-barhanewali
Wa Thuk Barhanewali]
Uses: Increases or produces saliva, either by local
mouth irritation; causing reflex activity of the
glands; (e.g., mustard, tobacco), or by exciting the
glands during their elimination.
Herbs: Arka, black pepper, chitrak, chiráyatá, gin-
ger, licorice, pippalí
Stimulant: [S- Agni-sthapaníya or Dipana; H -
Uksanewali]
VK- P+. Antibacterial, antiparasitical (also see
carminative)
Uses & Herbs: Increases agni, destroys áma, in-
creases autoimmune system, drying (e.g., pepper,
cloves, cinnamon, dry ginger, and ajwan).
Numerous forms of stimulants exist:
arterial: Cayenne
cardiac: Camphor, cane sugar, ephedra, glucose
cerebro-spinal: Jaóámáò¤hí, ku¤hthá
circulatory: Adrenaline
eyes: Barberry extract, yellow thistle juice

Section 3: Therapeutics
                      Chapter 5: Herb Glossary
 119
general: a) Diffusible (e.g., antispasmodics), b)
Permanent (i.e., tonics, astringents)
local: Laxatives, emetics, purgatives, diuretics,
diaphoretics, rubefacients, expectorants,
sialagogues, epispastics
nervine (i.e., exciting the nervous system): Musk,
asafoetida, caffeine
respiratory: 
Bhúmíámalakí, 
cardamom,
jaóámáò¤hí, mañjiähóhá, nirguòæí, tulsí
rheumatism etc: See rubefacient
skin: Cedar, chakra marda, sandalwood
spinal: Barley, dates, figs, pomegranate, rice, cane
sugar
ulcers/abscesses: Gotu kola, nirguòæí
uterine: Cinnamon, guggul, myrrh, vaå¤ha
lochana
vascular: Cayenne, cinnamon, ginger, kaòóakárí,
nutmeg, pippalí, vacha
stomachic: See aromatics and see below
Stomachic: [S- Kshudha-vardhaníya; H- Bhuk
Barhanewali] digestive stimulant (see stimulant,
bitters, carminative)
Uses: Increases or excites gastric juice secretion;
improves stomach tone, promotes appetite, and
digestion.
Herbs: Ámalakí, balá, bh^i´garáj, bilwa, black
pepper, cardamom, cedar, chiráyatá, chitrak,
cumin, ginger, harítakí, kaóuká, licorice, musta,
pippalí, turmeric, vacha, viæa´ga
Styptic: [S- Raktha-sthambana; H- Khun Band
Karanewali] (See hemostatic)
Uses: Causes vascular contraction of the blood
vessels or coagulation of the albuminous tissues
of the blood; checks hemorrhage
Herbs: Adrenaline, alum
Tonic (aromatic & bitter): [H- Taqat Denewali]
coldest: PK- V++ (in most cases)
Uses: Pitta conditions (i.e., fever, heat); blood
detox, weight loss, fever in blood; destroys áma,
liver, and bile regulation (i.e., hepatitis, jaundice);
fat and sugar reduction (i.e., spleen-diabetes); an-
titumor (benign and malignant), removes conges-
tion.
Herbs: Aloe, balá, barberry, chiráyatá, guæúchí,
kaóuká, gentian, goldenseal, kaóuká, musta, neem,
vacha. Various forms of tonics exist:
stomachic [H- Khub Bhuk Laganewali]
cardiac [H- Dilko Taqat Denewali
blood [H- Khun Barhanewali]
Tonic (astringent): tissue builders; see nutritives
Herbs: Harítakí
Tonic (nutritive): [S- Bruhangana karma; H-Dhatu
barane wale] VP- K+
Uses: Permanently increases the tone of a part of
the body, or the entire system by nourishing and
increasing weight. They are sweet, heavy, oily, or
mucilaginous; increasing vital fluids, muscles, and
fat; builds the blood and lymph; increases milk and
semen; restoratives for weakness, emaciation, de-
bility, and convalescence; soothing, harmonizing,
dispels rigidity, and calms nerves. They are taken
with stimulant or carminative herbs (e.g., ginger
or cardamom) to assist in absorption; having ex-
pectorant, demulcent, and emollient properties;
nurtures the lungs and stomach.
Herbs: Ámalakí, arka, a¤hwagandhá, balá,
bh^i´garáj, bibhítakí, cane sugar, coconut, cori-
ander, dates, ghee, gokähura, guæúchí, guggul,
harítakí, honey, jaóámáò¤hí, licorice, mañjiähóhá,
milk, raisins, sesame seeds, ¤hatávarí, turmeric,
vaå¤ha lochana, viæa´ga, vidárí kand
Rejuvenative Tonics: [S- Rasáyana karma]
Uses: Regenerates cells and tissues (body and
brain); promotes longevity—spiritual and physi-
cal. For young and old people.
Herbs:
Váyu—A¤hwagandhá, guggul, harítakí, calamus,
and ¤hatávarí.
Pitta—Aloe, ámalakí, gotu kola, ¤hatávarí, saf-
fron, and gokßhura.
Kapha—Bibhítakí, guggul, pippalí, ¤hilájit,
triphalá, and elecampane.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
120
Vermicide: [H- Kiremarnewali] that which kills
intestinal worms (see anthelmintic)
Vermifuge: [Kiremarnewali] Expels intestinal
worms (but may not kill the worms). See an-
thelmintic
Vulneraries: Astringent, demulcent, emollient
PK- V+
Uses: Heals tissue via external use; cool as a
plaster or poultice for cuts, wounds, burns, hem-
orrhage.
Herbs: Aloe, comfrey, honey, licorice, marsh-
mallow, turmeric, and slippery elm.

121
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
The doctor of the future will give no medicine but will interest their patients
in the care of the human frame, in diet, and in the cause and prevention of disease.
Thomas Edison
Chapter 6
Nutrition
e have briefly touched upon the topic of
tastes, as they are related to the seasons.
This may be quite an unusual way to look at the
seasons, but nonetheless, a useful one when con-
sidering health. To better understand the idea of
taste from the Áyurvedic viewpoint, we need to
examine it in depth. Its insights explain the role of
tastes in healing. Unique to Áyurveda is a scien-
tific breakdown of tastes, discussed according to
energies—or energetics. Áyurveda classifies herbs,
foods, and drinks into five aspects. Each has its
own therapeutic effects;
1. Taste
2. Element (property)
3. Hot or cold effect
4. Post-digestion effect (final taste after digestion)
5. Special properties
Taste: It is considered therapeutic for several rea-
sons. The Sanskrit word for taste is “Rasa”. It
means delight or essence, both of which promote
healing. A channel extends from the mouth into
the head and brings the essence (one meaning of
taste) to the brain. This essence stimulates práòa,
which in turn stimulates the agni or digestive fires.
If the taste of the food is not pleasing, the gastric
fires may not digest the food and thus do not pro-
vide proper nutrition. That is why Áyurvedic cook-
ing is a science unto itself, blending the right
amount of herbs for the right taste. In our society,
we have adulterated our sense of taste with un-
wholesome (artificial) foods (one of the two fun-
damental causes of disease we discussed in vol-
ume one).
Element: Six tastes originate from the five ele-
ments, transmitting their properties: sweet, salty,
sour, pungent, bitter, astringent. All tastes essen-
tially originate in the water element, having their
origin here. No food consists only of one taste; all
five elements are contained in all substances. So
when it is said that a food has a certain taste (e.g.,
sweet), that taste predominates. Similarly, no ill-
ness is caused by purely one doßha. However, when
a doßha predominates, it is said that an illness is
caused by that specific doßha.
     All persons need some for each of the six tastes
in their diet. However, depending on one’s consti-
tution and the season, one will adjust their tastes
to balance their doßha. The key is to have a mod-
erate amount of each taste. The benefits listed be-
low result from ingesting foods that develop these
healing measures. However, they relate primarily
to the doßha(s) listed. If used by a doßha not listed,
they will create excess.
ets
a
T
t
n
e
m
el
E
d
o
o
F
te
e
w
s
reta
w
/htra
e
s
e
h
crats
,ra
g
u
s
r
u
o
s
erif/htra
e
s
dic
a
,d
etn
e
m
ref
ytla
s
erif/reta
w
e
nila
kla
,tla
s
tn
e
g
n
u
p
ria/erif
,dirc
a
,y
cip
s
cita
m
o
ra
rettib
ria/re
hte
s
b
re
h
tn
e
g
nirts
a
*
ria/htra
e
g
nitcirts
n
o
c
hti
w
ytila
u
q
nin
n
at

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
122
ets
a
T
(
a
s
a
R
)
tc
eff
E
la
cis
y
h
P
tc
eff
E
la
t
n
e
M
te
e
w
s
-
P
V
,)s
ajo
(
p
a
s
efil
,s
e
u
ssit
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
&
s
dliu
b
n
oix
elp
m
o
c
s
e
n
o
b
,tn
e
m
tn
etn
o
c
er
u
s
a
elp
-
K
V
r
u
o
s
s
e
v
eiler
,s
e
h
sir
u
o
n
,s
a
g
sle
p
sid
,dia
e
vits
e
gid
d
n
a
n
oitalu
cric
s
ple
h
,s
etaita
s
,tsriht
s
e
u
ssit
lla
s
dia
,tra
e
h
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
,n
oita
ni
m
ile
ytidic
a
s
niatnia
m
,e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
er
tu
b
&
d
ni
m
s
n
e
k
a
w
s
e
s
n
e
s
-
V
ytla
s
,e
vita
d
e
s
,e
vita
x
al
,s
e
u
ssit
s
eta
cir
b
ul
,g
nin
etf
o
s
,e
vita
g
r
u
p
,g
nita
e
w
s
s
eto
m
o
r
p
,dia
e
vits
e
gid
d
ra
h
sts
e
g
n
o
c
e
d
,sr
o
m
ut
d
ra
h
s
n
etf
o
s
,cite
m
e
,e
c
n
ala
b
lare
ni
m
s
niatnia
m
,
m
g
elh
p
ets
at
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
,reta
w
s
dlo
h
,s
e
v
re
n
s
m
la
c
yteix
n
a
s
p
ots
tn
e
g
n
u
p
-
K
V
,s
e
h
s
ar
cig
rella
K
V
d
n
a
s
e
s
a
e
sid
ta
o
r
ht
sla
e
h
;taf
d
n
a
,e
s
a
er
g
,reta
w
sretn
u
o
c
,s
e
s
a
e
sid
nik
s
,a
m
e
d
e
s
e
v
o
m
er
,s
a
g
sle
p
sid
,dia
e
vits
e
gid
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
,ta
e
w
s
s
eto
m
o
r
p
,ets
at
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
p
u
s
k
a
er
b
,s
n
oitc
n
u
f
cin
a
g
r
o
d
n
a
m
silo
b
ate
m
,s
e
ss
a
m
d
ra
h
re
hto
d
n
a
stolc
r
o
d
o
olb
tn
a
n
g
ats
d
n
a
nia
p
e
v
re
n
s
e
v
eiler
,sle
n
n
a
h
c
sra
elc
n
ois
n
et
elc
s
u
m
d
ni
m
s
n
e
p
o
s
e
s
n
e
s
d
n
a
rettib
-
K
P
,re
v
ef
,s
e
s
a
e
sid
nik
s
,tsriht
,aix
er
o
n
a
sla
e
h
d
o
olb
;airetc
a
b
d
n
a
,s
etis
ara
p
,g
n
n
r
u
b
,a
e
s
u
a
n
,taf
s
e
c
u
d
er
,s
eifix
ote
d
,s
e
s
n
a
elc
,reifir
u
p
,citoibitn
a
;s
e
ss
e
c
x
e
reta
w
d
n
a
,e
u
ssit
,kli
m
ts
a
er
b
s
e
s
n
a
elc
,dia
e
vits
e
gid
,citp
e
sitn
a
taf
d
n
a
ra
g
u
s
sts
e
gid
d
n
a
s
e
s
n
e
s
sra
elc
s
n
oito
m
e
tn
e
g
nirts
a
-
K
P
,ta
e
w
s
,d
o
olb
s
e
s
n
a
elc
d
n
a
g
nid
e
elb
s
p
ots
,s
e
n
ar
b
m
e
m
s
u
c
u
m
d
n
a
nik
s
sla
e
h
,a
e
h
rraid
,citer
uid
,tn
ar
otc
e
p
x
e
;sre
clu
d
n
a
,e
s
p
alo
r
p
taf
d
n
a
er
utsio
m
s
eir
d
,s
e
u
ssit
s
n
eth
git
y
reif
slo
o
c
sra
elc
d
n
a
s
d
ni
m
d
n
a
s
e
s
n
e
s
s
n
oito
m
e
y
g
ra
htel
s
e
v
o
m
er
(V = Váyu, P = Pitta, K = Kapha, ‘-’ means reduces)
Negative Effects Due to Excess
The diseases listed below resulted from ingesting foods that create excesses in the doßha.
In excess, eventually any doßha will develop these ailments.

123
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
     It is interesting that Áyurveda is not concerned
with naming diseases. Illness is determined accord-
ing to the excesses and deficiencies of the elements
or doßhas (air, fire, and water). When doßhas are
balanced, illness does not exist. From this point of
view, one can see how, by understanding which
tastes mitigate or aggravate which doßhas, nutri-
tion becomes an elemental and effective measure
in maintaining the balance of health. Various dis-
eases are seen to be directly related to tastes and
doßhas in the charts shown above. Thus, by fol-
lowing an appropriate food plan for one’s consti-
tution, a person may maintain health and prevent
future illness.
Energy (Vírya): This energy activates tastes.
Foods and drinks possess either cold or hot energy
(in the body). Each taste has an associated energy.
* Yogurt is sour, sweet, and heavy. Pure forms
of the tastes will aggravate one’s doßha more
easily than complex versions and thus should
be used with care.
ets
a
T
(
a
s
a
R
)
tc
eff
E
la
cis
y
h
P
tc
eff
E
la
t
n
e
M
+
K
te
e
w
s
;s
e
s
a
e
sid
taf
ss
e
c
x
e
s
ete
b
aid
,ytis
e
b
o
,n
oits
e
gid
ni
,sr
o
m
ut
tn
a
n
gila
m
d
n
alg
k
c
e
n
tn
e
m
e
g
raln
e
:a
h
p
a
K
,y
g
ra
htel
yteix
n
a
:u
y
á
V
+
P
r
u
o
s
f
o
ss
ol
,ss
e
nib
b
alf
,tsriht
,re
v
ef
,htg
n
erts
,g
nih
cti
,ss
e
n
d
nilb
,ai
m
e
n
a
atti
P
,r
olla
p
x
o
p
lla
m
s
,s
e
p
re
h
,ss
e
nid
dig
,re
g
n
a
to
h
,e
c
n
eita
p
m
i
re
p
m
et
+
K
P
ytla
s
,n
ois
n
etre
p
y
h
,ria
h
y
ar
g
,ss
e
n
dla
b
,s
e
s
a
e
sid
nik
s
,tsriht
,s
elk
nir
w
f
o
ss
ol
,s
e
p
re
h
s
e
ss
e
c
s
b
a
,htg
n
erts
,re
g
n
a
,e
c
n
eita
p
m
i
y
g
ra
htel
tn
e
g
n
u
p
+
P
f
o
n
oitelp
e
d
,tsriht
diulf
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
er
,htg
n
erts
d
n
a
,sr
o
m
ert
,g
nitniaf
nia
p
k
c
a
b/tsia
w
,re
g
n
a
e
c
n
eita
p
m
i
+
V
rettib
u
y
á
V
,n
oitelp
e
d
e
u
ssit
s
e
s
a
e
sid
,ra
ef
,yteix
n
a
ain
m
o
s
ni
tn
e
g
nirts
a
+
V
,s
d
o
o
f
d
ets
e
gid
n
u
,tsriht
,nia
p
tra
e
h
,n
oitaic
a
m
e
,ss
olytiliriv
d
e
k
c
olb
,n
oita
pits
n
o
c
sle
n
n
a
h
c
,y
rr
o
w
,yteix
n
a
ain
m
o
s
ni
,ra
ef
ets
a
T
y
g
r
e
n
E
s
d
o
o
F
te
e
w
s
dlo
c
ra
g
u
s
r
u
o
s
to
h/*
cidic
a
,e
ni
w
,tr
u
g
o
y
s
elk
cip
ytla
s
to
h
,tla
s
elb
at
d
e
e
w
a
e
s
tn
e
g
n
u
p
to
h
,sre
p
p
e
p
to
h
e
ni
w
,s
eillih
c
rettib
dlo
c
n
e
dlo
g
,
m
ula
m
e
e
n
,la
e
s
tn
e
g
nirts
a
g
nitcirts
n
o
c
k
a
o
,
m
ula
k
ra
b
g
n
it
a
v
a
r
g
g
A
g
n
iy
fic
a
P
ra
g
u
s
s
etar
d
y
h
o
b
ra
c
x
elp
m
o
c
tla
s
elb
at
d
e
e
w
a
e
s
sre
p
p
e
p
to
h
)e
n
n
e
y
a
c
,.g.e(
s
e
cip
s
dli
m
)
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
,.g.e(
lo
h
o
cla
tiu
rf
r
u
o
s
,tr
u
g
o
y
srettib
er
u
p
)la
e
s
n
e
dlo
g
,.g.e(
)le
g
e
ola(
srettib
dli
m
stn
e
g
nirts
a
er
u
p
)s
nin
n
at
g
n
o
rts(
stn
e
g
nirts
a
dli
m
)
y
rre
b
p
s
ar
d
er
,.g.e(

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
124
Post-Digestive (Vipáka):
     Tastes may change at the end of the digestive
process. This is due to the digestive agni (fire)
juices in the alimentary tract (metabolism). For
example, foods or liquids, initially sweet, develop
an aftertaste. This taste may be any of the six tastes.
These aftertastes also affect a person’s constitu-
tion.
   [Throughout this text, the following abbrevia-
tions are used: ‘V’ ‘P’ ‘K’ stand for Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha; respectively. ‘-’ stands for reducing a doßha,
and ‘+’ means increasing a doßha]
Sweet VP- K+ (moist) promotes secretion of
Kapha, semen, easy and comfortable gas release,
and helps the discharge of urine and feces. Pro-
duces saliva.
Sour P+ increases the tissues (except the repro-
ductive dhátu, which is reduced). It  produces bile,
acid.
Salty P+ produces saliva
Pungent P+ (in time) causes gas, constipation, pain-
ful urine, reduces semen with difficult discharge.
Bitter PK- V+ produces dryness and gas in the
colon
Astringent PK- V+ constricts, bothers Váyu.
Emotions and Taste
     Each of the six tastes produces or enhances a
certain emotion when eaten. Thus, emotional dis-
orders may be balanced by eating and avoiding
foods, according to the tastes.
Doßhas, Nutrition, and the 6 Tastes
     Váyu is balanced by supplementing with moist
tastes, sweet, sour, and salty (balancing dryness),
and some warm tastes as well. Pitta is balanced by
using sweet (moist), bitter, and astringent (cool-
ing) tastes. This helps counter heat-related illness
(e.g., infection, rash, anger, impatience). Kapha
diseases are removed by using sour and pungent
tastes (i.e., they heat and burn up water). Bitter
tastes also reduce Kapha by causing a drying ac-
tion.
     Sweet: Generally, food is sweet in taste, neu-
tral in energy, and sweet in its post-digestive ef-
fect. It decreases Váyu and Pitta, and increases
Kapha. It nourishes and maintains humors, dhátus,
and malas (wastes).
     Sour: Examples of sour tastes include sour fruit,
tomatoes, and pickled vegetables. All  issues are
nourished by sour tastes, except reproductive tis-
sue (of the sour tastes, only yogurt nourishes all
tissues).
     Salty: Seafood or condiment. In moderation,
salt strengthens all tissues. When used in excess,
it depletes tissues.
     Pungent: Spices and spicy vegetables do not
offer much nutrition, but they stimulate  digestion.
     Bitter: Vegetables offer little nutrition. They are
useful in clearing and cleansing digestive organs,
and in aiding digestion, especially if taken before
meals (for Pitta and Kapha doßhas).
     Astringent: This is mainly a secondary taste.
Astringent foods, like green vegetables or unripe
s
ets
a
T
6
e
vits
e
gi
D
-ts
o
P
ets
a
T
ytla
s
,te
e
w
s
te
e
w
s
s
e
m
o
c
e
b
r
u
o
s
r
u
o
s
s
nia
m
er
,rettib
,tn
e
g
n
u
p
tn
e
g
nirts
a
tn
e
g
n
u
p
s
e
m
o
c
e
b
ets
a
T
s
n
oit
o
m
E
s
e
ss
e
c
x
E
te
e
w
s
eris
e
d
a
h
p
a
K
r
u
o
s
y
v
n
e
atti
P
ytla
s
d
e
er
g
atti
P
/a
h
p
a
K
tn
e
g
n
u
p
re
g
n
a
atti
P
rettib
feir
g
u
y
á
V
tn
e
g
nirts
a
ra
ef
u
y
á
V

125
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
apples, provide minerals but do not build tissues.
     Energy: Most foods are neutral in heating and
cooling effects. To apply hot or cold therapeutics,
appropriate spices and foods are eaten cooked or
raw.
     Heavy/Light: Most foods tend to be heavy,
though many light foods also exist. Spices can
make foods lighter. Oils can make them heavier.
Foods are also dry or moist. Dryness can be in-
creased by eating dry foods or toast, or made more
moist by frying foods or adding liquids.
Special Properties: (Prabháva)
     Herbs also have some subtler, more specific
qualities, beyond their traditional rules and defini-
tions. For example, basil, although a heating herb,
reduces fever. Herbs with similar energies will have
different special properties.
     Certain external actions affect the herb’s
prabháva: mantras, gems, yantras, or just the in-
tention or love imparted by the practitioner alters
the herbs beyond the general classifications. For
example, ámalakí (embellica officinalis) and
barhal (a variety of ficus bengalensis, linn.) both
have same taste, property, energy, and final taste
after digestion. Yet ámalakí alleviates the doßhas
and barhal aggravates the doßhas. Also til (sesame
seeds) and madan (randia dumetorum, lamk.) have
predominant sweet, astringent, and bitter  tastes.
Both are oily and sticky. Yet, madan is an emetic,
sesame is not. Similarly, wearing specific stones
like topaz, ruby, sapphire etc., can heal different
diseases.
Dual Doßhas
     It is simple mathematics. When doßhas are not
in a balanced state, either you must increase the
depleted doßha or decrease the aggravated doßha.
When a person has a dual doßha (e.g., Váyu/Pitta)
they are advised to ingest foods and herbs that in-
crease the third or deficient element (e.g., Kapha).
Simultaneously, one reduces their intake of foods
and herbs that increase the two excessive doßhas
(e.g., Váyu and Pitta).
     Foods affect the surface nutrition, while herbs
aid the subtle nutrition. There also may be instances
when one doßha is greatly in excess, and a second
mildly aggravated. Thus, proper  consideration of
degree of derangement is necessary as well.
Tastes and Organs
     Each of the six tastes also produces effects on
each of the internal organs as well. Again, through
ingesting the proper tastes, the health of the or-
gans may be maintained.
Physiology of the 6 Tastes
     Áyurveda says that each taste, when found in
excess, will adversely affect certain organs in the
body. This is used as a cross-reference to the five-
element view of health and balance, stated earlier.
Taste Organ
     Thus, Áyurveda offers a unique view of the
energetics of taste: six tastes (the initial taste, its
hot or cold energy, and its aftertaste), how tastes
are related to the doßhas, organs, diseases, and
emotions, and their special properties. It is a com-
plete science of the mechanics and energies. Fur-
ther, it reveals a causal relationship between food
and health; how one feels is greatly decided by
what one eats.
ets
a
T
n
a
g
r
O
te
e
w
S
)s
a
erc
n
a
p
(
n
e
elp
s
r
u
o
S
re
vil
ytla
S
s
y
e
n
dik
tn
e
g
n
u
P
s
g
n
ul
retti
B
tra
e
h
tn
e
g
nirts
A
n
olo
c

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
126
     As discussed earlier, Áyurveda aims to remove
the cause of an illness. Rather than ‘curing’ a spe-
cific disease, this science addresses the balance of
the whole individual. Along with external causes
it always considers the two levels of health: body
and mind. In the last chapter, we discussed how
the tastes and energies of foods play a direct role
in creating health or illness, from the Áyurvedic
point of view.
     Life habits (external) measures are also con-
sidered another essential Áyurvedic healing mea-
sure, when lifestyle changes are gradually adapted.
In the original Áyurvedic texts, people are cau-
tioned not to start or stop habits too suddenly. In
the chapter on the seasons, there was a subtle 7-
day transition period between seasons to be noted
and worked with to avoid disease during the shift.
We find similar wisdom in the spiritual texts about
the transition points at sunrise, noon, sunset, and
midnight. It is suggested that these are points of
weakness; the person is better advised to spend
these transitional times in sádhaná (meditation).
     Even for a healing science that suggests veg-
etarianism to those who are healthy, Áyurveda does
not advise giving up meat cold-turkey (no pun in-
tended). Even if a food is bad for one’s constitu-
tion (e.g., one’s favorite vegetables or desserts), or
good for their doßha, gradual stopping and start-
ing of any habits is advised. Gentleness is the key.
Similarly, if one undertakes too radically a detoxi-
fication program, one may experience bodily dis-
comforts from conditions such as diarrhea or ex-
cess toxins. Áyurveda has the unique position of
offering a healing process that does not have to
make one feel bad before feeling better. Healing is
approached in that sense. It will make life better,
simpler, and more natural, enhancing spiritual
growth as well. It may take some months before
the effects of healing are manifested. Making one
or two changes for health, and consistently follow-
ing them, is better than experimenting here and
there without a foundation for growth and heal-
ing. The Áyurvedic motto is, ‘no pain—no pain’.
     Also, people often look for quick, healing,
magic-medicine that allows them to return to their
self-harming (bad habits) ways. In fact, illness is a
sign that life is not being lived in balance. Herbs
are a food supplement and not magic pills that in-
stantly remove discomfort. Some people may be
impatient with this ‘gradual’ lifestyle development,
but it is an enhancement of lifestyle and not a quick
cure that Áyurveda achieves.
     Chronic indigestion also requires slow change.
One week of kicharí (rice and beans may be needed
for those with severe conditions. Again, some
people may be disinclined about making changes,
but the alternatives are not pleasant. Eventually one
finds a comfortable food plan.
     As discussed earlier, food essence rises through
the channel to the brain, so it is crucial that whole-
some foods are taken for their sattwic essence.
Organic is also very good. Sattwic essence brings
the energy of sattwa directly into the mind. This is
discussed, in detail, in another chapter as the final
step before experiencing samádhi  Saibikalpa) .
Dietary Questions
Eat to 1/3 capacity of stomach,
drink 1/3 and leave 1/3 for God.
Aßhþáñga H^idayam
The Áyurvedic determination of eating habits fol-
lows.
Overview
Preparation Eating warm (cooked) foods enliv-
ens the enzymes for easily and quickly digesting
food, promoting Apána Váyu, and removing
Kapha. However, when food is overcooked, its life
force becomes depleted. Further, cooking with too
much heavy oil can weaken the digestive fire. Food
is best eaten when cooked or steamed rather than
uncooked; it is more nutritive and building. Also,
persons on spiritual paths, (i.e., practicing sádhaná
(meditation) and following a guru or spiritual
guide), generally need not follow such drastic raw-
food measures. Eating raw food causes roughness
among persons on the spiritual path. It is true that
raw foods have enzymes to remove toxins, but they
do not adequately build the tissues. Fruit is better

127
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
fresh and uncooked. Microwaves damage the life-
force. Restaurant food is generally over- or under-
spiced, and not as good as a home-cooked meal.
Cooking over a wood fire is best. Cooking on a
gas stove is better than cooking on an electric stove.
Quality Sattwic: organic, fresh, homegrown, fresh-
picked, and raw dairy foods are advised. It is not
advisable to eat foods that are rotten, under or over
cooked, burnt, unripe, over ripe, stale, or junk food.
Other harmful foods include those that are canned,
artificial, rancid, and prepared with additives, pre-
servatives, or artificial colors. Finally, frozen foods
that contain steroids and chemicals (milk and ani-
mal products usually have steroids, chemicals, and
preservatives in them) should not be eaten.
Quantity A proper quantity of food is easily di-
gested, promotes longevity without afflicting the
doßhas, and helps Apána Váyu. Food, when eaten,
should fill one-third of the stomach size or capac-
ity. Liquid, when taken after meals, also should
fill one-third the stomach size. The time to drink
liquids at mealtime varies with the individual.
Heavy or obese persons should drink before meals.
Underweight or thin persons should drink liquids
after meals, and persons of normal weight should
drink with their meals. The remaining one-third of
space in the stomach helps digestion. The key is
moderation and regularity. Váyu doßhas need to
eat every 3 - 4 hours. Pitta persons generally have
good digestive fire. Kapha constitutions need to
eat less. Ultimately, the stronger the digestive fire,
the more one can eat. (Less food is better with a
fever.
When Hungry Eat only after the previous meal
has been digested. Otherwise, the digestive prod-
uct of the previous meal becomes mixed with the
new food, instantly aggravating all the doßhas. The
digestive fire/enzymes have to act upon the food
for some time in order to digest the food. Then,
the body needs time to restore the digestive fire/
enzymes for the future. If a person takes food be-
fore digesting the previous meal completely, the
food will not digest properly. The undigested food
is pushed along the GI tract by normal peristalsis,
imbalancing and aggravating the doähas.
Combinations Combining vegetables with fruit or
milk can cause digestive problems. One needs to
be careful while eating or choosing food. Differ-
ent combinations may be harmful. Its not advised
to combine sour tastes with milk, eat cold items
after ghee, eat equal amounts of ghee and honey,
or eat fish products along with dairy (these un-
healthy combinations create subtle toxins). Other
aggravating foods are too hot and too cold, or too
light and too heavy. Stew and curry are more di-
gestible than individual vegetables cooked and
eaten separately.
     Váyu— the fewer combinations the better (they
like combining foods, though it is not good for
them).
     Pitta— does best with combinations
     Kapha— is between Váyu and Pitta.
Spices Delicious tastes improve digestion, strength,
senses, complexion, and a healthy weight. They
are easily digested and help Apána Váyu. The use
of spices stimulates the secretions of digestive en-
zymes. Over-salted, under-salted, or sour season-
ing is to be avoided. Foods that are too tasty in-
crease rajas (aggravating the blood). Foods that
are too bland cause tamas (suppressing agni).
     Váyu—does well with rich and moderately
strong spices.
     Pitta—needs only mild spices.
     Kapha—does best with light, strongly spiced
foods.
Frame of Mind A relaxed, calm mind promotes
easy assimilation of food. This makes the mind
more sattwic. A nervous, anxious, angry, noisy, and
rushed mind makes the food harder to digest.
Smoky environments are also harmful when eat-
ing.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
128
     Silence is good, but there is no need to be too
serious. A prayer of gratitude to the Creator and
Supplier before a meal, or offering the food to ben-
efit humanity and the creation of beings is advised.
Chew food properly to digest and absorb nutrients.
Time daylight hours are the best hours to eat.
Váyu—dawn and dusk (smaller, more frequent
meals—eat every 3 to 4 hours) Pitta—at noon, larg-
est meal (three meals daily) Kapha—daylight
hours, breakfast is skipped make lunch the large
meal After meals, it is good to take a short, easy
walk. Some say napping while lying on your left
side helps digest foods This causes breathing
through the right nostril or “solar” breathing, which
increases the digestive heat or fire in the system.
Other authorities say napping after meals is un-
wholesome. Activities such as exercise, swimming,
or sex are not recommended just before or after
meals. Smoking disperses and dulls the agni (di-
gestive) fire.
Season and Geography Eat foods and herbs ac-
cording to season (i.e., do not eat cold and dry items
in the winter, or hot and pungent items in the sum-
mer). Eat foods and herbs according to geography
(do not eat hot and dry items in a hot dry desert, or
cold and oily items in cold and damp climates).
Miscellaneous Do not ingest equal amounts of
ghee and honey simultaneously (it becomes a
subtle toxin). Do not break with eating habits (e.g.,
someone who generally eats cold and sweet things
should not suddenly start eating hot and pungent
items). Herbs, diet, and lifestyle are recommended
to balance the doßha, but also should be in har-
mony with one’s own habits. Intake of substances
that aggravate the doßha and state of one’s strength
is ill advised. Eat after clearing the bowel and uri-
nary bladder, and only when hungry.
Drinking (except lassi buttermilk [yogurt and
water], and medicated herbal wine to stimulate
digestion) is not recommended during the meal,
but is all right afterwards.  Drinking alcohol after
meals causes hyperacidity unless it is medicated
herbal wines for Váyu and Kapha. Astringent or
herbal teas are all right after meals, but coffee pro-
motes indigestion, hyperacidity, or ulcers.
Desserts (especially cold) are heavy and sweet,
and suppress digestive fire, causing fermentation
and indigestion. They are better before meals, as
sweets are the first taste to be digested. Having
raw foods and salads at the end of the meal is bet-
ter for digestion. Other authorities say a little sweet
after meals promotes digestion.
Age/Gender these characteristics may bring ex-
cess to one’s doäha. Therefore, reduction of doßhas
may need to be considered at different ages, and
for different genders.
Kapha reduction is predominantly used from birth
to age 15, and for women. Pitta reduction is pri-
marily from age 15 to 55 years old, and for men.
Váyu reduction occurs at age 55 and over.
Áma: For 1 or 2 weeks, spices and a light and
cleansing diet are followed. Spices are given to
digest the undigested food or áma and cleanse the
entire body. Sugars, oils, meat, and dairy are
avoided. Then, one returns to their doßha diet, stay-
ing on the light side until áma is completely gone.
Different books offer varying doßha food lists.
Ultimately, persons will have to decide whether
any specific food is good or aggravating their
doäha.
Vegetarianism: Proteins, Vitamins, and Miner-
als
     Each year more and more people decide to be-
come vegetarians. Yet the major question asked at
our center is how one gets enough protein, vita-
mins, and minerals in their diet.
     It is true that active people who follow a veg-
etarian diet need sufficient amounts of these nutri-

129
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
ents. Proteins are best derived from milk, yogurt,
and high-protein content beans like garbanzos
(channa dal) and tur dal (both found in Indian gro-
ceries). They can be mixed with múngdal, which
also has high protein content, but not as much as
the other two beans. Boiled milk can be taken once
or twice a day. Yogurt/ water (lassi) can be taken
once or twice a day between 10 a.m. and sunset.
Beans can be mixed together and eaten for lunch
and dinner.
     For an ample supply of vitamins and minerals,
a mixture of green leafy vegetables, root veg-
etables, and colored vegetables (e.g., eggplant,
yellow squash) need to be eaten daily. The amount
of vegetables must be increased as well.
     When all the beans and vegetables (each ben-
eficial for various doßhas) are eaten together in one
meal, their properties balance, without aggravate
any one doßha. However, when a doßha is severely
unbalanced, certain foods may be required in
smaller quantities—or not at all—until balance is
restored.
Foods When no Sanskrit name exists and a Hindi
name is available, it will be marked with an ‘H’. V,
P, and K stand for Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha respec-
tively. Various books offer differing energetics for
certain foods. In fact, the same food grown in dif-
ferent locations may develop different energetics.
It is up to the individual to determine how each
food affects them.
Fruit
Taste: Sweet and sour (sometimes astringent)
Energy: Cold
Post-Digestive: Sweet VP- K+ (mildly): Balances
the three humors. The most sattwic food
Actions: Relieves thirst, refrigerant, alterative, laxa-
tive, mildly cleanses and nurtures, áma only in
excess
Elements: Water, ether (more than any other food
group)
Tissues: Builds plasma (rasa), cleanses blood, re-
duces other tissues in excess, lightness and purity
in body
Precautions: Its ether and cooling effects can cause
spacey, ungrounded symptoms. It can
overly diffuse our aura, becoming too sensitive and
physically vulnerable (as when living in cities or
having stressful lifestyles). Excess can aggravate
Váyu air and Kapha mucus, edema, fatigue
Guòas: Fruit is the most sattwic of all foods, pro-
moting lightness, clarity, harmony, content, intel-
ligence, and sádhaná (though it does not stimu-
late us to do mental work)
Preparation: Dry: K- V+
Fruit Juices: P- (sweet) KV+
Cooked: VK- P+
Sour Fruit with Salt: V- PK+
Sour Fruit with Sugar: P ok
Sweet fruits: VP- K+
Sour fruits: VK- P+
Bitter fruits: PK- V+
Combinations: It is best not to combine certain
foods. Sour fruits (lemons, grapefruit), pineapples,
papaya, cranberries, may be taken with meals.
Grains can be eaten with fruit, especially rice.
Bananas are ok with milk
Time: Sweet- afternoon
Kapha—fruit is not eaten in the morning, a Kapha
increasing time
Season: Fruit eaten in season and ripened natu-
rally is best. It is too cold for a sole diet, especially
in winter
Antidote: Warm sweet spices, ginger, cardamom,
cloves, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Cooking fruit also
helps.
Fruit List
     (The taste/energy/post-digestive effects will be
listed in this fashion.). Where available, Sanskrit
names will be provided for each food.
Apples
Energetics: Sweet, astringent, sometimes sour/
cold/sweet. PK- V+ (in excess, cooked  with cin-
namon is neutral =)
Action: Astringent, alterative, refrigerant
Indications: Diarrhea, intestinal bleeding or ulcers
(pectin binds the stool and promotes healing of
damaged membranes), bleeding gums, gall blad-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
130
der, inflammations, blood cholesterol, detoxifies,
chronic enteritis, Pitta and Kapha arthritis, herpes,
viruses, acid stomach, fiber, chelates metals, pro-
tects from x-ray radiation, blood pressure; baked
apples or sour apples are better for Váyu. Apple
juice is good for gastritis, colitis, and burning in-
fections. Apple skin is high in calcium.
Apricots
Energetics: Sweet, sour/hot/sweet VK- P+ mildly
and in excess
Action: Relieves thirst, anti-cough
Indications: Fever, constipation, cancer, skin,
muscle, and nerve disorders, fiber.
Bananas
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sour V- K+ P+
in excess or ulcers. (Unripe: astringent PK-, V+)
Action: Astringent, refrigerant, laxative, nutritive,
tonic, heavy, strengthening, aphrodisiac
Indications: Unripe—diarrhea, dysentery, cough,
lung bleeding, infants and young children, nerves,
alcoholism, Váyu hypertension, heart disorders,
protects against strokes, diarrhea, hemorrhoids,
high in potassium, vitamin C, and carbohydrates.
When taken with ghee and cardamom, bananas
alleviate hypoglycemia, constipation, and muscle
cramps; also build muscle and fat; and nerve and
reproductive tissues.
Precautions: Not used for Pitta with ulcers, hard
to digest, do not drink liquids for one hour after
eating a banana. They are not be eaten with milk
or yogurt, or eaten when suffering from fever,
edema, vomiting, or cough with mucus.
Cherries
Energetics: Sweet, sour, astringent/hot/ sweet V-
K+ in excess P+ sour ones VK- P+
Action: Alterative (blood cleansing)
Indications: Mental fatigue, insomnia, stress, heart
tonic, blood and plasma building, gout, lumbago,
motion sickness, poor vision, rheumatism, paraly-
sis, arthritis, stunted growth, obesity, (Black cher-
ries (Bipem kanta) better for plasma, tooth decay
or loose teeth, diarrhea, glands, detoxifies, gall
bladder and liver disorders), juice is stronger. For
PMS and menstrual flow, eat 10 cherries on an
empty stomach for seven days before menstrua-
tion begins.
Cranberries
Energetics: Astringent, sour/hot/pungent. KVK+
Action: Diuretic, alterative, hemostatic
Indications: Excellent for kidney, urethra, and blad-
der disorders, asthma, intestinal antiseptic, high in
vitamin C. Pitta conditions, burning urine, urinary
tract stones and infections, skin rashes, toxic blood,
edema, weight reduction (avoid store-bought juices
with sugar).
Dates (Kharjúra)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ in excess.
V+ if dry
Action: Nutritive, tonic, aphrodisiac, one of the best
fruit strengtheners, demulcent, laxative, refriger-
ant, febrifuge, expectorant
Indications: Tonic with almonds, restorative with
milk or kefir, for weak children, lung disease, con-
valescence, febrile disease, asthma, increase se-
men, strengthens reproductive systems (may be
added to herbal formulas as tonic). Good for wast-
ing diseases and injuries. Date sugar is a good
source of iron. Good for cough, gonorrhea. Plan-
tain, Dates, Coconut: Sweet-cold-sweet. VP- K+.
relieves burning, lungs, TB, bleeding; increases
reproductive fluid, hard to digest.
Figs (Anjíra)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK+
Dry V+
Action: Nutritive, demulcent, laxative, antibacte-
rial, aperient, emollient
Indications: Urinary tract and gall bladder stones,
liver, kidneys, chronic cough, increase weight,
destroys roundworms, hemorrhoids, cancer, diges-
tive disorders, high in fiber. Figs are a good source
of iron and an excellent blood builder. Taken in
the morning with a pinch of pippalí, help asthma.
Chewing figs strengthens teeth, tongue, and gums.
Research indicates figs shrink cancerous tumors.

131
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
More calcium than milk, more potassium than ba-
nanas.
Grapes (Drakäha, M^idvíká)
Energetics: Green: sour/hot/pungent V- PK+
Purple, red or black: Sweet/cold/sweet V- PK+
Action: Refrigerant, thirst relieving, nutritive, de-
mulcent, diuretic, and hemostatic, laxative, aph-
rodisiac
Indications: They are said to be the best of the
fruits; and provide immediate relief from thirst,
burning, fever, difficult or painful breathing, bleed-
ing, consumption, wasting, Váyu and Pitta feces
retention, hoarseness, alcoholism, dry mouth, and
cough. They help the eyes, blood (rich in iron),
and elimination of urine and feces; lungs, TB. They
help anemia, heart disease, and palpitations, diffi-
cult or burning urine, thrush in children, colds,
jaundice, chronic bronchitis, Bright’s disease, gout,
edema, cancer, detoxification  biliousness, acid-
ity, liver stimulant, energy, skin disorders, consti-
pation, prevents gum disease and tooth decay; and
cleanse all tissues and glands. Black grapes build
blood. The juice is used for fevers. Raisins taken
with herbs are a blood tonic; for debility, sweeten
and harmonize stomach; less likely to aggravate
Kapha; contains many vitamins and minerals. Eat-
ing a handful of raisins daily helps with enlarged
liver and spleen. Drinking soaked raisin water and
the raisins each morning improves digestion. Re-
search indicates grapes and raisins may prevent
cancer.
Grapefruit
Energetics: Sour/hot/sour V- P+ K liquefy/ dis-
charge or +
Action: Stimulant, expectorant, astringent
Indications: Discharges phlegm when taken in the
morning, digests sugars and fats, weight reduction,
stimulates liver and pancreas, cardiovascular heal-
ing, protects the arteries, cancer preventive, cho-
lesterol, high in vitamin C and potassium. Seeds
heal candida and are an antibiotic.
Guava (Perala; Amruta-phalam; Anjíra)
Energetics: Sweet/cold or hot
Indications: Excessive digestion and metabolism,
anorexia, gout. As a jelly it is a heart tonic and
anticonstipative. Soaked in water—relieves thirst
due to diabetes. Unripe—diarrhea.
Precaution: When the fruit is raw, the rind and the
pulp should be eaten together to prevent constipa-
tion. Guava is heavy and hard to digest.
Lemon (Limpaka)
Energetics: Sour, astringent/hot/sour V- P+ excess
K- fat K+ plasma
Action: Laxative, refrigerant, relieves thirst, expec-
torant, astringent, digestive stimulant (juice) sto-
machic, peel-digestive stimulant
Indications: Summer heat, sunstroke ( especially
with salt), fevers, hot-dry skin; thirst, stops bleed-
ing of lungs, kidney, uterus, and GI tract; inflam-
mation, colds, flu, sore throat, bronchitis, asthma,
digestive disorders, diabetes, scurvy, fevers, rheu-
matism, arthritis, gout, neuralgia; juice—heartburn,
sore throat gargle, swollen or bleeding gums;
cleanses the blood stream; with honey—rids
phlegm discharge and fat reduction; stimulates bile
flow; dissolves gall stones; peel—regulates liver,
spleen, and pancreas; digests sugars and sweets. It
will detoxify balanced Pitta doßhas. Lemon juice
and honey relieve nausea, vomiting, indigestion,
and mucus. Juice with baking soda and water re-
lieves gas and indigestion. Juice with cilantro juice
in water relieves kidney stones and urinary gravel.
External use—insect bites, nerve pain, disinfec-
tant.
Precautions: Do not take with milk, mangos, to-
matoes, or when suffering from a peptic ulcer
Lime (Karkatika)
Energetics: Sour, slightly bitter/cold/sweet VP+ in
excess—K+, fat, plasma
Action: Juice—digestive stimulant. Peel—stimu-
lant, stomachic, expectorant
Indications: Counters the effects of alcohol, pal-
pitations, malaria fevers, throat gargle, a glass of
hot water and 1 teaspoon each of lime and honey,
in the morning, relieves obesity and cholesterol.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
132
Peel—increases energy to liver; with salt—sun-
stroke or summer heat.
Mango (Ámra)
Energetics: Yellow-ripe Mangos: Sweet/hot/sweet
VP- K+. Green-unripe mangos: sour, astringent/
cold/pungent VK- P+ (except when prepared as
chutney)
Action: Demulcent, diuretic, astringent, refriger-
ant, skin-astringent
Indications: Nervous or weak digestion, constipa-
tion, vitality, strength, semen, skin, atonic indiges-
tion. Bark infusions, or skin—diarrhea, dysentery,
hemorrhoids, high in vitamin C. It is good for preg-
nancy and improves lactation. Drinking warm milk
with ghee one hour after eating a ripe mango im-
proves energy and vitality. Unripe or sour aids di-
gestion. Pulp—diabetes, blood pressure. Pickled—
for colds; seed powder —vaginal discharge; high
in vitamin C. As chutney, they are eaten with meals,
improving digestion and enhancing the food’s fla-
vor.
Melons
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet P- K+ V+ (in excess)
Action: Refrigerant, febrifuge, diuretic, aphrodi-
siac
Indications: Watermelon (Chayapula)—summer
heat, sunstroke, fevers, thirst, vexation, irritabil-
ity, burning urine (taken with a pinch of corian-
der), or burning sensations; blood purifier, cleans
tissues; bleeding gums, canker sores in the mouth;
high in vitamin A and C, (with seeds V=); antisep-
tic for typhoid fever. With cumin and cane sugar
the juice helps urinary conditions, intestinal ca-
tarrh, and congested liver; Cantaloupe—milder, is
better for Váyu. For acne and rashes, and to pro-
mote soft skin—rub melon rind on skin before bed.
Watermelon binds the stool and flushes the kid-
neys, but only eat them 3 hours after meals.
Contraindications: Eat alone. Watermelon—do not
eat at night or when cloudy (this causes edema or
abdominal pain). Eating them in excess causes res-
piratory problems. Not eaten with glaucoma
Oranges (Swadu-naringa)
Energetics: Sweet or sour/hot/sweet
or pungent V- K+ P+ excess or sour
variety. Sweet is the best variety
Action: Stimulant, expectorant, appetizer, refrig-
erant, relieves thirst; peel—stimulant, carminative
Indications: Counters cough, diabetes, bronchitis,
liver, heart disorders, vomiting, harmonizes stom-
ach; high in vitamin C and A. A glass of fresh or-
ange juice with a pinch of rock salt restores en-
ergy after exercising (Pitta doßhas add 10 lemon
drops). A blood purifier, with meals for bile and
scurvy; For babies—equal parts with water every
3 hours with mother’s milk for stomach disorders.
For children with anemia or nervous debility, mix
grape and orange juice.
Precautions: Avoid with joint pain or bladder dis-
orders
Papaya (Papita - H)
Energetics: Sweet, sour/hot/sweet V- PK+ P+ in
excess
Action: Digestive aid, toning, demulcent, stimu-
lant, laxative
Indications: Convalescence, digestive disorders,
pancreas, regulates sugar metabolism,  cough,
worms, asthma, back pain, colon disorders, liver
and spleen disorders; chronic illness, seeds—em-
menagogue, for abortion; unripe juice—
antiparasitical, blood thinner, prevents heart attack.
Externally—the inner skin of the fruit is rubbed
on one’s skin for eczema and dermatitis.
Peaches (Aru - H)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent, or sour/hot/sweet or
pungent V- PK+ (V+ sometimes. One peach daily
K-)
Action: Demulcent, laxative, refrigerant
Indications: Fever, cough, seeds—anti-cough/laxa-
tive, menstruation, colon worms, heal damaged tis-
sues; leaves—allay nausea, vomiting; high in vi-
tamin A, potassium, fiber; cancer, heart disease,
Nectarines are safer for Pitta.
Contraindications: Skin aggravates in excess or
acute Pitta conditions (i.e., rash)

133
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Pears (Arúk)
Energetics: Sweet or astringent/cold/
sweet or pungent PK- V+_(unless
baked) K+ (sweet)
Action: Nutritive, demulcent, laxative, tonic, feb-
rifuge, anti-cough
Indications: Lung tonic, diabetes, diarrhea, con-
valescence from lung disease (with cardamom,
cloves, ginger, cinnamon); fevers, poor appetite,
biliousness, hyperacidity, chronic gall bladder dis-
orders, excessive thirst, gout, stomach disorders,
laxative (eaten on an empty stomach), enlarged
liver, gonorrhea, hemorrhoids.
Precautions: Do not eat with arthritis, diabetes, dry
cough or sciatica.
Pineapple (Ananas-H)
Energetics: Sweet or sour/cold or hot/
sweet or pungent V- KP+ (sour or unripe)
sweet in moderation
Action: Diuretic, refrigerant, laxative, digestive
stimulant, anti-scurvy, diaphoretic
Indications: Cleanses the liver, biliousness, acid-
ity, jaundice, counters the effects of alcohol. Juice
relieves constipation and gastric irritability in fe-
vers. To reduce cigarette smoking and nicotine tox-
icity, chew small pieces of the fruit with half a tea-
spoon of raw honey. It digests albuminous (pro-
tein) substances. Contains high amounts of easily
assimilated manganese (which may prevent os-
teoporosis).
Precautions: Juice will aggravate Pitta. Not given
to children under 7 years old. Not eaten  on an
empty stomach in the morning. Not taken within
two hours of ingesting dairy products. Unripe pine-
apples may cause abortion
Plums
Energetics: Sweet, sour, astringent/hot/sweet VP-
K+ P+ sour European—sweet, Japan sweet/sour
Chinese black plum (Umeboshi)—sour
(antiparasitical, anti-cough, digestion)
Action: Refrigerant, relieves thirst, alterative, laxa-
tive
Indications: Fever, dry cough.
Pomegranate (Dáæima)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent, sour/hot, cold /
sweet, pungent PK- V+ (sweet); (P+ sour)
Action: Astringent, alterative, hemostatic, rind
antiparasitical
Indications: The sour, astringent, sweet variety is
the best. Builds red blood cells (juice), cleanses
bile, blood, bilious indigestion, gall stones, hypera-
cidity, fever, intermittent or malarial fever; diar-
rhea, dysentery, excessive perspiration, gargle for
sore throats; leukorrhea, tapeworm. They are good
for the heart, mind, anemia, and as a digestive aid.
Pomegranate binds the bowels, cardiac tonic,
hoarseness.
Raspberries/Blackberries/Blueberries
Energetics: Sweet, sour, astringent (unripe)/cold/
pungent PK- V+
Action: Refrigerant, relieves thirst, astringent; un-
ripe—astringent, leaf—astringent, hemostatic,
Blueberries—alterative refrigerant, astringent (un-
related botanical family)
Indications: Unripe—excess urination, nocturnal
emission, improves sexual vitality, liver
tonic, diarrhea, Blackberries (Jambul or
Rajaphala)—build blood, are good for dysentery
and diarrhea; goiter, cholera, hemorrhoids, and
insect bites/stings. The bark is used externally on
inflammations. The seed powder is useful in dia-
betes, reducing sugar in the urine and excessive
thirst. Raspberry leaf—miscarriage, morning sick-
ness (nausea). For bleeding gums or excess men-
struation, 10 to 20 raspberries are eaten on an
empty stomach 2 to 3 times daily.  Fruit is useful
for obesity, gout, arthritis, diabetes, constipation,
hypertension, kidney stones, and relieving the de-
livery pains of childbirth. Blueberries—regulate
sugar metabolism and reduce fevers, diarrhea and
dysentery; help bladder/urinary tract disorders,
contain tannic acid (destroys viruses).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
134
Precautions: Eating more than two handfuls of
raspberries at a time may cause vomiting. Taken
with dairy products, they can cause hemorrhoids,
skin diseases, and ulcers
Strawberries
Energetics: Sweet, sour, astringent (cold or hot/
sweet or pungent VP- K (+in excess)
Action: Refrigerant, relieve thirst, alterative, leaf
mild astringent, antacid as tea
Indications: Similar to raspberries; protects against
viruses, cancer, DNA damage, herpes
simplex, and skin disorders; high in vitamin C, fi-
ber, potassium, antioxidant. Ten berries daily may
help anemia and pulmonary TB. Useful for obe-
sity, gout, arthritis, diabetes, constipation, hyper-
tension, and kidney stones.
Contraindications: Their skin may aggravate Pitta.
Eating too many can cause coughing and vomit-
ing. They are eaten alone
Tangerine/Mandarin Orange
Energetics: Sweet, sour/cold/sweet (more sour than
oranges) VP- K+ P+ excess
Action: Refrigerant, relieve thirst, expectorant,
stimulant
Indications: Peels—warm, aids appetite, settles
stomach, vomiting, cough, discharge phlegm—
especially mandarin peel
Contraindications: Aggravates acute Pitta condi-
tions
Vegetables
Energetics: Pleasant/even/sweet
Actions: Generally sattwic (but less so than fruit)
Indications:
Root— heavier, nutritive, V- K+P= carrots, pota-
toes, sweet potatoes, artichokes, cauliflower (V+).
Leafy Greens—(including cabbage family) lighter
PK- V+ blood-cleansing, vitamins, minerals, not
nutritive.
Pungents—onions, chilies VK- P+ rajasic.
Nightshades—tomatoes, potatoes, VP- may cause
allergies, though if cooked they cause
fewer problems.
Diuretics—K- Carrots, celery, lettuce, mustard
greens, watercress, broccoli, potatoes.
Preparation:
Váyu—cooked or steamed, oils and spices, salt and
pickled (rajasic)
Pitta—raw or lightly steamed, vegetable juices,
Kapha—cooked or steamed. Fresh, organic, home
or locally grown is sattwic
Canned food is tamasic, aggravating all humors.
Combining: Combines well with other foods for
one’s constitution. Does not combine well with
fruit or sugars
Season: It is best to eat vegetables according to
season (taking into account one’s constitutional
requirements)
Spring, Summer—greens, leafy, raw
Fall, Winter—roots, cooked
Antidote—cold and raw—ginger, oil, vinegar
(rajasic), garlic and onions (rajasic/tamasic)
Dry and light—(i.e., cabbage family) oil, butter,
sour cream, cheese, whole grains, pasta
Alfalfa Sprouts (Lasunghas - H)
Energetics: Astringent, sweet/cold/pungent PKV+
decrease agni
Actions: Alterative, astringent, diuretic
Indications: Cleanse blood and lymph, reduce fat
and tumors, acne, boils, skin cancer, arthritis, gout,
obesity, edema, vitamins, and minerals.
Artichoke (Globe) (Kunjor, Hatichuk - H)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet PK- V+
(butter or lemon is better for Váyu)
Actions: Alteratives, hemostatics, diuretics
Indications: Cleanses liver, excess menstruation;
high in calcium, phosphorus, iron, vitamin C, and
niacin.
—Jerusalem Artichoke (Hastipijú)
Energetics: Astringent, bitter/cold/pungent PKV+
Actions: Tonic, rejuvenative
Indications: Rebuilds reproductive tissue, impo-
tence, infertility, sexual debility, vigor, vitality,
ojas, emaciation, convalescence.

135
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Asparagus (Marchuba - H)
Energetics: Sweet, bitter, astringent/cold/sweet
VPK=
Actions: Diuretic, alterative, mild laxative, demul-
cent, tonic, aphrodisiac, sedative
Indications: High Pitta, bleeding disorders or in-
fections of urinary or reproductive systems (includ-
ing venereal disease like herpes and for urinary
stones), fever, edema (and cardiac edema), gout,
arthritis. Drinking boiled asparagus water helps
rheumatism.
Avocado
Energetics: Astringent/cold/sweet VP- K+ best
taken with spices
Actions: Tonic, nutritive, demulcent, emollient
Indications: Nourishes liver, lungs, skin, builds
muscle and blood, emaciation, convalescence, hy-
poglycemia reduces the risk of heart attacks; high
in protein, contains vitamins A, D, E; high in min-
erals, especially copper and iron; rich in phospho-
rus, magnesium, calcium, sodium, and manganese;
more potassium than bananas.
Beans/Greens
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet PK- V+
excess
Actions: Alterative, diuretic, astringent
Indications: Cleanses blood and liver, gout, nor-
malize liver and pancreas; rheumatism, contain
vitamins A, B-complex, C, chlorophyll, carbohy-
drates, calcium, phosphorous, copper, cobalt, trace
source of inositol.
Bean (Mung) Sprouts
Energetics: Astringent, sweet/cold/sweet PKV+
excess
Actions: Alterative, antacid, febrifuge
Indications: Counter toxins, cleanses liver and bile;
alcoholism, hyperacidity.
Beets (Chukander - H)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ excess
Actions: Alterative, demulcent, laxative, tonic
Indications: Build blood, promote menstruation;
juice more medicinal (and aggravate PK). Beet
greens have same effects as spinach; lymph func-
tioning, gall bladder, and liver; digestive disorders,
anemia (build red blood cells).
Bell Pepper (Deshomaricha - H)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PKV+
Actions: Alterative, refrigerant
Bitter Melon (Karela)
Energetics: Bitter/cold/pungent PK- V+
Actions: Antipyretic, alterative, antacid,
antiparasitical
Indications: Excellent for diabetes; kidney stones,
intestinal worms, parasites, cleanses liver, bile,
blood, reduces weight, tumors, fever, diarrhea,
anemia, summer use, high in vitamin C.
Cabbage Family
Energetics: Astringent, sweet/cold/pungent PKV+
rajasic
Actions: Alterative, may prevent colon cancer
Broccoli—astringent/cold/pungent PKV+ —alter-
ative, blood cleanser, lowers the risk of cancer of
the esophagus, larynx, lung, prostate, mouth, co-
lon, pharynx, cervix, and stomach, tumor.
Brussels Sprouts (Kobi - H)—astringent/hot/ pun-
gent PK- V+—inhibits cancer of the G.I. tract, liver,
stomach, and colon; liver tumors, promotes pan-
creatic insulin; rich in vitamins A, C, riboflavin,
iron, potassium, fiber; depresses thyroid function.
Cabbage (Kobi - H) and Chinese Cabbage
— astringent/cold/pungent PK- V+—gas forming,
Chinese variety is easier to digest.
Heals ulcers, eczema, infections, heartburn, anti-
bacterial, antiviral, prevents cancer, scurvy, eye
diseases, gout, rheumatism, pyorrhea, asthma, TB,
gangrene; blood purifier, rashes, high in calcium,
vitamin C and A, sulfur. White cabbage juice re-
moves warts.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
136
Cauliflower (Phulkobí - H)—
astringent/cold/ pungent PK-
V+—more sweet and sattwic
than the others, demulcent, nu-
tritive, combines well with dairy;
reduces the risk of cancer (especially rectum, co-
lon and stomach). It is better for diabetics than
cabbage. Kale—blood cleanser, one of the best
cancer fighting vegetables (lung, stomach, esoph-
ageal, colon, mouth, throat, G.I., breast, bowel,
bladder, prostate); rich in vitamin A, C, riboflavin,
niacin, calcium, magnesium, iron, sulfur, sodium,
potassium, phosphorus, and chlorophyll; calcium
is easily assimilated.
Carrots (£hikha-mulam)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet or pungent
VK- P+ excess; juice V+ due to its cold nature,
sweet nature makes it hard to digest
Actions: Digestive, laxative, diuretic, appetite
stimulant, alterative, antiseptic; seeds—stimulant,
antispasmodic, emmenagogue
Indications: Increase blood flow, build blood,
brighten eyes, rickets, colitis, gout, constipation,
worms (eaten raw), arthritis, skin disorders, edema,
jaundice, chronic hepatitis, antioxidant, heal skin
and tissues; heart disease, reduce the risk of lung
cancer; diarrhea, healthy teeth, colon disorders,
dehydration, complexion. One cup of juice with 2
teaspoons of cilantro juice, taken twice daily on
an empty stomach, relieves hemorrhoids.
For chronic indigestion, a glass of juice is taken
with a pinch of ginger powder. One half
cup of juice mixed with one half cup aloe vera juice,
and taken twice daily, helps reduce cancer. Exter-
nally—poultice for malodorous, ulcerative sores.
Contraindications: May cause colic in babies.
Celery (Ajmoda)
Energetics: Astringent, sweet, salty/cold/pungent
PK- V+ (needed minerals for all three humors)
Actions: Astringent, diuretic, nervine; seeds and
roots—diuretic, seeds are hot, stimulant, carmina-
tive, emmenagogue, antispasmodic, (similar to
ajwan—wild celery seeds)
Indications: Cleanses mind, emotions, perception,
increases ether to promote meditation
(Closely related to gotu kola/bráhmí in this effect);
dizziness, headache, eliminates carbon dioxide,
Pitta and Kapha arthritis; adrenal disorders, weight
loss, blood cleanser, urogenital infections, pro-
motes digestion, kidney and liver disorders; regu-
lates the nervous system, water retention, diabe-
tes, cancer; lowers blood pressure; seeds and
roots—dissolve stones, arthritis, gout.
Chilies—Hot Peppers (Jhal - H)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P++
Agni++ (rajasic)
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, digestive, decon-
gestant
Indications: Burns áma, appetite, indigestion, para-
sites, lungs (asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, tra-
cheal and bronchial cell swelling), blood clots,
pain.
Cilantro (Coriander leaf) (Dhyanyaka,
Kustumbari)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK=
(balanced) V+ excess
Actions: Stimulant, diuretic, diaphoretic, febrifuge
Indications: Skin allergies, hay fever, builds the
digestive fire, sore throat, hyperacidity, nausea,
fever, colds, thirst, cleanses blood, bile and uri-
nary tract infections; juice—burning urine; anti-
dote to hot and sour foods (i.e., salsa, chilies, cur-
ries, yogurt). Externally—pulp placed on eyelids
relieves conjunctivitis; juice—skin diseases
Corn (sweet) (Yavanala)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet or pungent
K- VP+ excess
Actions: Balanced, corn silk- diuretic
Indications: Strengthening, corn silk—jaundice,
hepatitis, gall and kidney stones; urinary tract in-

137
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
fections, edema, brain and nervous system tonic;
helps gain weight; bone and muscle builder; vita-
mins A, B, C, potassium, phosphorus, iron, zinc,
potassium, magnesium, fiber.
Precautions: Avoid with digestive disorders or
obesity
Cucumber (Sakusa, Kíra)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK+
Actions: Refrigerant, diuretic; seeds—better diuret-
ics, febrifuges
Indications: Eaten as a raw dessert mixed with
lemon juice, pepper, and salt, enables the body to
absorb the maximum amount of the cucumber’s
juice and vitamins. Summer food, thirst relieving,
urinary tract infections—difficult or scanty urine,
spleen and stomach disorders, acne, blood puri-
fier; seeds—dispels phlegm and heat from the
lungs. Antidote to heavy, sticky yogurt properties.
Seeds are cooling, diuretic, and highly nourishing.
     There is a poem in India about Kíra;
Kíra shuba me híra
Kíra dopaher me jíra
Kíra sham me píra
Cucumber in the morning is diamond
Cucumber in the afternoon is cumin (digestive)
Cucumber in the evening is pain
Eggplant (Vartáka)—listed as a fruit in Charak
Energetics: Pungent, astringent, bitter/hot/pungent
VK- P+ [Only the tender variety] (V antidote with
spices)
Actions: Nutritive, demulcent, anticarcinogenic,
anticonvulsant
Indications: Long size increase Váyu and Kapha.
Food value, convalescence from febrile diseases;
heart tonic, appetite stimulant, mild laxative and
diuretic; dull vision, diabetes, cholesterol, arterio-
sclerosis, immune boosting, convulsions, epilepsy.
Contraindications: Nightshade may aggravate al-
lergies, Pitta, and arthritis
Garlic
See Chapter 4—Herbal materia medica.
Lettuce (Kahu, Salad - H)
Energetics: Pleasant, astringent/cold/sweet or pun-
gent PK- V+
Actions: Alterative, astringent, diuretic
Indications: Calms and cleanses mind, emotions,
blood, lymph, burning.
Mushrooms
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent PKV+
áma+ (tamasic)
Actions: Diuretic, astringent, hemostatic, Some
Chinese and Japanese varieties; and wild mush-
rooms are less tamasic and more toning
Indications: Edema, overweight, antitumor,
anticarcinogenic, reduce cholesterol, longevity.
Contraindications: Do not eat with boils, car-
buncles, pus infections
Mustard Greens
Energetics: Pungent, bitter/hot/pungent VK- P+
moderately
Actions: Stimulant, expectorant
Indications: Seeds discharge phlegm better than
greens; high amounts of calcium, iron, vitamin A,
and niacin.
Okra (Tindißha)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PKV+
Actions: Demulcent, emollient, diuretic, alterative,
aphrodisiac, tonic, (mallow plant family)
Indications: Difficult, painful, or burning urine;
diarrhea, dysentery, spermatorrhea, leukorrhea,
strengthening, gonorrhea, intestinal disorders, in-
flamed or spastic colon, diverticulitis, stomach ul-
cers, fever.
Onions (Durgandha, Palandu)
Energetics: Cooked—sweet/hot/sweet VK- P+
Raw—pungent/hot/pungent K- VP+ Rajasic except
when thoroughly cooked
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, aphrodisiac, expec-
torant
Indications: Colds, flu, general debility, sexual de-
bility; with oil or ghee strengthening properties of

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
138
meat, aid for physical exertion. Inhale raw onions
(until tearing begins) for fainting and convulsions.
Parsley
Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent VPK=
P+ excess
Actions: Stimulant, diuretic, alterative, emmenag-
ogue
Indications: Edema, oozing skin rashes, difficult
or delayed menstruation; gall stones, vitamins,
hypochondriac pain, kidney stones, minerals, blood
and lymph cleanser; urinary tract disorders, kid-
ney, bladder or prostate disorders; adrenal and thy-
roid gland conditions; corrects vitamin deficiency,
high in vitamins A, B1, B-complex, C, potassium,
manganese, phosphorus, calcium, and iron.
Peas (Green or Snow) (Sahíla, Vartula)
Energetics: Astringent/cold/pungent PK - V+ (green
better for Váyu)
Actions: Alterative, astringent
Indications: Blood cleanser, prevents appendicitis
and ulcers, antifertility, lowers cholesterol, controls
blood sugar, lowers blood pressure, low-calorie
protein, anti-carcinogen, high fiber.
Potatoes (Alu - H)
Energetics: Pleasant, astringent/
cold/sweet PKV+ (curried is best) [may aggravate
VP as a nightshade] V: Use ghee or butter
Actions: Nutritive, tonic, diuretic, sedative
(grounds), produces breast milk
Indications: Strengthening, diarrhea, absorption,
cancer, blood pressure, balances alkalinity and
acidity.
Precautions: Avoid with diabetes, gout, stones, rash,
arthritis.
Radish (Múlaka)
Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent KP+;
V- (long white variety).
Actions: Appetite stimulant, expectorant, anticough,
diuretic, antiparasitical
Indications: Digests heavy food, colds, flu, respira-
tory infections, cleanses gall bladder and liver; head-
aches, laryngitis, sinusitis, gall stones, intestinal
worms, contains vitamin A, B-complex, and C.
Sea Vegetables
Seaweed
Energetics: Salty, astringent/cold/sweet VPK= VP-
K+ excess
Actions: Alterative
Indications: Minerals, plasma, edema, congestion,
thyroid, cysts, benign tumors. Dulse; Rich in pro-
tein, fluoride, iron Irish Moss/Kelp; High in cal-
cium, potassium, magnesium, iron; excellent for
thyroid disorders Kuzu; Gives quick energy Nori;
Good for prostate and thyroid disorders, high in
protein, B1, B2, B6, B12, vitamins C, E
Spinach (Palak - H) and Chard
Energetics: Pungent, bitter, sweet, astringent/ cold/
pungent or sweet K- PV+
Actions: Alterative, refrigerant, demulcent, laxa-
tive
Indications: Soothes mucus membranes, fever,
cough, dry cough, burning lung sensation, blood
cleanser, rich in minerals, intestinal tract disorders,
hemorrhoids, anemia, vitamin deficiencies.
Precautions: Do not eat with liver diseases, gall or
kidney stones or arthritis. It is difficult to digest
Squash
     —Acorn, Summer (Heavy)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent VPK=
Actions: Demulcent, expectorant, nutritive
     —Winter
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent VPK+
Actions: Demulcent, expectorant
Indications: More nutritive than summer variety,
dry cough, laryngitis, high in vitamin A.
     —Zucchini and Yellow
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent VPK;
V+ excess
Actions: Alterative, diuretic, refrigerant, expecto-
rant
Indications: Summer anti-heat food.
Sweet Potatoes and Yams (Piòæálu)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ P+ excess
Actions: Nutritive

139
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Indications: Convalescence, debility, reduces can-
cer risk (especially lungs), high amounts of vitamin
A/beta carotene, antioxidant properties, high in vi-
tamin C, low in calories.
Contraindications: Hard to digest, eat without other
vegetables. Yams are easier to digest
Tomatoes (Bilatí, Baigun - H)
Energetics: Yellow—sweet, sour/heating/pungent
VPK+ Red—sour, astringent/hot /pungent the
stomach and heat the intestines/sour VPK+ (when
raw), VK-P+ when steamed); Tridoähic when oc-
casionally eaten along with cumin, turmeric, and
mustard
Actions: Refrigerant, relieves thirst
Indications: Circulation, blood, heart, cholesterol,
hypertension, lowers cancer risk; appendicitis, di-
gestive disorders.
Contraindications: Aggravates toxic blood condi-
tions, acidity, sciatica, kidney and gall stones, and
arthritis. Raw seeds can cause abdominal problems.
A member of the nightshade family
Turnips (Raktasarßhapa) and Rutabaga
Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent KVP+
rajasic
Actions: Alterative
Indications: Blood and lymph cleanser, stops
bleeding, Pitta or Kapha arthritis; uric acid, kid-
ney stones, overweight, gout; rich in all vitamins
(high in vitamin C) and sulfur.
Watercress (Chandrasura, Ahalíva)
Indications: Anemia, calcium deficiencies, blood
purifier, catarrh, liver and pancreas disorders,
stimulates the appetite, thyroid disorders, arthri-
tis, emotional disorders, TB, high in potassium,
sulfur, vitamin A, calcium, and iron; contains cop-
per, magnesium, sodium, potassium, and iodine.
Grain List
Sweet/neutral/sweet Sattwic, VPK= aggravates in
excess. Whole grain is the best staple for all cli-
mates and constitutions.
Actions: Gives bulk to stool, easy to digest
Elements: Earth
Tissues: Builds all
Indications:
Diuretics; nutritive, K+, discharge phlegm, barley,
pearled barley, corn, rye, buckwheat.
Nutritives; V-, convalescence, wheat, oats, basmati
and brown rice, (some say barley V-; others say
barley V+)
Preparation: Steamed whole grains are balanced
and easiest to digest
Breads: Hard to digest, yeast V+, toasted is easier
to digest and makes them better for V and K
Pastries: More difficult to digest than bread, espe-
cially if made with refined sugars and flour.
Unleavened breads: Chapatis, tortillas, matzoh,
etc., are better than yeast breads
Pastas/noodles: Good (especially whole wheat)
Cut/ground: Good—lose their properties quicker
Oil Fried: (deep fried) harder to digest, PK áma+
Dried: (granola, etc.) V+ K-, corn chips (fried in
oil) PK+ & dryness V+, crackers better all around
Antidoting: Some spices may be helpful, use as
necessary
Combinations: Do not eat bread with other foods;
with steamed vegetables, oil or ghee, VPK=; all
other grain combinations are ok, but make sure the
other foods are combinable (i.e., grain and veg-
etables are ok, and grain and fruits are ok, but fruit
and vegetables may not combine well.)
Season—good during any season due to holding
their potency within the seed. Winter is especially
a good time
Grains with pointed ends are best.
Barley (Yáva)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PK- V+ in
excess
Action: Diuretic, demulcent, antirheumatic
Indications: Lung disease convalescence, cough,
fevers, arthritis, edema, water retention, kidneys,
absorption, diarrhea, cleanses urinary tract, increases
and bulks stool; reduces body fat and mucus; helps
difficult breathing, stiff thighs, throat and skin dis-
orders. It is strengthening, stabilizing, heals infec-
tions, and removes toxins. Prevents cholesterol ab-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
140
sorption in the intestines and aids the suppression
of cholesterol in the liver. Stimulates the liver and
lymphatic system. It contains calcium, iron, protein,
and potassium.
Buckwheat (Kaspat - H)
Energetics: Astringent/hot/sweet K- VP+
Indications: It is not as nutritious as wheat, but is
still considered helpful as a food. It is too heating
and drying for Pitta and Váyu doßhas.
Corn (sweet) (Yavanala)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet K- VP+ in excess
Action: Diuretic
Indications: Edema, kidney and gallstones, jaun-
dice (corn silk especially), nutritive, liver, kidneys,
spleen absorption, solar energy increases percep-
tion (especially with ghee).
Contraindications: Corn chips, VP+ (blue corn is
colder and better for P); corn bread, tortillas, posole
V+
Millet (Soma; Rajika)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet K- VP+ mildly
Action: Demulcent, diuretic
Indications: Nutritive, convalescence, debility,
wholesome but difficult to digest. Millet is high in
iron, lecithin and choline, thus preventing some
forms of gallstones. It is full of protein and nutri-
tion. It is good for colitis, ulcers, and urinary dis-
orders. Due to its alkaline nature it is good for the
spleen, pancreas, and stomach.
Oats
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+
Action: Demulcent, emollient, laxative (especially
cut or rolled)
Indications: Calms and strengthens mind, nerves
(especially oat straw), builds all tissues (including
reproductive). It normalizes blood glucose in dia-
betes, helps slow thyroid conditions, neutralizes
excess cholesterol, high amounts of iron, vitamin
E, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, and B complex. Pro-
tein is easily assimilated.
Precautions: A little heavy and hard to digest, espe-
cially with sugar and milk. May produce skin erup-
tions or aggravate toxic blood conditions
Rice (Vrihi, Dhanya)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold or neutral/ sweet
VPK=, K+ in excess (especially basmati) starch is
easy to digest. Highly sattwic
Action: Tonic, nutritive, demulcent, laxative
Indications: Vomiting, anorexia, poor digestion,
harmonizes the stomach, builds all tissues through
plasma, soothes the nervous system and the brain.
Helps rid the body of toxins; high in B-complex.
     Rice pointed at both ends is best. It relieves thirst
and is good for all three doßhas. White basmati
rice is best, as it is nutritious and easily digested.
Brown rice may have more nutrition, but since it
is harder to digest, one may not obtain any nutri-
tion from it without an excellent digestive fire.
Contraindications: Bleached, refined white- K+,
áma +, brown short grain (warming), maybe P+,
V- if it can be digested
Rye
Energetics: Astringent/hot/pungent PK- V+
Action: Diuretic
Indications: One of the best Kapha grains. Few
allergenic reactions, very high amounts of lysine,
helps the glands, good for weight loss.
Wheat (Godhúma)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK+
Action: Nutritive, aphrodisiac
Indications: Strengthening, children’s growth,
builds muscle tissue, energy, earth, heart, palpita-
tions, calms mind, insomnia, ulcers, colitis, hem-
orrhoids, heals fractures; with milk and sugar for
bleeding disorders (rakta Pitta). Taken as chapatis
(unleavened bread pancake); wheat bran is a bulk
laxative; used as coffee substitute. It is nourishing
and strengthening. External poultice—astringent
for burns, sores, skin rashes.

141
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
     Whole wheat restores health and alleviates Váyu.
It is the best grain for Váyu doßhas. Pasta (carbohy-
drate) eaten without protein produces serotonin in
the brain that is linked to calmness and cheerful-
ness. Pasta also contains iron, phosphorous, and
magnesium.
Contraindications: Gluten may cause allergies,
aggravate arthritis, gout or other áma conditions.
White flour is an artificial and overly refined food
(tamasic), K+ áma+, clogging channels and dull-
ing mind.
Legumes
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/neutral/sweet PKV+
(except mung, soy) All beans are rajasic—caus-
ing gas and irritating body, mind, senses and emo-
tions—and therefore not recommended for yoga
since they vitiate sattwa by aggravating the mind.
Mung beans and tofu are the only two exceptions.
The mung bean is the only sattwic bean.
Indications: Energy for strenuous work
Element: Earth (protein) mostly, and air; heavy and
dry, thus hard to digest
Combination: As a protein they combine well  with
grains for a staple food, containing all the eight
essential amino acids; especially split mung bean
with long grain or Basmati rice kicharí (see rice
section on previous page). Combine well with veg-
etables. Legumes do not combine well with other
beans, sugars, fruit or diary
Preparation: Well-cooked and properly spiced.
Some need to be soaked in water overnight, espe-
cially whole beans. When prepared in lard or heavy
oils, are hard to digest, PK+
Season: Hold their properties, so can be eaten year-
round (because fruits and vegetables lose their en-
ergies quickly, seasonal eating is suggested for them)
though better in winter
Antidotes: Parboiling and removing water once or
twice removes some irritant properties (e.g., for soy
or kidney beans); Spices—onions, cumin, asafoe-
tida (hi´g), cayenne, and salt help, but will aggra-
vate Pitta
Nutrition: Proteins, iron, B vitamins, trace miner-
als; as a crop they nourish the soil instead of rob-
bing it and absorb more than 100 pounds of nitro-
gen from the atmosphere yearly
Bean List
Aduki
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent PKV+
slightly rajasic
Action: Alterative, diuretic, heart tonic
Indications: Heart, blood, circulation, children,
convalescence, edema from malnutrition, painful
or burning urine; delayed or difficult menstruation;
as paste with sugar for confections.
Black Gram (Maßha)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet P- V+ K+
mildly
Action: Nutritive, demulcent, aphrodisiac, nervine
tonic, lactogogue
Indications: The most strengthening bean, diarrhea,
dysentery, indigestion, hemorrhoids, arthritis, pa-
ralysis, liver disorders, cystitis, rheumatism. In-
creases semen and breast milk. Externally —plas-
ter for arthritis/joint pain.
Chick Pea/Garbanzo (Chanaka)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/pungent PK- V+
Action: Nutritive, aphrodisiac, diuretic, astringent
Indications: Strengthening, increases reproductive
tissue, debility, brain, as humus it is easier to di-
gest. Roasted—relieves gas, urine retention or ex-
cess; contains calcium, iron, potassium, vitamin
A. [Indian name: Channa dal - many varieties]
Fava/Broad (Bakla - H)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PKV++
Indications: Not used as food because some get toxic
reactions. Contains calcium, protein, iron, B vita-
mins.
Flat Bean/Goya (Simbi)
Energetics: PK- V+
Indications: Good for phlegm disorders
Precautions: Not good for the eyes, depleting prop-
erties

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
142
Green Peas
Energetics: PK- V+
Pinto: bitter, astringent/cooling (vipaka)
Indications: Cook well; eliminates gas and stool
from colon
Kidney/Navy/Pinto (Makußhtaka - S; Bakla - H)
Energetics: PK- V+
Kidney: Astringent/hot/pungent
Navy: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent
Pinto: Astringent/cold/pungent
Action: Nutritive, digestive, aphrodisiac, cardiac
Indications: Bleeding disorders, bile, fevers, and
other Pitta excesses. It is strengthening. Red kid-
ney beans are rich in all nutrients, protein, and fi-
bers.
Contraindications: Hard to digest
Lentils (Masura)
Energetics: PK- V+ (in excess)
Red: Astringent/hot/pungent
Sweet: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet
Indications: Nutritive, strengthening. High in cal-
cium, magnesium, phosphorus, iron, sulfur, vitamin
A, proteins. They reduce fat and blood, and absorb
water. Cleanses liver, helps flu and diarrhea.
Contraindications: Some lentils are hard to digest;
though easier if sprouted. (There are differing be-
liefs on the use of various lentils.) They can cause
constipation. High in uric acid - can aggravate gout.
Lima (Cimra - Bengali)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet PKV+
Indications: Easier to digest, especially if fresh.
Good for simple diarrhea (but not for Váyu, Pitta,
or mucus diarrhea), constipation. External poul-
tice—cleanses foul ulcers. Rich in potassium, min-
erals, vitamins, fiber.
Mung (Green Gram) (Mada, Mudga)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK= K+
in excess Sattwic
Action: Refrigerant, antipyretic, alterative, hemo-
static. Very nutritious and wholesome
Indications: Pitta disorders, summer food, conva-
lescence from febrile or infectious disease (as
kicharí—see Basmati rice), relieves thirst during
fevers, febrile disease, liver, drugs, smoking, or al-
cohol detoxification, cancer, enlarged liver or spleen,
bleeding; Tea—high fevers or heat stroke. External
paste—burns, sores, swelling, inflamed joints, draws
out toxins, swollen breasts, mastitis, breast cancer.
It is sometimes called  múng dal”.
Múng dal comes with green skin on or peeled and
split in half. The latter is easier to digest. It is found
in Indian grocery stores.
Peanuts (Buchanaka)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet K- VP+
Action: Oily and often classified as a nut
Indications: Strengthening, protein, use raw and
cooked (not roasted), add honey or cane sugar
Contraindications: Dry roasted V++, peanut but-
ter hard to digest K+
Soy/Tofu (Bhatwan - H)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent PVK+
Rajasic
Tofu: Sweet, astringent/cold/pungent VP- K-+
Soy cheese: Sour, astringent/hot/pungent VPK+
Action: Easier to digest as tofu (sattwic)
Indications: Tofu after febrile disease, as milk for
Kapha or áma, lung infections, lymph with fever;
taken with kicharí VPK=. Tofu is rich in protein,
calcium and potassium. It promotes female hor-
mone balance.
Split Peas
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cool/sweet PKV+
Action: Binding stool
Indications: Diarrhea.
Contraindications: Hard to digest, better as soup

143
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Nuts & Seeds
Energetics: Sweet/warm/sweet V- PK+
Actions: Tonic, nutritive, strengthening, rejuvenative
Indications: The best source of protein and fat from
vegetable sources; increase fat, marrow, nerve tis-
sue, reproductive tissue, ojas, build blood and
muscles, strengthen memory and creativity;
sattwic—helps yoga and meditation. Seeds—simi-
lar yet lighter, less nourishing, easier to digest, V+
excess.
Preparation: Chewed well, not taken in excess
drinks—nut milk is best, fermented nut drinks
(amasake) easier to digest- use with fresh ginger
salt—better for Váyu; raw sugar—(sucanat,
jaggery, dates, raisins) tonic, demulcent for con-
valescence and debility. roasting—heavy, oily, hard
to digest, roast in takes out oil light roasting—bet-
ter for Váyu. Not roasted—better for PK but check
that they are not rancid  Nut butters are oily and
used in small doses.
Season: Properties are stored well. Best taken in
fall and winter—oiliness, K+ in spring, P+ in sum-
mer
Combination: Do not combine well with beans or
starchy vegetables (potatoes); combine well with
dairy, most fruit, grain, sugar (though heavier and
harder to digest)
Antidote: Mild spices like ginger or cardamom
Almonds (Badama)
Energetics: Sweet, slightly bitter/hot/sweet VPK+
Actions: Nutritive, nervine, aphrodisiac, demul-
cent, laxative, rejuvenation
Indications: Cough, dry cough, increase marrow,
semen, kidney, reproductive organs, brain, conva-
lescence, debility, builds strong bones and ojas (life
sap); good for the heart, lowers bad (LDL) choles-
terol and raises good (HDL) cholesterol; cancer-
fighting protease inhibitors. High in potassium,
magnesium, phosphorus, protein, fiber, and the trace
mineral boron (that may regulate calcium metabo-
lism).
Brazil Nuts
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet; Oily, heavy
V- P+ K++
Actions: Tonic strength, nutritive
Indications: Modern research suggests they may
improve resistance to cancer and tumors.
Cashews (£hoephahara)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet- see general notes
above VPK+
Actions: Expectorant
Indications: Helps deeper tissues. High in potas-
sium, magnesium, vitamin A.
Coconut (Dírghavrakßha)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+
Actions: Refrigerant, diuretic, demulcent, emollient
Indications: High Pitta, lungs, skin, recovery from
febrile and infectious disease.
Filberts (Askhota)/ Hazelnut (Findak - H)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet V- PK+
Actions: Lighter, easier for Kapha to digest
Indications: May help restore energy in chronic
fatigue syndrome, hypoglycemia, yeast infections.
High in potassium, sulfur, calcium.
Flax/Linseed (Uma)
Energetics: Warming VK
Actions: Antiinflammatory (internal & external)
Indications: Rich in fatty acids, bronchial conges-
tion, constipation.
Contraindications: Taken with lots of liquids and
digestive herbs
Lotus Seeds (Kamala - white; Padma; Kokonad -
pink; Induvara - blue)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet P- VK+
áma
Actions: Nutritive, tonic, calmative, aphrodisiac,
rejuvenative
Indications: With sugar and ghee—good for Váyu,
increase deeper tissues including ¤hukra (reproduc-
tive) and ojas, nocturnal emission, leukorrhea, in-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
144
fertility, neurasthenia; combines well with
a¤hwagandhá and ¤hatávarí.
Contraindications: Very hard to digest
Macadamia
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet V- PK+
Actions: Nutritive
Indications: May reduce weight.
Contraindications: Oily, expensive
Pecan
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet V- PK+
Actions: Nutritive, aphrodisiac, laxative, nervine
Indications: Nourishing the marrow and nerves,
reproductive system, laxative for elderly, increases
appetite, restores energy. High in potassium, vita-
min A.
Pinon
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet Sattwic
best of all nuts. V- PK+ (but less than other nuts)
Actions: Nutritive, tonic, demulcent, rejuvenative
Indications: Lungs, nerves, reproductive system,
debility, wasting, convalescence, good as flour.
Pistachio (Pista - H)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+
Actions: Tonic, sedative
Indications: Anemia, neurasthenia, builds muscles,
energy, may help with alcohol recovery. They are
rich in potassium, phosphorus, and magnesium
salts; which when combined, help to control hy-
pertension.
Psyllium
Energetics: Astringent/cold/pungent VPK=
Actions: Antiinflammatory for digestive tract, laxa-
tive; may cause gas initially
Indications: Constipation, hardens loose stool
Contraindications: Taken with lots of liquids and
digestive herbs.
Pumpkin Seeds (Punyalatha, Dadhiphala)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/pungent PK- (light quality)
V+ excess
Actions: Antiparasitical
Indications: Parasites including tapeworm and
roundworm; gout.
Contraindications: Reduces ¤hukra
Sesame Seeds (Tila)
Energetics: Sweet, bitter astringent/hot/pungent V-
PK+
Actions: Nutritive, tonic, rejuvenative
Indications: Nourish all tissues, internal organs, and
skin; growth of teeth, bones, and hair; debility, con-
valescence. Black—best for tonic, oil or butter; best
used for nourishing effects; white seeds go rancid
quickly. Build immunity and life sap (ojas); sesame
seed milk relieves colitis, gastritis, heartburn, and
indigestion.
Sunflower Seeds (Arkakantha, Suria-mukhi)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK=
Indications: Febrile or infectious disease, cleanse
lungs and lymph.
Walnuts (Akßhota)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+
Actions: Nutritive, aphrodisiac, laxative, nervine;
unripe fruit and husk—antiparasitical
Indications: Marrow, calms the nerves, reproduc-
tive tissues, laxative for elderly, useful for para-
sites, ringworm (internal and external use), skin
conditions. Leaves are used as a wash for malig-
nant sores, and leukorrhea. High in potassium,
magnesium, vitamin A, reduces serum cholesterol.
Dairy
Dairy is most beneficial when raw, from animals
that are treated kindly (i.e., free roaming), and who
receive no steroid injections or chemicals in their
foods.
Energetics: Sweet/cool/sweet VP- K+ Sattwic
Tissues: Builds all seven tissues (sapta dhátus)—
especially increase plasma, fat, reproductive
Indications: Calms the mind, nerves, and emotions.
It is good for meditation and yoga; emaciation, de-
bility, convalescence, wasting, bleeding, sexual
debility.

145
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Contraindications: Heavy, damp, sticky; increases
mucus and áma. Raw and organic dairy products
from healthy, happy cows are best (pasteurized and
homogenized dairy products are more tamasic)
Preparations: Warm or room temperature, boiled
milk. Refrigerated (i.e., cold) dairy increases áma.
Milk is better raw and organic, after being boiled
for one minute, and then cooled.
Combinations: Dairy does not combine well with
other foods (or salt). Having milk first thing in the
morning is better before other foods are eaten. It is
incompatible with meat, fish, yeast bread (which
ferment the dairy), sour fruit (which makes the
dairy curdle), fruit, nuts, pickles, pickled veg-
etables, and green leafy vegetables. Yogurt does
not combine well with fruit, nuts, meat, or fish.
Dairy does combine well with whole grains and
raw sugars.
Season: Sour dairy (yogurt, kefir, buttermilk, etc.)
are not to be taken as much in the summer due to
their heating nature (except when taken as lassi).
Cheese in abundance, and during the winter and
spring is not suggested (which are Kapha increas-
ing times). Cheese is also not recommended dur-
ing the Kapha times of the day.
Antidotes:
Milk—ginger, cardamom, cinnamon; yogurt and
cheese—mustard, cayenne, cumin
Dairy Foods
Butter (Navanita)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/pungent VP- K+
Indications: Used with Pitta-reduction herbs, nour-
ishing, strengthening, stabilizing, used for debil-
ity and convalescence. It improves digestion, com-
plexion, and is an aphrodisiac. For consumption,
hemorrhoids, facial paralysis, bronchitis. Sug-
gested for the young and old. It heals Váyu and
Pitta concerns, blood, pulmonary TB, eye problems,
and cough.
Contraindications: Heavy, fattening, clogging, in-
creases cholesterol, may be artificially colored, can
cause constipation. With salt, it increases heaviness
and clogging. Externally—burns
Buttermilk (Lassi, Takra)
Energetics: Sweet sour/cold/sweet V-PK+ (Home-
made without salt. Store-bought has salt - better to
avoid)
Actions: Astringent, digestive stimulant, diuretic
Indications: Appetite, indigestion, malabsorption,
debility, emaciation, convalescence, one of the
easiest foods to digest. It reduces edema, hemor-
rhoids, anorexia, phantom tumors, anemia, and
nourishes the spleen. Yogurt is most easily digested
when taken wit  an equal amount of water (and
digestive spices), and drunk with meals. For Kapha
doßhas —1/4 cup yogurt and 3/4 water. This makes
lassi. Shake the lassi in a covered jar for 1 minute
to produce buttermilk. In this form, takra is easier
to digest than lassi, and is even good for srota
blockage where lassi is not. Some believe takra
may be taken after sunset (lassi is not advised).
Cheese (Panír - H)
Energetics: Sweet, sour/hot/sour Hard: V- PK+ (but
still hard to digest for Váyu) Soft: VP- K+
Actions: Nutritive, astringent
Indications: Diarrhea, bleeding.
Contraindications: Constipation, congestion, mu-
cus, clogs the channels, salted increases Pitta
Cottage Cheese
Energetics: Sour/hot/pungent VPK=
Indications: Not too difficult to digest.
Cream
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet
Actions: Rejuvenative, nutritive, aphrodisiac, cal-
mative, laxative
Indications: Plasma, skin, nourishes all tissues (es-
pecially ¤hukra dhátu), lungs, stomach. It reduces
bleeding, dry cough, dry throat, fever, thirst. Very
similar to milk in its effects.
Contraindications: Heavier and richer, thus, more
mucus-forming and harder to digest. Use in small
quantities, and avoid combining with other rich
foods.
Ghee (Clarified Butter) (Ghrita)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ mildly

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
146
Actions: Tonic, emollient, rejuvenative, antacid,
nutritive
Indications: Fattening, increases marrow, semen,
and ojas. Improves intelligence, vision, voice, liver,
kidneys, and brain. The best form of fat for the
body. The best oil for Pitta. It balances all agnis
(digestive fires). Good for memory and digestion.
It is used in conditions of insanity and consump-
tion. Ghee promotes longevity and reproductive
fluid, good for children and the elderly, supple body,
lungs, herpes, injury, Váyu and Pitta disorders, fe-
vers, TB, and is highly auspicious. Taken with herbs,
it transports their  nutrients and energies to all seven
tissue layers. Ghee  also reduces the desire for eat-
ing animal products. When special herbs like
a¤hwagandhá are made into medicated ghee, they
remove harmful cholesterol from the body. Other
herbs are made into medicated ghees to enhance
their healing effects.
Ice Cream (Kulfi - H)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet P- VK+ áma+
Contraindications: Not used with TB, Kapha dis-
eases, áma, fever, constipation, alcoholism, chol-
era. It creates áma, weakens the digestive fire, clogs
the channels, damages the spleen, pancreas, and
deranges the sugar and water metabolism. It causes
hypoglycemia, diabetes, tumors. Avoid in the au-
tumn and winter (better in the summer and spring)
Ice Bean is a little better, producing less conges-
tion, but still not very healthful Frozen Yogurt is
also not much better. The less sugar content, the
better. Cold dairy and sugar together are not very
healthy for the body and mind. [Indian kulfi is made
with whole milk, without whip-
ping air into it.]
Kefir
Energetics: sour/hot/sour V- PK+
Actions: Lighter than yogurt,
heavier than buttermilk
Indications: Improves digestion
and absorption, low appetite, re-
lieves anorexia. Fruit-sweetened is not as good.
Milk (Dugdha, Kßhíra)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+ Highly
sattwic. It is invigorating, increasing the dhátus.
Actions: May be taken in larger quantities than other
dairy. It is a tonic, rejuvenative, nutritive, aphrodi-
siac, calmative, laxative
Indications: Nourishes plasma, skin, all tissues (es-
pecially ¤hukra dhátu). It is a tonic for the lungs
and stomach (reduces bleeding from these sites).
Milk calms dry cough and dry throat, fever, and
thirst. It is a mild laxative with ghee. For Pitta con-
ditions. It is excellent for the children and the eld-
erly, debilitation, convalescence, nourishing the
brain, nerves, mind, and memory. Boiled milk
builds ojas, promotes sleep (with warm nervine
herbs). Boiled, it reduces Váyu and Kapha. It pro-
duces semen.
     Cows: Promotes longevity and rejuvenation. It
helps strengthen emaciation after injury, increases
intelligence, strength, and breast milk. It is a natu-
ral laxative, relieves exhaustion, dizziness, toxins,
difficult breathing, cough, severe thirst and hun-
ger; chronic fevers, urinary, and bleeding disor-
ders. It promotes auspiciousness. Cows’ milk is
said to be the best of the milks.
     Goats: Easily digested and heals pulmonary TB,
fevers, difficult breathing, bleeding disorders and
diarrhea.
Contraindications: It is damp and can weaken agni.
It generally contains residues of inorganic fertiliz-
ers, antibiotics, steroids; and is homogenized and
pasteurized; and comes from mistreated cows.
Thus, inorganic milk may cause side effects. Dairy
allergies may be due to these inorganic substances.
However, allergies may also be caused by its heavy
nature. Do not take milk at night, unless it being
used as a laxative or calmative. Then boil and use
the appropriate herbs and oils. May cause colds or
rheumatism. Goats Milk has a warm energy K- VP+.
Antidotes: To remove the heavy nature of milk, di-
gestive herbs such as ginger and cinnamon are sug-
gested. This may alleviate allergies.
AM—aphrodisiac
Noon—KP-; digestive stimulant
PM—for children, calmative, laxative
Surface milk is good for all three doßhas The foam
is good for all three doßhas

147
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Sour Cream
Energetics: Sour/hot/pungent V- PK+
Actions: Stimulant, nutritive
Contraindications: In excess it may cause acidity
Yogurt (Dadhi)
Energetics: Sweet, sour/cold/sweet Sweet yogurt
VP- K+. Sour yogurt V- PK áma + Very sour yo-
gurt causes bleeding disorders. Sweet and sour
yogurt has mixed effects
Actions: Nutritive, digestive stimulant, astringent
Indications: Nourishes all tissues. In small
amounts, it aids digestion of all other foods. It re-
plenishes positive flora, decreases vaginal yeast
infections and cancer; malignant  tumors, boosts
the immune system, promotes strength  relieves
the flu, colds, anorexia, emaciation, and diarrhea
(take with appropriate spices); uric acid, digestive-
tract infections, cholesterol, cholera. Yogurt, like
milk, is considered sacred (sattwic). [See butter-
milk]. Yogurt adds weight and fat; and improves
digestion when taken during meals. The whey re-
duces anorexia, weakness, emaciation, malabsorp-
tion. Whey cleanses the náæís, increases appetite,
and reduces mental fatigue. Yogurt made by hand,
mixed with pepper and cane sugar strengthens the
body.
Contraindications: Heavy, in excess it causes con-
stipation, clogs srotas, aggravates toxic blood (i.e.,
acne, skin rashes). Do not take after sunset. Yogurt
or lassi is not to be taken with diseases involving
blocked channels (srotas)
Antidote: Take with ghee, ámalakí and water
Take care of the Earth,
it was not left to us by our parents,
it was loaned to us by our children.
        Kenyan proverb
Animal Products
Meat & Fish
Energetics: Sweet/warm/sweet V- PK+ tamasic
Indications: Meat is the most nourishing food, ex-
cellent for debility, convalescence, lowering high
Váyu
Contraindications: Most potentially deranging food,
breeds toxins or áma, feeds infections, fevers, tu-
mors, dulls the mind and senses, reduces love and
compassion
Long term effects: Creates bad karma (the higher
evolved the animal, the worse the karma) Red meat
of a cow is the most negative karma. Poultry yields
less bad karma, fish even less, shellfish the least,
eggs only very slightly.
     The Vedic texts (¤hastras) state that it is accept-
able to take the life of an animal in two instances:
if it is your job, i.e., fisherman; and if one is weak
and it is needed to preserve or save a human life.
     Further, meat acts like a drug, inducing energy
to get well, but it does not nourish and rebuild the
subtler tissues
     Non-organic animal products are full of hor-
mones, antibiotics, chemicals. The animals are
often diseased and treated badly. Thus, when these
products are eaten, the chemicals are ingested and
affect one’s health Organs (i.e., liver) are very nour-
ishing to their respective organs, but produce low
tissue quality and dull the mind Bones and bone
soup nourish marrow but are heavy, causing toxic
blood
Preparation: Cooked properly with digestive
spices, raw or not completely cooked áma+ and
aggravates blood Salt softens and tenderizes, MSG
has many adverse  effects
Soups and stews are easier to tolerate
Deep fried are more aggravating
Canned very tamasic
Combinations: Do not combine well with other
foods, especially milk, bread, or potatoes. Milk is
very toxic (mixing milk to nourish a young animal
with flesh of one slaughtered)
Season: Avoid in summer due to its warm energy,
morning and evening (Kapha times), better for those
in high altitudes or northern latitudes

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
148
Antidotes: Raw vegetables, leafy greens, vegetable
juices, bitter herbs (i.e., aloe gel) may somewhat
antidote meat
Beef
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+
Indications: Nutritious, builds blood and muscles,
strength, endurance
Contraindications: Aggravates toxic blood, reduces
compassion, dulls the mind (tamasic).
Chicken/Turkey
Energetics: White—Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet
PK- V+; Dark—Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+
Actions: Dry, light
Indications: Easiest meat to digest, improves ab-
sorption, anorexia, debility, convalescence (espe-
cially as soup). Tamasic.
Duck
Energetics: Sweet, pungent/hot/sweet V- PK+
Actions: More nutritive
Contraindications: Harder to digest than turkey or
chicken
Lamb/Mutton
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet VPK+
Indications: Aphrodisiac.
Contraindications: Irritant, promoting sexual ac-
tivity, with garlic aggravates the blood. Tamasic
Pork
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet VPK+
Contraindications: Dullness, heaviness of mind
and senses, clogs srotas (channels)—bacon, par-
ticularly, is difficult to digest and is heavy because
of high fat concentration. It increases fat tissue
more than any other meat. Tamasic ++
Venison
Energetics: Astringent/cold/pungent V- PK+
Tamasic
Actions: Nutritive, aphrodisiac
Indications: Kidneys, bones, fertility, growth, or
retardation in children.
Fish
Energetics: Sweet, salty/hot/sweet V- PK+
Actions: Tonic, rejuvenative, laxative, lighter than
meat, not as dulling or grounding
Indications: Builds plasma; oil nourishes liver, skin,
eyes, strengthens heart, reduces cholesterol and ar-
teriosclerosis. Shellfish are generally good for the
kidneys, reproductive tissue, and impotence. They
reduce Váyu and increase Pitta and Kapha.
Contraindications: May cause diarrhea or nausea
Preparation: Fresh is important; canned or salted
aggravates humors and causes áma; steamed or
baked is best
Combination: Does not combine well with milk,
sugar, meat
Antidote: Mustard, horseradish, ginger, garlic, pe-
rilla (shisho), sour sauces P+ aggravate blood, may
cause diarrhea
Ocean Fish
Energetics: Salty/hot/sweet V- PK+
Freshwater Fish
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet VPK=
PK+ in excess; less salty, better for Pitta & Kapha
Actions: Trout easiest fish to digest
Animal Oil
Very hard to digest, P,K, áma cholesterol, toxic
blood
Lard
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet K, áma ++
Contraindications: Clogs channels, promotes obe-
sity, skin diseases, gallstones
Eggs
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet White VPK=; Yolk V-
PK+ less tamasic than meat and fish because they
are not killed. Better yet are the unfertilized eggs.
Still, they are considered impure karma
Actions: tonic, nutritive, demulcent, aphrodisiac
Indications: Vigor, fertility, convalescence, sexual
debility

149
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Oils, Condiments, Spices
Sources: Nuts, seeds, beans, oily
vegetables and animal fats like
milk, butter, or animal tissue
Energetics: Sweet, bland/warm/
sweet V- PK+
Actions: Internal—demulcent, laxative
Indications: Maintain fat, nerve, and marrow tis-
sues, allowing for easy secretion and discharge. Use:
Cooking- adjunct and flavoring
Massage—softens skin and muscles, dissolves tox-
ins and congestion, absorbed into skin; thus lubri-
cating lungs, large intestines, nourish the deeper
dhátus. Needed by almost everyone, debility, con-
valescence, snehana (oleation therapy see Chap-
ter 4—Pañcha karma)
Contraindications: Not used with áma, congestion,
toxic blood; massage not done with red or oozing
skin diseases; or with severe pain or palpitation —
use light oil application to abdomen
Almond (Badam)
Energetics: Sweet, slightly bitter/hot/sweet VPK+
Action: Demulcent, expectorant, tonic, the same
as the nut
Indications: Cough, wasting diseases of the lungs
and kidneys; soothes skin and muscles; tension,
pain, good massage oil—absorbs well, reduces
wrinkles and stretch marks. Builds immunity and
life sap (ojas).
Avocado
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+
Action: Same as fruit only more nutritive
Indications: Strengthens muscles and liver, nour-
ishes skin, good massage oil, good for salads.
Canola
Energetics: VK- P+
Indications: Lowers bad cholesterol; may lower
blood pressure. Best oil to cook without destroying
cholesterol-lowering properties.
Castor Oil (Erand)
Energetics: Sweet, bitter/hot/sweet VP- K+ in ex-
cess
Action: Purgative, antispasmodic, analgesic
Indications: One teaspoon with a cup of warm milk
and 1/2 teaspoon ginger before sleep is a strong rem-
edy for clearing srotas and cleansing áma. Best for
constipation (1-2 tsp. in hot water before bed.),
used on children, epilepsy, arthritis, nerves, and
pain. External—Best for reducing swellings. In
packs promotes healing sores, wounds, sprains, and
injuries. It detoxifies, reduces abdominal tumors,
swellings, and pain, menstrual cramps. Castor is
the best Váyu-healing oil to ingest and the best pur-
gative oil, and has been dubbed, the “king of the
oils”. An Áyurvedic analogy clarifies the role of
castor oil. The lion is the king of the jungle. Wher-
ever he goes, all other animals run away. Similarly,
when castor oil reaches the internal body, all Váyu
disorders run away; it is one of the major remedies
for Váyu ailments. Taken internally, it heals enlarged
prostate, hernia, fevers, pain and swellings of the
waist, genitals, abdomen, and back. It is a good
purgative (two teaspoons with warm water before
bed).
Coconut (Nariyal)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+
Action: Tonic, emollient, refrigerant
Indications: Specific for Pitta, nourishes and soft-
ens skin, inflammatory skin, psoriasis, eczema,
sunburn, burns, chapped lips, dry cough with fe-
vers, burning in lungs, increases ¤hukra dhátu, one
of the easiest oils to digest.
Corn
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent KVP+
mildly
Action: Demulcent, diuretic
Indications: Difficult urination, nourishes skin.
Flaxseed/Linseed
Energetics: Sweet/hot/pungent VK- P+ K+ in ex-
cess
Action: Expectorant, lubricating laxative
Indications: Cough, loosens phlegm, draws mu-
cus  from system.
Margarine
Energetics: P- V+ K+ mildly
Action: Depends upon vegetable oil used

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
150
Indications: Depends upon vegetable oil used.
Mustard (Sarson)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+
Action: Stimulant, demulcent
Indications: Excellent for Kapha and Váyu disor-
ders. For Kapha external/internal, anticough, loos-
ens lung mucus, congestion, cold, joint heaviness,
arthritis, abdominal pain.
Olive (Jaitoon)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+
Action: Mild laxative
Indications: Liver, softens gallstones, bile, skin, hair,
lowers bad cholesterol (cooking may increase cho-
lesterol. Better to cook with canola.), salads, mas-
sage (particularly general use or day massage since
it is lighter in property). It may help control blood
pressure and diabetes. Causes cellulite
Peanut (Múngphali)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+
Action: laxative, demulcent, diuretic
Indications: Cooking oil, not as nutritious as
sesame.
Safflower
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/pungent V- P+
K+ mildly
Action: Laxative, emmenagogue, difficult or de-
layed menstruation
Indications: Lighter—better for Kapha, circulation,
heart, blood, immune boosting, contains vitamin
E.
Sesame (Til)
Energetics: Sweet, bitter/hot/sweet V- PK+ highly
sattwic
Action: Tonic, rejuvenative, sedative, laxative, nu-
tritive
Indications: The best oil. When used externally for
massage it penetrates into the skin, nourishing and
detoxifying the deepest tissue layers. Best for
Váyu massage. It aggravates Pitta skin and eye
conditions as it is hot in potency. It builds thin people
and thins heavy persons; is constipating, kills para-
sites, and when properly processed, it heals all dis-
eases. Frying makes it unhealthy.
     Sesame aids  all dhátus, lungs, kidneys, brain,
debility, convalescence, rejuvenation, calms nerves,
relieves muscle tension, spasms, and pain, relieves
anxiety, tremors,  insomnia, convulsions, dry cough,
chronic constipation, voice  and vision, growth of
hair, nails, teeth, bones, children  elderly, most
deeply penetrating oil, best for Váyu, best for yogic
diet, improves immune system and ojas; antioxi-
dant.
Soy
Energetics: Astringent/cold/pungent PK- V+
Action: Demulcent, diuretic
Indications: Skin, high in vitamin E.
Sunflower (Súryamukhi)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/cold/sweet VPK=
Action: Nutritive
Indications: Skin, cough, lung heat, high in vita-
min E.
Sweeteners
As discussed earlier, we need a certain amount of
sweet taste to maintain tissue development. This
is because the basic taste of our body is sweet.
White sugars are refined, which means they have
been stripped of their nutrition. Thus, as they are
absorbed into the body, the body expends nutri-
tion and energy to digest the sugars but gains no
nutrition from white sugar. Absorption actually
may not take place, turning the refined sweet to
áma in the tissues. Raw sweets (e.g., cane sugar,
maple syrup, etc.) contain nutrition needed for
helping the body. Sugars relieve burning, thirst,
vomiting, fainting, and bleeding diseases.
Energetics: VP- K+ In excess they derange all hu-
mors. Dry sugars (i.e., cookies, dry fruit, dry past-
ries) derange Váyu
Action: Tonic, demulcent, diuretic, calmative, re-
frigerant, laxative, antiseptic, preservative
Indications: Debility, rejuvenation, external—
sores, burns, wounds, rashes, inflamed eyes,
niráma Pitta and niráma Váyu; when digestive sys-
tem is not clogged (if there is significant coating of
the tongue, i.e., sáma, only fresh raw honey should

151
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
be used). Combination: Generally, eaten alone—
the first taste digested. Eaten after meals in large
quantities, only sugar is digested (no foods), caus-
ing gas and áma from the undigested food. It does
not combine well with salty tastes at all. With milk,
ghee and ginger or cinnamon—nourishing
Antidote: Spicy sweet spices (i.e., cardamom, gin-
ger, cloves, fennel) bitters are ok but do not com-
bine well directly (i.e., gentian, barberry, turmeric,
kuóki, neem)—it is better to take these herbs in cap-
sules before or after sweets
Brown Sugar
Energetics: It is white sugar with syrup added
Indications: Slightly less deleterious effect.
Cane Sugar
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+
     Laxative, hard to digest, unctuous, builds the
body tissues, increases Kapha and urine, an aph-
rodisiac. Sweet initial and post-digestive taste,
cooling in energy. Modern cane sugars are found
under the product names, Sucanat and Florida
Crystals.
Fruit Sugar
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+
     They still derange sugar metabolism, weaken
digestion, and promote áma in excess. Date sugar
and grape sugar are two of the better fruit sugars.
It is also believed that many fruit sugars are made
from fruit from ‘third world’ countries that have
bought the American-banned pesticides (like DDT)
from the US and spray their fruit with these pesti-
cides. So it is important to know the source of the
fruit sugar as well.
Honey (best sweetener)[used raw] (Madhu)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/ sweet VK- P+
Action: Demulcent, emollient, expectorant, laxative,
nutritive, tonic, rejuvenative; external—demulcent,
astringent, antibiotic
Indications: Has some of its flower properties (i.e.,
sage honey will be somewhat of a nervine, expel
phlegm, fat, nourish mind, nerves, senses, immune
system, ojas (royal jelly and propolis are even bet-
ter for ojas), external—burns, wounds, sores, eyes.
It is a vehicle (anupana) to bring herbs to the deep-
est tissue layers, and make tea a tonic, expectorant,
or laxative.
     Heals the eyes, breaks up hard masses, relieves
Kapha, poison, hiccup, and diabetes (in small
doses). It further heals skin conditions, parasites,
difficult breathing, cough, diarrhea, cleanses and
heals wounds, and aggravates Váyu. It becomes
toxic if cooked, if used in hot weather by people
with Pitta diseases, if cooked, if used in hot weather
by people with Pitta diseases, or with hot foods.
Warm raw honey is acceptable (i.e., in warm wa-
ter); it promotes vomiting, and is good for decoc-
tion enemas.
Contraindications: Heating destroys medicinal
properties, aggravates Pitta, creates subtle toxins,
so it is better not to cook or bake with it. Excess
use will derange humors just like white sugar does.
It is also a subtle toxin when taken with equal pro-
portions of ghee (better to make it 1:2 or 2:1 pro-
portions) which breeds toxins or áma, feeds infec-
tions, fevers, tumors
Jaggery (Guæa)
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+ Indian raw,
natural sugar containing vitamins and minerals
Action: Rejuvenative, tonic
Indications: Difficult, painful, or burning urine,
anemia, debility, rejuvenation. Any whole cane
sugar such as the Sucanat and Florida Crystals
brands of cane sugar are similar to jaggery, but are
cooler for Pitta doßhas. Well washed and stored
(old) only slightly increases Kapha, helps elimi-
nation of feces and urine.
Lactose
Energetics: Milk sugar
Action: Tonic
Indications: Empowers herbs.
Maltose/Malt Syrup
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet
Action: Tonic, demulcent, analgesic
Indications: Chronic colds, lungs, stomach, abdomi-
nal and intestinal spasms, colic, children, convales-
cence.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
152
Maple Sugar
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VP- K+
Action: One of the best natural sugars; nutritive,
demulcent
Indications: Cough, fever, burning.
Molasses
Energetics: Sweet/hot/sweet V- PK+
Action: Iron, nutritive, tonic
Indications: Builds blood, muscles, heart, debil-
ity, gynecological—pregnancy, postpartum.
Rock Candy (Mishri)
Energetics: Made from sugar—it gives energy
Action: Demulcent
Indications: Cough, burning in the chest, used in
pujas or rituals to the Deities and then eaten as
prasad (blessed food). Better than molasses, an
aphrodisiac, for emaciation and reducing Váyu.
When taken with ginger in water, it relieves Pitta,
a useful summer drink.
White Sugar
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VPK+
It is artificial, overcooked, toxic, áma+, Tamasic,
aggravates blood, feeds infections, leaches vita-
mins and minerals from the body, deranges water
metabolism, upsets sugar and fat metabolism;
weakens liver and pancreas; hyperactivity, addic-
tive. In moderation it can build tissues, though bet-
ter to use whole sugars listed.
Condiments
Carob
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet VPK=
Sattwic
Action: Nutritive, demulcent
Indications: Weakness, substitute for chocolate.
Chocolate
Energetics: Sweet, sour/hot/sweet VPK+; rajasic
and tamasic
Action: Stimulant, calmative, aphrodisiac
Indications: Depression, hypotension, as herbal tea.
Contraindications: Usually prepared with white
sugar so it deranges Kapha
Mayonnaise
Energetics: Sour, sweet/hot/sour V- PK+
Indications: Used on salad as a balance for Váyu.
Contraindications: Heavy, hard to digest
Salt (Namak/Lavaò)
Energetics: Salty/hot/sweet V- PK+
Indications: A little softens food and makes more
digestible, aids saliva and gastric juices, gargle,
soothe and soften mucus membranes and muscles;
draws out toxins, relieves muscle tension; large
amounts are used in emesis to clear stomach.
Contraindications: Aggravates blood, excess de-
ranges all humors, weakens digestion, nausea, heat,
and heaviness; not good with heavy or moist foods
(i.e., dairy products) Sea Salt is better than com-
mercial, refined salt. Black Salt is better than sea
salt; P+ Rock Salt is drier, lighter and a better di-
gestive stimulant—better for Váyu; Tridoähic/best
Vegetable Salts are good, they contain many min-
erals
Vinegar (Vikankar)
Energetics: Sour/hot/sour V- PK+ (K mild)
Action: Digestive, circulatory stimulant
Indications: Aids secretion of hydrochloric acid,
promotes and eases menstruation (natural forms
like apple cider vinegar, are preferred to refined
commercial brands. Extract alkaloids from herbs
(acetic tinctures, i.e., lobelia), other sour condi-
ments, lemon or lime juice, sour pickles, perform
similarly to vinegar.
Liquids
Liquids are very important to our nutrition as we
are mainly made up of plasma.
Milk: Is sweet in initial and post-digestive taste; cool
in energy. VP- K+. It is invigorating, increasing the
dhátus.
     Cows: Promotes longevity and rejuvenation. It
helps strengthen emaciation after injury, increases
intelligence, strength and breast milk. It is a natural

153
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
laxative, relieves exhaustion, dizziness, toxins, dif-
ficult breathing, cough, severe thirst and hunger;
chronic fevers, urinary and bleeding disorders. It
promotes auspiciousness. Cows’ milk is said to be
the best of the milks.
     Goats: Easily digested and heals pulmonary TB,
fevers, difficult breathing, bleeding disorders, and
diarrhea.
     Butter (fresh): Is an aphrodisiac, improves com-
plexion, strength, digestion, absorbs water, heals
Váyu and Pitta concerns, blood, pulmonary TB,
hemorrhoids, facial paralysis, eye problems, and
cough.
     Ghee (clarified butter): Improves intelligence,
memory, digestion, longevity, reproductive fluid,
eyesight; good for children and the elderly, supple
body, pleasant voice, lungs, herpes, injury, Váyu
and Pitta disorders, insanity, fevers, TB, and is
highly auspicious.
     Yogurt: (made by hand and mixed with pepper
and sugar) strengthens the body. [Mixed with wa-
ter it makes Lassi, which promotes digestion when
consumed during the meal. One-half water for
Váyu and Pitta; 3/4 water for Kapha.] Yogurt or
lassi is not to be taken with diseases involving
blocked channels (srotas). [See the dairy section
for further details—page 146]
Alcohol
Energetics: Pungent, sweet, bitter, sour/hot/sour V-
PK+ rajasic
Action: Beer—diuretic
Indications: Small amounts of wine aid digestion
and circulation (particularly medicated Áyurvedic
wines, like drakßha), relax nerves, promote men-
struation; extracting herb properties (especially spicy
or bitters). Beer causes kidney stones. Wine is the
best form of light consumption. Hard liquor is very
disruptive. Sweet liqueurs are deranging due to the
combination of sugar and alcohol.
Contraindications: Excess aggravates all humors,
aggravates blood, deranges liver, pancreas, kidneys,
addiction, not for yoga or meditation; beer—long
term—causes edema and overweight
Coffee
Energetics: Pungent, bitter/warm/pungent KVP+
Rajasic
Action: Nervine, cardiac stimulant
Indications: Occasional use for energy, hypotension,
depression.
Contraindications: Mild narcotic, addictive
Fruit Juices
Energetics: Áma+
Action: Laxative
Indications: Sour or astringent are better (cran-
berry, lemon, lime, pineapple, pomegranate, Sour
V-; astringent PK-).
Contraindications: Weaken digestive fire, not taken
with or directly after meals or first thing in the
morning
Herbal Teas
Energetics: spicy and astringent
Spicy- ginger, cinnamon, cloves, cardamom, or-
ange peel, mint, chamomile, etc.—stimulate diges-
tion VK Astringent—alfalfa, dandelion, chicory,
strawberry leaf, hibiscus, etc.—antacid, alterative
PK
Milk & Dairy
Energetics: See Dairy section (p. 135)
Milk VP- (with sugar or honey)
Buttermilk V
Mineral Water
Energetics: Carbonated PK- V+
Action: Oxygenates blood and cells
Indications: Circulation, some mineral supplement-
ing
Soda
Contraindications: Both commercial (Coke, Pepsi
etc.) and natural are sweet and usually  taken cold.
They do not combine well with other foods, weak-
ens agni, weaken spleen and pancreas, derange
sugar and water metabolism
Indications: Better in hot weather or when very
thirsty.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
154
Tea
Energetics: Bitter, sweet, astringent/cool/pungent
PK- V+ some feel it is sattwic
Contraindications: Refined teas may be artificial and
damaging, excess causes insomnia, dry mouth and
thirst, overly brewed causes constipation
Indications: Taken with milk and spices like gin-
ger and cinnamon (Indian Chai) it is less aggra-
vating to Váyu. Best taken after meals, as astrin-
gent tastes are digested last. Counters hyperacid-
ity, summer drink, counters heat, damp, and sun
exposure; migraine headaches, overly brewed
causes constipation (so it is good for treating diar-
rhea).
Vegetable Juice
Energetics: See the vegetable section
Sour (i.e., tomato) P+, blood aggravation
Salty V- (as soup is best)
Green (celery, parsley, comfrey leaf) detox, PKV+
Carrot- cleansing, strengthening (too sweet, may
weaken digestion)
Wheat Grass- highly cleansing, good for áma, PK-
, cleans blood, counters infection and tumors, V+
unless used with sours—lime, lemon, orange
Water
Energetics: Fresh spring or well is best. Tap water
is chlorinated and devitalized; causes disease and
áma aggravation.
Váyu—warm or hot, better with milk or spiced due
to its lightness
Pitta—taken a little cool or at room temperature
Kapha—warm or hot, not in excess
Cold—astringent—stops bleeding, relieve burning
sensation
Warm—stimulant, laxative, promotes sweating, re-
lieves cold sensation
Distilled—devitalized, depletes práòa, V++, drains
toxins from system
Excess—(especially distilled) leaches nutrients and
dilutes plasma
Spring—water is preferred over distilled water.
     Áyurveda suggests that liquids are best taken in
a form other than plain water as water leeches the
body of its minerals and nutrients. For example,
herbal teas are preferred over plain water.
Váyu—drink between Pitta and Kapha, sweet,
sour, fruit, vegetable juices, and herb teas
Pitta—more, sweet, bitter, astringent fruit or veg-
etable juices, herb teas
Kapha—drink less, bitter, astringent, diuretic, pun-
gent herbal teas
     Meals—1/2 to 1 cup with meals is ok (lassi is
recommended) to wash and clear taste buds more
than this dilutes digestive juices
     Season—General—drink 3 to 5 cups warm (as
tea) [summer—more; winter—less]
     Water is the great healer described in the
Atharva Veda. It should be obtained from clean
sources: wells, rivers, etc. Áyurveda says that our
bodies are mostly made up of plasma. Drinking
too much plain water will deplete the minerals and
nutrients. Autumn and summer are the two sea-
sons that are best for healthy people to drink plain
water (and drink less plain water in the other sea-
sons). Therefore, drinking teas, and fruit and veg-
etable juice is advised. Some water is acceptable
to drink at the beginning, the middle and end of
the meal. Drinking water at the end of the meal
will have no adverse effects on the person
     Precautions: Do not drink water with a low di-
gestive fire, abdominal tumors, or enlarged abdo-
men; anemia, diarrhea, hemorrhoids, duodenum
diseases, pulmonary TB, or edema. Do not drink
water at the beginning of the meal (causes stout-
ness), or at the end of the meal (causes emaciation)
     Cold water: Relieves alcoholic intoxication, ex-
haustion, fainting, vomiting, debility, giddiness,
thirst, sun heat causing burning sensations, Pitta
excesses, blood problems, and poisoning.
     Hot or warm water: Stimulates hunger, helps
digestion and the throat, easily digested, cleanses
the urinary bladder, relieves hiccup, gas, Váyu and
Kapha imbalances.
     Boiled water: Does not overly increase the
body’s inner moisture content. It is good for Pitta
doßha. Do not drink boiled water kept overnight; it
becomes stale and aggravates all three doßhas.

155
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
     Coconut water: Relieves Váyu and Pitta doßha
concerns.
Benefits of Drinking Water
     Boiled Water: Tridoßhic. It is light, a digestive
stimulant; dispels gas, heals pain in the  rib area;
rhinitis, and hiccup. Boiled and reduced to 3/4—
relieves Váyu; reduced to 1/2—balances Pitta. It
is useful in early and late winter, spring, and rainy
season. When water is boiled and reduced to 1/4 it
relieves Kapha (but it is also constipative). It is
helpful in the summer and fall. When water is
cooled after boiling it heals all doßhas, and is
wholesome. Boiled water is not to be kept over-
night; it becomes stale and impure.
Hot Water: VK- Light. It stimulates digestive
power, heals pains in the rib area; rhinitis, gas, hic-
cup, and cleanses the urinary tract. Taken before
bed, it cleanses Kapha sticking to the inner body;
eliminates Váyu, and removes indigestion.
Warm Water: This is not advised for exhaustion,
mental fatigue, convulsions, hunger, and bleeding
in the upper body areas.
     Water Digestion: Unboiled water takes three
hours to digest. Water that is boiled and  allowed
to cool down is digested in 11/2 hours. Water that
is boiled and drunk when warm is digested in 48
minutes.
Less Water Quantity: For certain diseases, it is
advised to drink less water: anorexia, coryza, sali-
vation, edema, consumption, poor digestion, ob-
stinate abdominal diseases, fever, eye diseases,
ulcers, and diabetes mellitus.
Spices & Herb Therapy
Spices
Energetics: Pungent/warm/pungent VK- P+
Actions: Light, dry, warm, fragrant, subtle, clear,
stimulant, carminative, antispasmodic, diaphoretic,
expectorant
Indications: Spices regulate appetite and strengthen
the agni fire, lungs, head, gastrointestinal, cleanse
srotas, burn up áma, aid mental activity.
Antidote: Counters heaviness, dispels gas, eases di-
gestion
Commercial spices: Most supermarket spices have
been irradiated, destroying their práòa and adding
the negative effects of radiation to the spices
Powders: Once powdered, energies begin to dimin-
ish after 6 months, although they have been found
useful up to two years later
Combinations: Adding them to heated ghee or oils
empowers spices, as does a bit of honey or raw
sugar
Individual Spices
Anise (Sweet Fennel) (Shatapußhpa)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, lactogogue
Indications: Similar to fennel but is more pungent
and warm, abdominal pain, gas, indigestion, men-
strual cramping, vomiting, dry cough.
Asafoetida (Hi´g)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+ tamasic
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, antispasmodic,
anthelmintic
Indications: Some consider it the best Váyu spice,
best for relieving abdominal distention, pain,
cramping and gas, parasites, worms, candida, de-
layed or difficult menstruation, pain, anxiety, men-
tal disorders—i.e., nervousness, vertigo, anxiety,
hysteria, worry, depression, lethargy, cough,
asthma, arthritis, headaches, nerve pain, paralysis,
circulation; strengthens heart; palpitations, angina,
exorcism.
Contraindications: Not for meditation or yoga;
(tamasic), aggravates bile or acid conditions
Antidote: For beans
Basil/Holy Basil (tulsí) (see Chapter 4 materia
medica)
Bay Leaves
Energetics: Pungent, bitter/hot/pungent VK- P+
mildly
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, analgesic

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
156
Indications: Cleansing, headaches, clear srotas,
cough and congestion, diarrhea, hemorrhoids. Use-
ful as an insect repellent in the kitchen.
Antidote: Dairy, meat, damp sticky food
Black Pepper (Maricha)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK-P+ rajasic
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, decongestant,
expectorant
Indications: Burns up áma very well, colds, flu,
cough, gargle for sore throat, fevers, colon cleanse,
digests fat and obesity; metabolism, mucus, ex-
pectorant, sinus congestion, cold extremities, raises
agni, epileptic seizures, with honey, clears Kapha
from the system in the morning. External—inflam-
mations, urticaria, erysipelas. [For full details see
Materia Medica Chapter 4 - Maricha - page 95]
Caraway/Cumin (Jíraka, Jíra)
Energetics: Caraway—Sour, pungent/hot/sweet K-
VP+ Cumin—Pungent/hot/pungent VKP=
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, lactogogue, di-
uretic (used like fennel and coriander)
Indications: Digests bread, like fennel and dill rela-
tives; colitis, gas, digestion, abdominal pain, dis-
tention.
Antidote: Overeating, heavy foods
Cardamom (Elá) see Chapter 4 materia medica
Antidote: Ice cream, milk, cold or sweet foods like
bananas, coffee
Cayenne (Marichaphalam)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+ hottest;
most yang; rajasic
Actions: Stimulant, expectorant, diaphoretic, hemo-
static, anthelmintic
Indications: A heart strengthener, circulation, gives
energy after shock, heart attack or collapse; stops
acute bleeding; absorption, chill, abdominal disten-
tion, worms, colds, flu, sinus congestion, cleanses
colon, helps digest fats, burns áma.
Antidote: For raw food
Precautions: Very damaging to mucus membranes.
Not an advised spice.
Chamomile (Babunike-phul - H)
Energetics: Pungent, bitter/cold/pungent PK- V+ in
excess; sattwic
Actions: Stimulant, antispasmodic, emmenagogue,
emetic, diaphoretic, carminative  analgesic,
nervine, calmative
Indications: Pain, headaches; abdominal, children
—nerves and digestion; colic, bile, blood, men-
strual, ear, neuralgia, and injury pains; external use
also; calms nervousness, anxiety, hysteria, insom-
nia, neurasthenia; poor digestion related to ema-
ciation and nervousness.
Cinnamon (Thwak)
see page 107
Cloves (Lavangaha)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent; rajasic
K- P+ V+ in excess
Actions: Stimulant, expectorant, decongestant,
anthelmintic, analgesic, aphrodisiac Indications:
Gas, nausea, vomiting, toothache, hiccup, laryn-
gitis, pharyngitis, headache, clears head, sinus and
lungs, nerves, toothache, colds, cough, asthma,
warms and disinfects the lymphatics, low blood
pressure, impotence, indigestion, opens and clears
srotas.
Precaution: Promotes sexual activity
Antidote: Sugars
Coriander (Dhyánaka) (For full details see Mate-
ria Medica Chapter 4 - Dhányak - page 83)
Antidote: Hot foods and spices (i.e., as cilantro -
coriander leaf)
Cumin (see caraway)
Dill (Misroya)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/sweet VPK=
leaves cooler, seeds warmer
Actions: Stimulant, antispasmodic, lactogogue

157
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Indications: Colic, cramps, and diarrhea for chil-
dren; similar to fennel.
Fennel (Methica, Sonph)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/sweet VPK= perhaps the
most sattwic spice
Actions: Stimulant, diuretic, carminative, sto-
machic, antispasmodic, lactogogue
Indications: Abdominal pain (gas or indigestion),
menstrual cramps, hernia, diarrhea, colic, vomit-
ing, morning sickness, nausea, anorexia, cough,
dry cough, promotes semen, increases vision, raises
agni, difficult or burning urination, digestion—
children and elderly; promotes menstruation, nurs-
ing mothers—increases breast milk flow.
Fenugreek (Medhika, Methi)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+
Actions: Demulcent, diuretic, tonic, rejuvenative,
aphrodisiac, stimulant, antirheumatic Indications:
Longevity, nerves, allergies, arthritis, skin, reju-
venation, diabetes, allergies, bronchitis, flu, chronic
cough, dysentery, dyspepsia, convalescence,
edema, toothache, sciatica, neurasthenia, counters
cold (i.e., extremities, abdominal pain, indigestion,
respiratory and reproductive systems, hair growth,
promotes breast milk flow, liver hypo-function,
seminal debility, debility, outdoor winter work).
Do not use when  pregnant.
Garlic see Chapter 4 materia medica
Ginger see Chapter 4 materia medica
Horseradish (Sobhanjana, Sirgu)
Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent VKP+
like mustard
Actions: Stimulant, expectorant, diuretic, antispas-
modic, antilithic (dissolves stones)
Indications: Cleanses lungs, diabetes, sinuses, colds,
flu, sore throat, hoarseness, digestion, circulation,
rheumatism. External poultice for facial neuralgia,
inflammatory swellings).
Antidotes: Fish and raw vegetables
Marjoram (Sathra - H)
Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent VKP+
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, expectorant
Indications: Colds, flu, weak digestion, promotes
menstruation.
Mustard (Rajika- Brown; Sarßhapah - Black)
Energetics: Bitter (brown) Pungent/hot/pungent
VK- P+; best Kapha spice
Actions: Stimulant, analgesic, expectorant
Indications: Laxative, 1 teaspoon ingested as an
emetic for drunkenness, poisons. Clears head and
sinuses, chronic colds and coughs. Hot mustard
bath—as an emmenagogue. Ten-minute external
paste—chest troubles, blisters, inflammatory nerve
disorders, pain and swelling of the joints, edema,
headache, abdominal colic and pain, obstinate
vomiting; gout, sciatica, urticaria, arthritis.
Nutmeg (Malathi-phalam; Jati-phalam)
Energetics: Sweet, pungent, astringent/hot/pungent
VKP= best sedative of all spices; tamasic
Actions: Stimulant, carminative, astringent; use for
abdominal pain, dysmenorrhea, insomnia, poor
absorption (especially in the small intestine), ab-
dominal distention, incontinence, diarrhea, dysen-
tery, impotence, mental disorders (i.e., nervous-
ness, anxiety, hysteria—prepared in milk decoc-
tion)
Oregano
Energetics: Sour, astringent/hot/pungent VKP+
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, carminative, anal-
gesic, antiseptic
Indications: Colds, cough, nausea, morning sick-
ness, dysmenorrhea, gas, indigestion. Excellent for
severe distention.
Peppermint (Paparaminta - H)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/pungent VPK=

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
158
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, carminative, anal-
gesic
Indications: Colds and flu, fevers, and sore throat;
clears head, sinuses, allergic headaches, and hay
fever; opens mind and senses; promotes emotional
harmony.
Poppy Seeds (Kasa bijam)
Energetics: Sweet, astringent/hot/ pungent VKP+
Actions: Stimulant, antispasmodic, astringent
Indications: Diarrhea, malabsorption, cramping
pain, cough, aids digestion.
Rosemary
Energetics: Pungent, bitter/hot/pungent VK- P+
mildly
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, excellent emme-
nagogue
Indications: Eases menstruation, headaches, har-
monizes and strengthens heart and emotions.
Saffron see Chapter 4 materia medica
Sage (Salbia-sefakuss - H)
Energetics: Pungent, astringent/hot/pungent VK- P+
in excess
Actions: Stimulant, diuretic, nervine, astringent
Indications: Opens the lungs, head, sinuses; sore
throat; clears srotas, voice, perception, thought;
relieves excessive sexual desire, calms heart, di-
gests meat and dairy, reduces excess secretions in
body (i.e., stops the flow of milk in nursing women,
swollen lymph glands, dries excess mucus in lungs
and nose, dries sores, ulcers, and bleeding; and
night sweats), is a diuretic for urinary tract prob-
lems, calms the brain.
Spearmint (Pahadi pudina - H)
Energetics: Sweet/cold/pungent VPK=
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, diuretic, calmative
Indications: Painful, difficult or burning urine (cold),
colic, indigestion, and sleep in  children, nausea,
vomiting, morning sickness.
Thyme (Ipar - H)
Energetics: Pungent/hot/pungent VK- P+
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, anticough, anthel-
mintic, antiseptic
Indications: Severe cough, whooping cough, bad
breath, indigestion, gas, menstrual disorders.
Turmeric see Chapter 4 materia medica
Vitamins
     Under normal conditions, Áyurveda suggests
persons receive their vitamins through herbs and
foods because they are easier to digest and absorb
in these simple or elemental forms. Each doßha
requires a few vitamins that may naturally become
depleted more rapidly than the rest. If vitamin pills
or liquids are taken, it is suggested coriander or
cardamom be taken with them to help digest and
absorb the vitamins and minerals. Pitta doßhas have
the strongest digestive system, and can better uti-
lize supplements without weakening their diges-
tive fire. Kapha doßhas need the least amount of
supplements, and more hot spices to raise their
digestive fire. Further, oily vitamins (e.g., E, D, A)
are not advised due to their tendency to dampen
digestion.
Doäha Vitamins Minerals
Váyu A, B3, D, E, C zinc, calcium
Pitta A, B, K calcium, iron
Kapha B6, D none needed
a
h
ä
o
D
s
n
i
m
a
ti
V
sla
r
e
n
i
M
u
y
á
V
C
,
E
,
D
,3
B
,
A
m
uicla
c
,c
niz
atti
P
K
,
B
,
A
n
o
ri
,
m
uicla
c
a
h
p
a
K
D
,6
B
d
e
d
e
e
n
e
n
o
n

159
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
s
n
i
m
a
ti
V
y
c
n
eicife
D
n
i
m
a
ti
V
f
o
s
m
o
t
p
m
y
S
A
er
uta
m
er
p
,s
elp
m
ip
,s
elk
nir
w
;nik
s
y
h
cti
,yla
c
s
,h
g
u
o
r
,y
r
d
,g
nin
r
u
b
,ss
e
n
d
nilb
th
gin
,slia
n
tilp
s
,ff
u
r
d
n
a
d
,g
nig
a
a
e
n
r
o
c
g
nin
e
k
ciht
;s
e
y
e
g
nih
cti
*
1
B
ra
e
,a
m
e
d
e
,e
u
gitaf
,n
oits
e
gid
d
n
a
y
r
o
m
e
m
r
o
o
p
er
uliaf
tra
e
h
,ytilib
atirri
,s
m
elb
o
r
p
*
2
B
ss
ol
ria
h
,ytivitis
n
e
s
th
gil
;s
e
y
e
to
h
s
d
o
olb
,g
nin
r
u
b
,g
nih
cti
sre
d
r
o
sid
re
vil
*
3
B
,e
u
gitaf
;
m
silo
b
ate
m
d
n
a
n
oitalu
cric
,y
r
o
m
e
m
r
o
o
p
lo
rets
elo
h
c
*
5
B
y
a
h
,sre
d
r
o
sid
tra
e
h
d
n
a
e
v
re
n
,n
oits
e
gid
r
o
o
p
,s
n
oitc
ef
ni
ss
ol
ria
h
,re
v
ef
*
6
B
,ai
m
e
n
a
,a
m
e
z
c
e
,e
c
n
ala
b
m
i
e
n
o
m
r
o
h
,n
oits
e
gid
r
o
o
p
ff
u
r
d
n
a
d
,S
M
P
,n
oitn
eter
reta
w
*
9
B
ss
ol
ria
h
,sre
d
r
o
sid
.I.
G
,ai
m
e
n
a
2
1
B
r
o
o
p
,ain
m
o
s
ni
,e
u
gitaf
,g
nig
a
er
uta
m
er
p
sre
d
r
o
sid
m
ets
y
s
s
u
o
v
re
n
lartn
e
c
;n
oitartn
e
c
n
o
c/y
r
o
m
e
m
C
,ss
e
n
k
a
e
w
la
n
er
d
a
,g
nin
o
sio
p
late
m
y
v
a
e
h
,s
m
u
g
g
nid
e
elb
etilulle
c
D
ria
h
,s
e
n
o
b
,slia
n
,hte
et
k
a
e
w
E
nik
s
y
r
d
,sla
n
er
d
a
k
a
e
w
,ss
e
n
k
a
e
w
e
v
re
n/elc
s
u
m
F
nik
s
,sre
d
r
o
sid
ela
m
ef
,lo
rets
elo
h
c
,sre
d
r
o
sid
tra
e
h
,sis
o
r
bif
cits
y
c
,n
ois
n
etre
p
y
h
,s
n
oitc
ef
ni
ts
a
e
y
,sre
d
r
o
sid
sre
d
r
o
sid
la
nits
etni
,s
e
u
ssit
d
e
m
r
o
fla
m
,sre
d
r
o
sid
re
vil
K
g
nid
e
elb
,g
nig
a
er
uta
m
er
p
,y
g
re
n
e
w
ol
*B1- Thiamine, B2- Riboflavin, B3- Niacin, B5- Pathothenic Acid, B6- Pyroxidine, B9- Folic Acid

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
160
s
n
i
m
a
ti
V
s
e
c
r
u
o
S
d
o
o
F
A
,slitn
el
,y
o
s
,n
r
o
c
,s
elb
ate
g
e
v
w
olle
y
r
o
n
e
er
g
k
ra
d
kli
m
elo
h
w
,s
n
a
e
b
o
z
n
a
b
ra
g
1
B
,s
elb
ate
g
e
v
n
e
er
g
,s
e
ss
alo
m
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
,n
ar
b
e
cir
stu
n
,r
u
olf
y
o
s
,s
n
a
e
b
2
B
,
m
re
g
,ta
e
h
w
,e
y
r
,ta
e
h
w
elo
h
w
,y
o
s
,n
r
o
c
,telli
m
s
n
e
er
g
k
ra
d
,s
e
ss
alo
m
,stu
n
,o
d
a
c
o
v
a
,kli
m
,s
n
a
e
b
3
B
,s
n
a
e
b
k
c
alb
,e
cir
dli
w
,y
elra
b
,ta
e
h
w
k
c
u
b
,ta
e
h
w
kli
m
,s
n
e
er
g
k
ra
d
,stu
n
,s
d
e
e
s
e
m
a
s
e
s
5
B
,e
g
a
b
b
a
c
,ilo
c
c
o
r
b
,s
n
a
e
b
,n
r
o
c
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
re
w
olfilu
a
c
6
B
sto
rra
c
,s
n
a
e
b
,ta
e
h
w
k
c
u
b
,e
cir
n
w
o
r
b
9
B
,
m
re
g
ta
e
h
w
,s
elb
ate
g
e
v
n
e
er
g
,d
ala
s
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
tr
u
g
o
y
,stc
u
d
o
r
p
y
o
s
,s
niar
g
d
etu
o
r
p
s
,n
ar
b
2
1
B
,s
e
otato
p
,yli
m
af
e
g
a
b
b
a
c
,stu
o
r
p
s
aflafla
,s
u
g
ara
p
s
a
g
n
ú
m
,sre
p
p
e
p
n
e
er
g
,ar
k
o
,s
a
e
p
,s
n
e
er
g
d
rats
u
m
,s
n
ole
m
,stiu
rf
s
u
rtic
,s
eirre
b
,s
e
ota
m
ot
,s
n
a
e
b
,y
ria
d
,elp
p
a
e
nip
,s
a
y
a
p
a
p
,s
e
o
g
n
a
m
ík
ala
m
á
C
kli
m
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
D
rettu
b
,s
n
e
er
g
k
ra
d
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
,lio
x
alf
,th
giln
u
s
E
,s
d
e
e
s
,stu
n
,s
n
e
er
g
k
ra
d
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
,
m
re
g
ta
e
h
w
s
e
ss
alo
m
,kli
m
,rettu
b
F
y
o
s
,lio
d
e
e
s
x
alf
,lio
e
vilo
,lio
d
e
e
s
nil
,slio
elb
ate
g
e
v
s
d
e
e
s
,lio
re
w
olffa
s
,lio
K
kli
m
,s
e
ss
alo
m
,s
g
g
e
,tr
u
g
o
y

161
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
sla
r
e
n
i
M
y
c
n
eicife
D
la
r
e
n
i
M
f
o
s
m
o
t
p
m
y
S
nitoi
B
e
n
o
rets
ots
et/la
n
er
d
a
,g
nidla
b
,
m
silo
b
ate
m
r
o
o
p
,n
oiss
er
p
e
d
,ai
m
e
n
a
g
nidla
b
,sitita
m
re
d
,sre
d
r
o
sid
e
nilo
h
C
g
niy
ar
g
er
uta
m
er
p
,s
e
v
re
n
k
a
e
w
,ytin
u
m
m
i
w
ol
,taf
lotis
o
n
I
n
oita
pits
n
o
c
,lo
rets
elo
h
c
,ss
ol
ria
h
,a
m
e
z
c
e
A
B
A
P
o
gilitiv
,g
niy
ar
g
er
uta
m
er
p
,n
oits
e
gid
ni
,e
u
gitaf
,ss
e
n
s
u
o
v
re
n
s
dio
n
o
v
alf
oi
B
a
m
e
z
c
e
,s
m
u
g
g
nid
e
elb
,s
nie
v
e
s
o
cira
v
m
uicla
C
s
p
m
arc
g
el
,sto
p
s
lia
n
etih
w
,ain
m
o
s
ni
,S
M
P
;slia
n
,hte
et
,ria
h
k
a
e
w
m
ui
m
o
r
h
C
d
e
w
ols
,e
u
gitaf
,ss
ol
y
r
o
m
e
m
,ai
m
e
c
ylg
o
p
y
h
,sis
o
relc
s
oiretra
ht
w
o
r
g
elc
s
u
m
,ht
w
o
r
g
e
dir
olh
C
g
niti
m
o
v
s
u
oicin
re
p
re
p
p
o
C
e
n
ot
nik
s
r
o
o
p
,r
olo
c
ria
h
f
o
ss
ol
e
nid
o
I
dlo
c
,nik
s
y
r
d
,sre
d
r
o
sid
dio
r
y
ht
n
o
rI
,s
n
oitc
ef
ni
tn
e
u
q
erf
,slia
n
k
a
e
w
,ria
h
elttir
b
,ytilativ
w
ol
,ai
m
e
n
a
hta
er
b
tr
o
h
s
,nik
s
y
h
cti
m
uis
e
n
g
a
M
sis
air
o
s
p
,s
elc
s
u
m
e
s
n
et
,ytilativ
w
ol
e
s
e
n
a
g
n
a
M
s
m
elb
o
r
p
e
e
n
k
,ss
e
n
k
a
e
w
niar
b
,s
ete
b
aid
m
u
n
e
d
b
ylo
M
n
oitp
m
u
s
n
o
c
d
o
o
f
,ht
w
o
r
g
d
e
s
a
erc
e
d
s
u
r
o
h
p
s
o
h
P
e
u
gitaf
,ss
e
n
k
a
e
w
elc
s
u
m
,ss
ol
e
n
o
b
m
uiss
ato
P
nik
s
y
r
d
,n
oits
e
gid
ni
,ai
m
hty
h
rra
,n
oiss
er
p
e
d
m
uin
ele
S
ss
ol
yticits
ale
nik
s
,ff
u
r
d
n
a
d
,g
nig
a
er
uta
m
er
p
a
cili
S
slia
n
k
a
e
w
,ss
e
nib
b
alf
m
uid
o
S
a
e
s
u
a
n
,s
elc
s
u
m
k
a
e
w
,aix
er
o
n
a
r
u
flu
S
nik
s
yla
c
s
,slia
n
k
a
e
w
,a
m
e
z
c
e
c
ni
Z
f
o
ss
ol
,ss
ol
ria
h
,s
n
oitc
ef
ni/s
dlo
c
,ss
e
n
d
nilb
th
gin
,sto
p
s
lia
n
etih
w
lle
m
s
d
n
a
ets
at

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
162
s
d
o
o
F
n
i
sla
r
e
n
i
M
sla
r
e
n
i
M
s
d
o
o
F
nitoi
B
re
w
olfilu
a
c
,s
e
m
u
g
el
,stu
n
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
e
nilo
h
C
)s
n
a
e
b
y
o
s
,stu
n
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
ni(
nihtic
el
lotis
o
n
I
s
d
e
e
s
,s
e
m
u
g
el
,sta
o
,y
elra
b
,e
cir
n
w
o
r
b
,s
e
ss
alo
m
A
B
A
P
s
e
ss
alo
m
,
m
re
g
ta
e
h
w
,e
cir
n
w
o
r
b
s
dio
n
o
v
alf
oi
B
C
ni
m
ativ
s
a
s
b
re
h
e
m
a
s
e
ht
m
uicla
C
,b
o
ra
c
,tr
u
g
o
y
,tiu
rf
d
eir
d
,stu
n
,kli
m
,s
d
e
e
s
,s
n
e
er
g
k
ra
d
r
o
a
e
s
sta
o
,u
f
ot
,ilo
c
c
o
r
b
,s
u
g
ara
p
s
a
m
ui
m
o
r
h
C
s
e
otato
p
,lio
n
r
o
c
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
e
dir
olh
C
tla
s
re
p
p
o
C
stu
n
,sta
o
,s
nisiar
,s
o
d
a
c
o
v
a
,s
niar
g
,s
e
m
u
g
el
,ple
k
e
nid
o
I
elp
p
a
e
nip
,s
e
ota
m
ot
,sto
rra
c
,s
n
a
e
b
,ple
k
n
o
rI
,s
d
e
e
s
,s
nisiar
,tiu
rf
,s
e
otato
p
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
,e
slu
d
,y
elsra
p
,s
n
e
er
g
y
fa
el
kli
m
,stu
n
m
uis
e
n
g
a
M
y
fa
el
d
n
a
a
e
s
,stiu
rf
d
eir
d
,slitn
el
,stu
n
,y
o
s
,n
r
o
c
w
olle
y
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
sto
cir
p
a
,e
cir
,la
e
m
n
r
o
c
,sta
o
,y
ria
d
,s
u
rtic
,y
rele
c
,s
elp
p
a
,s
n
e
er
g
e
s
e
n
a
g
n
a
M
,s
o
d
a
c
o
v
a
,s
d
e
e
s
,stu
n
,s
elb
ate
g
e
v
a
e
s
d
n
a
n
e
er
g
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
s
eirre
b
e
ulb
m
u
n
e
d
b
ylo
M
s
n
e
er
g
y
fa
el
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
,s
e
m
u
g
el
s
u
r
o
h
p
s
o
h
P
,s
d
e
e
s
e
m
a
s
e
s
,s
elb
ate
g
e
v
lla
,y
ria
d
,stu
n
,s
n
a
e
b
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
s
d
e
e
s
nik
p
m
u
p/re
w
olf
n
u
s
m
uiss
ato
P
,s
niar
g
,s
e
g
n
ar
o
,tiu
rf
d
eir
d
,s
elb
ate
g
e
v
lla
,ss
ercreta
w
,s
a
n
a
n
a
b
s
e
m
u
g
el
,y
ria
d
,s
d
e
e
s
re
w
olf
n
u
s
m
uin
ele
S
ilo
c
c
o
r
b
,s
e
ota
m
ot
,s
n
a
e
b
,s
niar
g
elo
h
w
a
cili
S
)
b
re
h
(
liate
sr
o
h
m
uid
o
S
tla
s
r
u
flu
S
s
n
a
e
b
,s
eirre
b
n
arc
,s
elp
p
a
,yli
m
af
e
g
a
b
b
a
c
,stu
n
c
ni
Z
s
elb
ate
g
e
v
,y
o
s
,s
niar
g
,s
d
e
e
s
re
w
olf
n
u
s/nik
p
m
u
p

163
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
Menus
     Below are sample menus for various health con-
cerns, as well as daily meals for various doßhas.
Váyu Doäha
Váyu (eat every 3 - 4 hours)
Váyu Arthritis
Serves: 4-5 people
Preparation: 30 minutes
V, P-; K +*
1/2 cup white basmati rice
1/2 cup split yellow múngdal
3 medium zucchinis 1 tsp. cardamom
1 tsp. balá 1 tsp. tulsí
1 tsp. turmeric 1 tsp. guggul
5 tsp. ghee 2 cups water
     Wash the rice and dal in water and place in a pot
with 2 cups of water; heat until it boils. Reduce the
flame to a slow boil and cook for 10 minutes (add
more water if needed).
     Add a little water in another pot and place a
steamer inside. Slice the zucchini, putting the slices
in the steamer and boil for 2 to 3 minutes. When
the food is ready, put the ghee in a frying pan and
turn the heat to high. Put a drop of water in the
pan. When it sizzles, lower the flame and add the
rest of the spices and stir until the aroma of the
herbs is released. Add the rice and dal to the mix-
ture in the frying pan and stir.
     [For a Pitta- or Kapha-reducing meal, replace
zucchini with celery. Add 1/4 tsp. neem to the
herbal ingredients]
r
e
m
m
u
S
/g
n
ir
p
S
lla
F
/r
et
n
i
W
g
n
i
k
a
W
r
u
o
h
2/1
(
e
r
ofe
b
)la
e
m
a
et
b
re
h
,
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c(
,á
h
d
n
a
g
a
w
h
¤
a
ála
h
pirt
)
hti
w
kli
m
to
h
e
e
h
g
,re
g
nig
h
s
erf
,
y
e
n
o
h
,cire
m
r
ut
h
¤
á
r
p
n
a
v
a
y
h
c
ts
a
f
k
a
e
r
B
e
cir
f
o
m
a
er
C
hti
w
e
e
h
g
,
d
n
a
,
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
fla
h
;ra
g
u
s
e
n
a
c
dli
m
d
elio
b
p
u
c
n
o
m
a
n
nic
hti
w
ra
g
u
s
e
n
a
c
d
n
a
m
a
er
C
r
o
la
e
m
ta
O
hti
w
ta
e
h
W
f
o
e
e
h
g
,
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
,
p
u
r
y
s
elp
a
m
d
n
a
k
c
a
n
S
r
o
tiu
rf
te
e
w
s
te
e
w
s
ra
g
u
s
e
n
a
c
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
hti
w
n
o
rettu
b
d
n
o
m
la
sita
p
a
h
c
hti
w
d
n
a
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
e
e
h
g
a
et
b
re
h
;
h
c
n
u
L
etih
w
ita
m
s
a
b
w
olle
y
tilp
s
,e
cir
g
n
ú
m
la
d ,
e
e
h
g
,
,otato
p
te
e
w
s
iss
al
elo
h
w
d
d
a
;e
m
a
s
ta
e
h
w
sita
p
a
h
c
k
c
a
n
S
d
e
e
s
e
m
a
s
e
s
,le
n
n
ef
,rettu
b
d
n
a
e
e
h
g
n
o
ita
p
a
h
c
hti
w
elp
p
a
d
e
k
a
b
d
n
a
n
o
m
a
n
nic
a
et
b
re
h
;y
e
n
o
h
r
e
n
n
i
D
,ats
a
p
e
k
o
h
citra
e
e
h
g
,h
s
a
u
q
s
,
,
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
iss
al
o
z
n
a
b
ra
g/y
elra
b
,p
u
o
s
e
e
h
g
,
,iss
al
,e
g
a
b
b
a
c
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
k
c
a
n
S
,re
g
nig
to
h
hti
w
a
et
e
cir
o
cil
d
n
a
y
e
n
o
h
e
e
h
g
,kli
m
d
elio
b
e
e
h
g
,
,re
g
nig
h
s
erf
y
e
n
o
h

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
164
Liver, Spleen, Gall Bladder Disorders
Serves: 4-5 people
Preparation: 30 minutes
V +, P, K -
1/2 cup basmati rice 1/2 cup lima beans
2 cups fresh corn 2 cups green beans
2 1/2 cups múng bean sprouts
1 tsp. turmeric 1 bunch cilantro
1 tsp. mañjißhóhá 1 tsp. gokßhura
2 cups water 1 tsp. bhúmíámalakí
5 tsp. ghee 1 bunch dandelion root
     Wash the rice and lima beans in water and place
in a pot with 2 cups of water; heat  until it boils.
Reduce the flame to a slow boil and cook for 10
minutes (add more water if needed).
     Put a little water in another pot and place a
steamer inside. Place the corn and green beans in
the steamer and boil for 2 to 3 minutes.
     When the food is ready, put the ghee in a frying
pan and turn the heat to high. Put a drop of water
in the pan. When it sizzles, lower the flame and
add the spices, stirring until the aroma of the herbs
is released. Add the rice and dal to the mixture in
the frying pan and stir for 15 to 30 seconds. Add a
múng bean sprout salad to the meal.
[Excellent for recovering
from alcohol addictions]
Heart Disorders
Serves: 4-5 people
Preparation: 30 minutes
V +, P, K -
1/2 cup whole wheat 1/2 cup aduki beans*
11/2 eggplants 1 bunch cilantro
1/4 tsp. turmeric 1/4 tsp. arjuna
1/4 tsp. guggul 5 tsp. ghee
3 cups water
tomato/cucumber/lettuce salad
     Soak aduki beans and wheat overnight. Wash
and peel eggplant and cut into slices. Pour salt on
both sides of the eggplant and let it sit on a paper
towel for about 1/2 hour. This draws out the alka-
loid properties (which may cause allergies). Then
cut the eggplant  into pieces.
r
e
m
m
u
S
/g
n
ir
p
S
lla
F
/r
et
n
i
W
g
n
i
k
a
W
a
et
b
re
h
¤(
ír
a
v
áta
h
,
)le
n
n
ef
,cire
m
r
ut
hti
w
e
e
h
g
e
n
a
c
,
ra
g
u
s
kli
m
to
h
hti
w
e
e
h
g
,
,cire
m
r
ut
n
a
v
a
y
h
c
h
¤
á
r
p
ts
a
f
k
a
e
r
B
r
o
e
cir
d
eff
u
p
hti
w
ta
e
h
w
e
e
h
g
,
,re
d
n
air
o
c
kli
m
tu
n
o
c
o
c
f
o
m
a
er
C
r
o
ta
e
h
W
hti
w
y
elra
b
e
e
h
g
,
,re
d
n
air
o
c
kli
m
y
o
s
k
c
a
n
S
rettib
r
o
te
e
w
s
tiu
rf
ra
e
p
r
o
elp
p
a
h
c
n
u
L
etih
w
ita
m
s
a
b
w
olle
y
tilp
s
,e
cir
g
n
ú
m
la
d ,
e
e
h
g
,
,ilo
c
c
o
r
b
,re
d
n
air
o
c
iss
al
,
d
ala
s
d
d
a
;e
m
a
s
ta
e
h
w
elo
h
w
sita
p
a
h
c
k
c
a
n
S
;s
d
e
e
s
re
w
olf
n
u
s
;le
n
n
ef
a
et
ss
ar
g
n
o
m
el
kli
m
ifr
u
b
;
a
et
tni
m
r
e
n
n
i
D
,ats
a
p
e
k
o
h
citra
e
e
h
g
,
,re
w
olfilu
a
c
,o
rtn
alic
iss
al
-a
b
ra
g/y
elra
b
,p
u
o
s
o
z
n
e
e
h
g
,
,e
g
a
b
b
a
c
,iss
al
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
k
c
a
n
S
tu
n
o
c
o
c
n
o
o
ra
c
a
m
,eip
nik
p
m
u
p
a
et
b
re
h
Pitta Doähas

165
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
g
n
ir
p
S
/r
e
m
m
u
S
lla
F
/r
et
n
i
W
ts
af
k
a
er
B
)
d
eriu
q
er
to
n
(
a
et
e
cir
o
cil/re
g
nig
h
¤
á
r
p
n
a
v
a
y
h
c
,
sta
o
g
hti
w
e
eff
o
c
kli
m
k
c
a
n
S
)
d
e
siv
d
a
to
n
(
s
eirre
b
n
arc
sto
cir
p
a
d
e
w
ets
h
c
n
u
L
tilp
s
,y
elra
b
w
olle
y
la
d
g
n
ú
m
,
e
e
h
g
,y
rele
c
,
iss
al
,re
d
n
air
o
c
ta
e
h
w
k
c
u
b
sita
p
a
h
c
a
m
il
,
sle
ss
u
r
b
,s
n
a
e
b
,stu
o
r
p
s
e
e
h
g
,
a
et
tni
m
,re
p
p
e
p
k
c
a
n
S
)
d
e
siv
d
a
to
n
(
;s
eirre
b
p
s
ar
a
et
ss
ar
g
n
o
m
el
,s
d
e
e
s
nik
p
m
u
p
hti
w
a
et
n
o
rffa
s
y
e
n
o
h
re
n
ni
D
,ats
a
p
e
k
o
h
citra
,k
c
o
d
r
u
b
,e
e
h
g
,
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
iss
al
,p
u
o
s
e
y
r
,s
n
a
e
b
o
z
n
a
b
ra
g
,
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
,ste
e
b
a
et
n
o
m
a
n
nic
k
c
a
n
S
)
d
e
siv
d
a
to
n
(
s
eirre
b
n
arc
,elp
p
a
h
s
otnic
a
m
a
et
eli
m
o
m
a
h
c
     Wash the wheat and lima beans in water and
place in a pot with 2 cups of water, heat until it
boils. Reduce the flame to a slow boil and cook
for 10 to 20 minutes (until soft). Add more water
to the pot if needed.
     Add a little water in another pot and place a
steamer inside. Place the eggplant slices in the
steamer and boil for 2 to 3 minutes. When the food
is ready, put the ghee in a frying pan and turn the
heat to high. Put a drop of water in the pan. When
it sizzles, reduce the flame to low and add the spices,
stirring until the aroma of the herbs is released. Add
the wheat or beans to the mixture in the frying pan
and stir for 15 to 30 seconds. Add cilantro on top of
the meal, and lettuce, tomato, cucumber salad on
the side.
[For Váyu heart disease, replace
aduki beans with múng beans]
Kapha Doähas
Kapha Doähas
Kapha Diabetes
Serves: 4 people
Preparation: 30 minutes
V, K -, P + (moderately)
1/2 cup barley 1/2 cup múngdal
1/2 eggplant 1 bitter gourd (karela)
1 tsp. guggul 1 tsp. turmeric
1 tsp. cardamom 1 tsp. mustard seeds
2 cups water mango chutney
3 tsp. ghee, mustard or canola oil
1 tsp. guæmar (if there is pancreatic damage)
     Wash and peel eggplant and cut into slices. Pour
salt on both sides of the eggplant and let it sit on a
paper towel for about 1/2 hour. This draws out the
alkaloid properties (which may cause allergies).
Wash the bitter gourd and cut the gourd and egg-
plant into pieces.
     Wash the barley and dal in water. Place the bar-
ley and múngdal in a pot with 2 cups of water and
heat until it boils. Reduce the flame to a slow boil
and cook for 10 minutes (add more water if
needed).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
166
d
o
o
F
n
oits
e
gi
d
n
I
r
o
F
s
et
o
d
it
n
A
d
o
o
F
n
oits
e
gi
d
n
I
r
o
F
s
et
o
d
it
n
A
lo
h
o
cl
A
s
d
e
e
s
ni
m
u
c
r
o
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
w
e
h
c
iss
a
L
tla
s
,ni
m
u
c
,re
p
p
e
p
k
c
alb
s
d
n
o
m
l
A
le
e
p
d
n
a
th
gin
re
v
o
reta
w
ni
k
a
o
s
ra
g
u
s
e
n
a
c
hti
w
e
k
a
T
.nik
s
e
ht
s
e
m
u
g
e
L
tla
s
;ni
m
u
c
;re
p
p
e
p
k
c
alb
s
elp
p
A
n
o
m
a
n
nic
a
n
a
ujira
M
,kli
m
,s
u
m
ala
c
e
e
h
g
o
d
a
c
o
v
A
re
p
p
e
p
k
c
alb
,n
o
m
el
,cire
m
r
ut
)
d
er(
ta
e
M
sre
p
p
e
p
ilih
c
,s
e
v
olc
;e
n
n
e
y
a
c
s
a
n
a
n
a
B
d
n
a
y
e
n
o
h
w
ar
;re
g
nig
y
r
d
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
kli
M
ra
g
u
s
e
n
a
c
rettu
B
ra
g
u
s
e
n
a
c
;y
e
n
o
h
w
ar
g
n
ú
M
s
n
a
e
B
n
o
m
el
e
g
a
b
b
a
C
,cire
m
r
ut
,lio
re
w
olf
n
u
s
ni
k
o
o
c
s
d
e
e
s
d
rats
u
m
d
n
a
stu
N
th
gin
re
v
o
k
a
o
s
e
nieffa
C
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
d
n
a
g
e
m
tu
n
sta
O
ni
m
u
c
;s
d
e
e
s
d
rats
u
m
;cire
m
r
ut
re
w
olfilu
a
C
re
g
nig
li
O
n
o
m
el
e
s
e
e
h
C
;re
p
p
e
p
ilih
c
;re
p
p
e
p
k
c
alb
e
n
n
e
y
a
c
s
n
oin
O
d
e
k
o
o
c
lle
w
s
a
e
p
k
cih
C
r
o
o
z
n
a
b
ra
g
(
lá
d
a
n
n
a
h
c
)
s
d
e
e
s
n
a
w
ja
n
r
o
c
p
o
P
e
e
h
g
etalo
c
o
h
C
ni
m
u
c
;
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
s
e
otato
P
s
d
e
e
s
n
a
w
ja
hti
w
reta
w
m
ra
w
re
b
m
u
c
u
C
tla
s
;s
d
e
e
s
n
a
w
ja
h
sid
a
R
tla
s
s
g
g
E
s
n
oin
o
,cire
m
r
ut
,o
rtn
alic
,y
elsra
p
re
p
p
e
P
d
e
R
e
e
h
g
h
si
F
n
o
m
el
d
n
a
,e
m
il
,tu
n
o
c
o
c
e
ci
R
re
p
p
e
p
k
c
alb
r
o
tla
s
cilra
G
e
ciuj
n
o
m
el
hti
w
lio
e
vilo
ra
g
u
S
n
o
m
el
e
e
h
G
n
o
m
el
d
n
a
tu
n
o
c
o
c
d
etar
g
o
c
c
a
b
o
T
á
h
c
a
v
,í
m
h
á
r
b
s
d
e
e
s
n
a
w
ja
,to
o
r
s
n
a
e
B
n
e
er
G
tla
s
;s
d
e
e
s
n
a
w
ja
ota
m
o
T
ni
m
u
c
;e
m
il
d
ala
S
n
e
er
G
e
ciuj
n
o
m
el
hti
w
lio
e
vilo
ra
g
e
ni
V
ste
e
w
s
w
e
d
y
e
n
o
H
;re
d
n
air
o
c
hti
w
tu
n
o
c
o
c
d
etar
g
y
e
n
o
h
;n
o
m
el
ta
e
h
W
re
g
nig
m
a
er
C
e
cI
s
e
v
olc
;
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
tr
u
g
o
Y
re
g
nig
;ni
m
u
c
s
n
a
e
B
y
e
n
di
K
tla
s
k
c
o
r
;ni
m
u
c

167
Section 3: Therapeutics
                                          Chapter 6: Nutrition
     Add a little water in another pot, place a steamer
in the pot and put the eggplant and kerala in the
steamer and boil for 2 to 3 minutes.
     When the food is ready, add the ghee or oil and
three mustard seeds in a frying pan. Turn the heat
to high until the seeds pop. Then reduce the flame
to low add the rest of the spices, and stir until the
aroma of the herbs is released. Add the barley and
dal into the frying pan and stir for 15 to 30 sec-
onds. Serve sweet mango chutney with the meal
(about 3 teaspoons per person). This is readily
available at Indian grocery stores.
Overweight
Serves: 4-5 people
Preparation: 30 minutes
1/2 cup barley 1/2 cup garbanzo beans
2 1/2 cups peas 3 carrots
1 tsp. guggul 1 tsp. turmeric
1 tsp. cardamom 1 tsp. mustard seeds
1 tsp. triphalá 1 tsp. musta
3 cups water 3 tsp. mustard or canola oil
     Soak the barley and garbanzo beans overnight
in water. Wash the peas and carrots. Scrape off the
carrot skins and slice into pieces. In separate pots,
place the barley and the garbanzo beans. Add 11/2
cups of water to each pot and bring to a boil. Lower
the flame to a slow boil and cook for 10 minutes
or until soft. Then steam the vegetables for 2 to 3
minutes.
     Place the oil and three mustard seeds in a fry-
ing pan and raise the flame to high. When the mus-
tard seeds pop, reduce the flame to low and add
the remaining herbs. Stir until the aromas of the
herbs are released, and then add the barley.
Incompatible Foods
Many diseases are caused by combining foods that
aggravate create harmful, subtle chemicals in one’s
body. Below is a partial list.
1. Honey with ghee (in equal amounts)
2. Honey with radish
3. Yogurt with hot foods, milk, bananas, tea (ex-
cept with balancing herbs)
4. Milk with oil, salt, vinegar, green squash, rad-
ish, bananas, lemons, oranges, plums  candy,
sesame, yogurt.
5. Vinegar with sesame seeds
6. Honeydew melon with honey, yogurt, or water
7. Cucumber with water
8. Rice with vinegar
9. Meat with dairy, sesame, vinegar, or honey
10. Hot foods and drinks with cold foods and drinks
11. Cold drinks after cucumber or melons
(SEE CHART ON PREVIOUS PAGE)
Suggested Reading
Balch P, Balch J. Prescription for Cooking &
    DietaryWellness. Greenfield, IN: PAB Books;
    1992.
Dash, B., Kashyap L. Materia Medica of Áyurveda.
  New Delhi, India: Insight Publishing
    1987.
Frawley D. Áyurveda Certification Course. Santa
     Fe, NM: American Institute of Vedic  Studies;
    1992.
Heinerman John. Encyclopedia of Nuts, Berries
     and Seeds. West Nyack, NY: Parker Publish-
     ing; 1995.
Lad Usha, Vasant. Áyurvedic Cooking. Albuquer-
     que, NM: Áyurvedic Press; 1994
Nadkarni K.N. Indian Materia Medica. Bombay,
     India: Popular Prakashan; 1993.
Mindell Earl. The Vitamin Bible. New York, NY:
     Time Warner Books; 1991.
Sachs Melanie. Áyurvedic Beauty Care. Twin
     Lakes, WI: Lotus Press; 1994.
Sharma RK, Dash B. Charak Saåhita (vol.1).
     Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series;
    1992.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
168

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 169
laÑŒnaM ba^MH<aM kalae Üxa<aM snaeHnaM taTaa .
svaednaM stamBanaM caEva jaanaItae ya; sa vaE iBaSakÿ ..4..
La´ghanaå b^iåhaòaå kále rúk¤haòaå snehanaå tathá.
Svedanaå stambhanaå chaiva jáníte yaà sa vai bhißhak.
One who knows how to reduce, nourish, dry, oleate, foment,
and use the astringent therapies is the real physician.
                                        Charak Sú:Ch. 22 verse 4
Chapter 7
Pañcha Karma
yurveda offers unique therapeutic measures
that heal mild and chronic diseases. Even
   diseases that are believed to be incurable
by modern medicine have been healed. Stories
abound of people being carried into pañcha karma
centers, and a few weeks later, walking out on their
own two feet, healthy and rejuvenated. Áyurveda
is not based on magic; rather, it is based on under-
standing medical principles and the six stages of
illness.
The most deeply seated toxins that cause dis-
ease are heavy and sticky, lodging in the deepest tis-
sue layers. Pañcha Karma permanently eliminates
these toxins from the body, allowing healing and res-
toration of the tissues, channels, digestion, and men-
tal functions.
Six therapies are divided into two categories: 1)
Toning or nourishing (b^iμhaòa or saμtarpaòa), and
2) Reducing or detoxifying (la´ghana or
apartarpaòa)—those that cause lightness.
    B^iåhaòa                        La´ghana
 (earth, water)
(ether, air, fire)
   Snehana       Rúkßhaòa               Svedhana          Stambhana
(oil therapy)     (drying)
    (sweating)        (astringent)
 Anuvásana
      Basti
       FIGURE 1
     B^iμhaòa tones because it uses therapies that pro-
mote earth and water elements, while la´ghana light-
ens by using ether, air, and fire elements to reduce.
Illness is relieved as doähas become balanced through
these therapies.
The six major therapeutic categories are either
toning or reducing in nature. 1. Reducing (la´ghana
or lightening) the body, making it light.
2. Nourishing (b^iμhaòa or expanding) the body by
adding corpulence.
3. Drying (rúkßhaòa) or producing roughness in the
body.
4. Oleation (snehana) or applying oil to the body
creates softness, fluidity, and moistness.
5. Sudation (svedhana) or sweating, removes
stiffness, heaviness, and coldness. 6. Astringent
(stambhana) balances the flow (slow or fast) of
bodily fluids (e.g., diarrhea, bleeding, etc.), and
prevents mobility.
The therapeutic measures involved for each cat-
egory primarily include herbs, foods, internal and
external application of oils; fasting, and exercise.
Below are listed the respective therapeutic measures,
1. Lightening (la´ghana)—light, hot, sharp, non
slimy, rough, subtle, dry, fluid, hard.
Two forms of lightening exist: strong (¤hodhana)
and mild (¤hamana). £hodhana expels the doßhas
out of the body through decoction enema, emesis,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
170
purgation of the body and head, and by bloodletting.
£hamana is a palliative approach that, rather than
expel the doßhas, merely normalizes them through
seven approaches. 1) Digestive, carminative herbs,
2) Hunger-producing herbs, 3) Avoidance of food,
4) Avoidance of drink, 5) Physical exercise, 6) Sun-
bathing, 7) Exposure to wind.
Palliative therapy is used by people with
diabetes, poor digestion, excess watery conditions
(e.g., congestion, overweight), toxic buildup (áma),
and fevers. These measures are also used for stiff
thighs, skin diseases, herpes, abscesses, spleen, head,
throat and eye problems; and are provided to people
during the cold season (£hi¤hira—mid Jan. to mid
March).
Pitta and Kapha disorders follow ¤hodhana
(strong) therapies of purgation and emesis. Symptoms
include the presence of toxins, obesity, fever, vomiting
or nausea, diarrhea, heart disease, constipation,
heaviness, and excess belching.
People with moderate symptoms of weight gain
and medium strength are first given digestive herbs
like ginger, cardamom, or cinnamon. Persons who
need to boost their appetites are also given hunger-
producing herbs like bibhítakí and guggul. Once the
person is strengthened and digestion is improved, then
both groups of herbs are administered, along with
the other purificatory therapies, for a more thorough
detoxification.
Those people who are only mildly overweight, and
of medium strong, and those who have medium
strength and have doßha excesses, are advised to
control their thirst and hunger. For people who are
weak and ill, and are not yet able to withstand the
stronger therapies, mild therapies are initially
suggested (i.e., sun and wind bathing and mild
exercise).
Excess use of reduction therapies cause joint pain,
body aches, cough, dry mouth, thirst, loss of appetite,
anorexia, weakened hearing and sight. Further
disorders include mental instability, excess fasting, a
desire to enter dark places, emaciation, weakened
digestion and depleted strength. Other imbalances are
giddiness, cough, indigestion, insomnia, depletion of
life sap (ojas) and semen; hunger, fever, delirium,
and belching. Additional disorders include pain in
the head, calves, thighs, shoulders, ribs, fatigue,
vomiting, constipation, and difficult breathing.
2. Nourishing (b^iμhaòa)—heavy, cold, soft,
unctuous, thick, bulky, slimy, sluggish, stable, smooth.
This is also a ¤hamana (palliative) therapy because it
alleviates and/or mitigates both Váyu and Váyu/Pitta
imbalances. This is mostly applied to the very weak
or those with Váyu excesses. Included here are the
very young, very old, emaciated, people suffering
from lung injury, those experiencing grief, strain,
dryness, excessive emission of semen or excess travel.
Nourishing therapies may be given to everyone in
the summer, depending upon the condition of their
health. Nourishing therapies include bathing, oil
massage, oil enema, sleep, nutritive enemas, warm
milk with whole sugar, almonds, tahini, organic dairy
and ghee.
Excessive use of nourishing therapies causes
obesity, congestion, difficult breathing, heart
problems, diabetes, fever, enlarged abdomen, fistula-
in-ano, and áma. Other developments include skin
disorders, cough, fainting, dysuria, poor digestion,
and scrofula (TB of the neck lymph nodes). Further,
if toxins are in the body, they should be eliminated
before toning.
To counter excessive use of nourishing therapies,
antidotes include less sleep and the herbs guæúchí,
guggul, ¤hilájit, ámalakí, viæa´ga, t^ikatu, and chitrak,
with honey.
3. Drying (rúkßhaòa)—rough light, dry, sharp, hot,
stable, non slimy, hard. Herbs and foods having
pungent, bitter, and astringent tastes produce dryness.
Usually, this therapy is applied when there are Kapha
excesses and obstructions in the srotas (channels).
These therapies are also used with major diseases
involving the heart, urinary bladder, spastic thighs,
gout, urinary disorders.
Excessive use of drying therapies causes the
same symptoms as excessive la´ghana therapies.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 171
a
h
ä
o
D
e
s
U
n
ia
M
a
h
p
a
K
n
oitc
u
d
er
u
y
á
V
g
nin
ot
atti
P
hto
b
a
h
ä
o
D
n
oitc
u
d
e
R
a
h
ä
o
D
y
p
a
r
e
h
T
a
h
p
a
K
sis
e
m
e
,ts
af/g
n
o
rts
d
o
ol
B
/atti
P
n
oita
g
r
u
p/etare
d
o
m
u
y
á
V
a
m
e
n
e/dli
m
4. Oleation (snehana)—these qualities are liquid,
subtle, fluid, unctuous, slimy, heavy, cold, sluggish,
and soft. Medicated oils are used. Therapy lasts for
3 to 7 days. This is discussed later in the chapter
(abhyañga section, p. 207).
5. Fomentation (svedhana)- these properties are hot,
sharp, fluid, unctuous, rough, subtle, liquid, stable,
and heavy. Sweating techniques such as warm water,
poultice, and steam; and medicated lotions are used.
This is discussed later in the chapter (abhyañga
section, p. 207).
6. Astringent (stambhana)—qualities include cold,
sluggish, soft, smooth, rough, subtle, liquid, stable,
light VK+. Although this approach seems similar to
lightening, astringents are used more for Pitta
excesses, while lightening may be required for any
doßha.
Indications for using this therapy include excess
Pitta, blackish complexion, bradycardia (less than 60
heart beats per minute), alkali, diarrhea, vomiting,
poisoning, and perspiration.
Excessive use of astringents develops stiffness,
anxiety, stiff jaw, cardiac arrest, constipation, cracked
skin, dry mouth, thirst, and decreased appetite. Other
conditions include memory loss, increase of upward
moving Váyu, and malaise.
All therapies fall into one of two categories,
nourishing (santarpana), and depleting
(apartarpaòa).
Aßhþáñga H^idayam Sú: Ch 12 verse 1
Generally speaking, Kapha doßhas need reducing
or depleting therapy to reduce earth and water
excesses (toxic Pittas need a milder form of
detoxification). Kaphas also need nourishing therapies
for the ether, air, and fire elements of Váyu and Pitta.
In fact, each doßha may need some form of
detoxification, depending upon its condition.
It is a unique insight of the Áyurvedic system that
healing requires a removal of the toxins through one
of the various reduction therapies.
Then a nurturing therapy to build healthy new cells
and tissues follows. To nourish before detoxifying
would be adding to the preexisting toxins. In other
words, nourishing therapies would only nourish the
toxic condition. Only after toxins are removed can
one begin to rebuild their system.
Reduce - then Tone: Most people can use some
degree of reducing, whether it is with herbs, fasts,
sweating, etc., purifying the body, and preparing it
for toning.
When Not to Reduce: Some people, who are al-
ready weakened by illness—or the very old or very
young—become even weaker through reduction. In
these cases, a combination of the two methods is
employed so the person’s strength is not depleted
completely. Reducing and toning are used especially
for long term therapies.
Excess application of nourishing or depleting will
cause diseases of the opposite nature. Generally, be-
ing too thin is better than being too heavy because
gaining weight is easier than losing it.
Summary
Kapha is already heavy and needs to become
lighter. Váyu is already light and needs to develop.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
172
Nourishment
When Used
Results of therapeutic reducing include sharp, clear
senses, removal of toxins, light body, appreciating
the taste of foods, normal hunger and thirst. Other
results include normal or healthy feeling in the heart
and throat, little or no belching, reduction of disease
severity, more enthusiasm, and removal of laziness.
Excess reducing produces emaciation, weakness, etc.
Results of therapeutic toning include strength, a
nourished mind and body, and healing of diseases
related to being underweight and to having a weak
immune system. Symptoms of excess toning include
profound obesity, diabetes, fever, enlarged abdomen,
cough, toxins, skin diseases, fistula.
Note the difference between purification and pal-
liation. If the aggravated humors are in the GI tract,
they are ready for purification (pañcha karma). If they
are still in the dhátus, malas or áma (tissues, waste or
undigested foods) they cannot be directly eliminated
and palliation or pacifying methods are first needed.
Toning/£hamana, B^iμhaòa, and Snehana
For Váyu and Pitta
Reducing/Saå¤hodhana
La´ghana
 Saå¤hodhana
          Saå¤hamana
   (purifying)
           (pacifying)
     [strong]
           [mild]
FIGURE  2A
Saå¤hodhana
 blood      emesis      purge    enema      naysa
letting                                      (dry)         head
        (nirúha)     purge
FIGURE  2B
Saå¤hamana
     digestive    thirst       wind           air          sun
    stimulants
                   FIGURE  2C
Saμ¤hodhana, [bloodletting, emesis (vamana), pur-
gation (virechana), dry enema (nirúha basti), and
head purgation (nasya)] are all elements of the unique
cleansing called pañcha karma. This will be discussed
later as the main healing approach for chronic dis-
ease. It is used for excess Kapha, Pitta, fat, blood,
wastes, minor Váyu disorders, along with the other
doßhas. These therapies are useful with diabetes, áma,
poor digestion, fever, water retention, obesity, and
stiff thighs. They are also used for skin disorders,
herpes, abscesses, spleen, throat, head, and eye dis-
orders, and used by everyone in the cold seasons. For
skin diseases, diabetes, and high Váyu, reduction is
not used between November and February. It is said
that by undergoing saå¤hodhana treatments, disease
will not recur.
a
h
ß
o
D
y
p
a
r
e
h
T
f
o
e
p
y
T
a
h
p
a
K
,e
n
a
p
m
a
cle
e
kil
s
b
re
h
th
gil/dli
m
íla
p
pip
atti
P
e
kil
s
b
re
h
g
nilo
o
c/etare
d
o
m
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
le
g
e
ola
,
u
y
á
V
/g
n
o
rts
á
h
d
n
a
g
a
w
h
¤
a
h
cir
,g
n
e
s
nig
,
slio
,teid
e
c
u
d
e
R
d
o
o
g
,e
slu
p
g
n
o
rts
,y
g
re
n
e
g
n
o
rts
,n
ois
n
et
elc
s
u
m
r
o
e
n
ot
elc
s
u
m
g
nita
o
c
e
u
g
n
ot
tn
e
ni
m
o
r
p
h
sir
u
o
N
,e
slu
p
k
a
e
w
,y
g
re
n
e
w
ol
cin
o
r
h
c
,e
n
ot
elc
s
u
m
f
o
k
c
al
,n
oitaic
a
m
e
ytis
e
b
o
,k
a
e
w
r
o
dic
c
alf

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 173
Saμ¤hamana, [digestive stimulants (including spices,
fasting, and exercise), thirst, sun or wind bathing, and
fresh air] are gentler therapies to pacify mild disor-
ders. Strong persons may be healed just from exer-
cise, sunbathing, and fresh air. Those with moderate
strength begin with digestive stimulants including
herbs. These therapies are used for vomiting, diar-
rhea, heart diseases, cholera, intestinal disorders, fe-
ver, constipation, heaviness, belching, nausea, anor-
exia, Kapha, and Pitta.
£hodhana reduces excess wastes, while
¤hamana heals excess doßhas. These therapies
eliminate the wastes and balance the doßhas.
Summary
Preliminary Therapies (Purva Karma)
Before pañcha karma is employed, persons first
reduce the excessed doßhas and cleanse áma (toxins)
from their system. This is achieved by eating lightly
spiced meals according to their doßha (see Chapter
6).
Ten therapies are useful in Purva karma, also
known as palliation or £hamana.
     Herbs were discussed in detail in Chapter 4, and
foods, nutrition and ghee were reviewed in the last
chapter. Now, we take a closer look at body oil and
sweat therapies. Later chapters will detail the remain-
ing topics. Taking herbs and eating the proper diet
according to one’s doßha are a long-term form of
pañcha karma. These 10 applications can be used
independently of preliminary palliation to heal and
help maintain one’s balance of physical and mental
health.
Palliation generally lasts for three months, one
month, or one week. When an illness is chronic or
strong, palliation may be shorter since the humors
may be ready to be eliminated. Conversely, healthy
persons undergoing pañcha karma merely for
enhancement or prevention may skip the palliation
therapies.
Snehana & Svedhana (Oleation & Sweating Meth-
ods): After palliation therapies remove toxins, two
main preliminary therapies are used, oleation and
sweating. Both begin to unseat the toxins that have
moved and situated themselves in places they do not
belong. These relocated toxins are the cause of ill
health or imbalance.
Below is an overview of the 10 therapies and what
measures are suggested for each doßha. Readers are
advised to see their respective chapters for a complete
understanding of their procedures.
£hamana - Palliation
1. Oil Massage [Snehana]
Váyu—lots of sesame oil with mahánáráyan and
castor oil are best. Massage should be warm, gentle
and firm. Oils are only used after most of the áma is
removed by eating hot spices.
Pitta—touch is soothing, light, gentle, slightly cool
with a moderate amount of oil (cool cocoanut, ghee,
safflower), bráhmí (gotu kola), or mahánáráyan oil
is also applied.
Kapha—strong, dry, or with light and hot oils (i.e.,
mustard, canola, olive), deep tissue, perhaps with
some slight pain. Also, da¤hmúl oil is helpful for
Kapha doßhas.
2. Sweat Therapy [Svedhana]
Váyu—(mild) brief steam baths or hot tubs (head
is kept out of the heat), or ingesting mild diaphoret-
g
nili
O
y
d
o
B
.1
d
o
o
F
.6
y
p
are
h
T
ta
e
w
S
.2
y
p
are
hta
m
o
r
A
.7
s
cin
o
T
la
b
re
H
.3
/sr
olo
C
.8
tn
e
m
n
o
riv
n
E
/sla
e
M
d
n
a
sli
O
.4
e
e
h
G
elyts
efi
L
.9
e
sicre
x
E
.5
.0
1
á
n
a
h
d
á
S
n
oitailla
p
m
ret
g
n
o
L
s
htn
o
m
3
n
oitailla
p
etare
d
o
M
htn
o
m
1
n
oitailla
p
m
ret
tr
o
h
S
k
e
e
w
1

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
174
ics like nirguòæí, cinnamon, and ginger, or tonics like
balá, comfrey, or da¤hmúl. They need to drink plenty
of liquids to replenish the water (during and after
sweating) or they will become too dry. Too much
sweating may lead to dizziness, convulsions, faint-
ing, or vertigo.
Pitta—cool or mild sweating using cool and
dispersing herbs (i.e., kuóki, yellow dock, burdock)
followed by a cool shower. During excess sweating
one may feel thirsty, develop burning sensations, feel
dizzy, or develop a fever.
Kapha—strong, dry heat, hot diaphoretics and
expectorants (i.e., ginger, sage, pippalí, cinnamon).
One sweats until one begins to feel uncomfortable,
but not exhausted.
3. Herbal Tonics
Váyu—¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, balá,
triphalá with digestive spices like ginger or cinnamon,
and herbal wines like drákßhá are useful. Excessive
use of these herbs aggravates Váyu, coats the tongue,
distends the abdomen, and may cause constipation.
Pitta—cool, bitter, astringent alteratives, aloe gel,
barberry, dandelion, burdock, red clover, pau d’arco,
bráhmí, mañjißhþhá, comfrey, and coriander. These
are all blood and bile cleansers, and drain the excess
heat from the body.
Kapha—hot, dry, pungents (i.e., ginger, pippalí,
myrrh, t^ikatu), bitters (i.e., aloe, turmeric, barberry)
reduce fat. Herbs are most effective when taken with
a little raw honey (which helps loosen phlegm).
4. Oils & Ghee
Váyu—(daily use of sesame or ghee—1 to 2 tbs.—
taken internally). This moistens the dry Váyu
membranes and tissues, and softens and loosens dry
and hardened toxins in the body tissues.
Pitta—ghee, internal (1 to 2 tbs. daily) and
external (especially in eyes). Triphalá or bráhmí ghee
are the suggested medicated ghees.
Kapha—1 to 2 tsp. daily of mustard, canola, and
flax seed oils are taken internally. These oils loosen
phlegm.
5. Exercise
Váyu—mild exercise, calming yoga postures
(sitting or lying down) and gentle breathing exercises
also strengthen (see the haóha yoga chapter). Mild
sunbathing (avoiding wind and cold) and daily
sádhaná (meditation) automatically heal the mind and
body.
Pitta—moderate amount, in cool air or wind, walks
taken during the full moon and other moderate
activities like flower gardening. Cooling Yoga
postures, like shoulder stands or sitting and lying
down, and práòáyám are suggested. People with heart
problems are advised not to do shoulder stands. The
best práòáyám for Pitta is ¤hítalí and lunar practices
(see Chapter 9). Both are best taught by a qualified
yoga or práòáyám instructor, rather than by clients
trying on their own. Exercise that creates excess heat
and sweating (i.e., aerobics, heavy exertion, exercising
under a hot sun) are contraindicated.
Kapha—strong aerobics (e.g., jogging in the wind
and sun), long hikes, camping, and strong physical
labor. One must first be healthy and strong enough to
exercise at this level. If persons sweat or exercise too
much they feel tired afterwards.
6. Food
Váyu—adequate, nutritious, Váyu reducing (i.e.,
dairy, nuts, grains of basmati rice, oats, and wheat,
root vegetables, sweet fruits, boiled milk with ginger,
cardamom, cinnamon, fennel). One should eat
nutritiously; overeating should be avoided. Fasts for
1 to 3 days, with ginger and cinnamon tea, are all
right for those who are strong enough. (Meat is used
when one is recovering from a debilitating illness).
Pitta—moderate and cool Pitta reduction, sweet
fruits, raw or lightly steamed vegetables, green veg-
etable juice, cool grains like rice, oats, and wheat,
and yellow split múngdal (or whole múng beans).
Spices include coriander, cumin, fennel—cool spices.
Hot spices should be avoided, as are salt and vinegar.
Moderate fasts with cool herbs (i.e., dandelion or
burdock), green vegetable juices or fruit juices (i.e.,
pineapple or pomegranate) are also suggested. Weak
Pittas may take more dairy (preferably organic— no
drugs or steroids fed to the animals, and from con-
tented animals—not factory-herded ones).

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 175
Kapha—light, anti-Kapha, steamed diuretic
vegetables, diuretic grains, beans, hot spices, reduce
water and juice consumption. Fasting on spices and
honey from 3 to 7 days is suggested. Overall, sugar,
sweet foods, dairy, heavy oils. and meats should be
avoided.
7. Aromas
While aromatherapy is not technically a
consideration of saå¤hamana, it is incorporated here
for additional therapeutic value. Aromas work more
on the mind than the body, so they help balance
psychological causes of illness.
Váyu—sandalwood, frankincense, cedar, and
myrrh, are calming and grounding.
Pitta (cool)—oils, incense, soaps, sachets of
sandalwood, rose, geranium, and other flower scents
open the heart and reduce fire.
Kapha—oils, incense, soap, sachets etc. of
myrrh, frankincense, cedar, eucalyptus, sage.
8. Colors/Environment/Meals
Fresh air, wind, and sun help stimulate digestion
in mild cases of illness. While color therapy is not
technically a consideration of saå¤hamana, it is
incorporated here for additional therapeutic value.
Colors work more on the mind than the body, so they
help balance psychological causes of illness.
Váyu—balancing therapies include short fasts (1
to 3 days), being warm and comfortable inside and
outside the home, moist air (for one living in a dry
climate), and mild sunbathing. Wear warm colors of
red, orange, and gold. White (a moist color) also
balances mild Váyu excesses. The bed should be soft
and comfortable. The environment should be
pleasing. One must adopt measures for self-care.
Pitta—mild fasts (about one week), air and wind
bathing reduce excess heat. Cool-colored clothing
(i.e., white and pale shades of green, pink, and blue)
are also balancing.
Kapha—sunbathing, fresh air, long fasts, warm
color therapy—red, orange, yellow in clothes,
furniture, and decor—in both home and office—
balances excess Kapha.
9. Lifestyle
Váyu—resting the body and mind. Excess
traveling, noise, distractions are avoided, sleeping
during the day, if tired, and having a secure and stable
lifestyle—with happiness, contentment and joy—is
suggested. Mild exercise (stop when perspiration
begins) is useful.
Pitta—cool, pleasing environments, cool
breezes, moonlight, avoiding sun, heat, and fire.
Relaxation is advised, doing various or diverse things,
allowing time for amusement and play, practicing
sweet, affectionate, loving, friendly behavior; being
near water and gardens. Conflict, arguments,
aggression, ambition, strain, and overwork, and effort
are avoided. Moderate exercise is useful (stop when
perspiration begins).
Kapha—dry, rough clothes and environment (i.e.,
austere life—sleeping on the floor, physical labor,
staying up late at night, not napping or sleeping late),
avoiding cold and damp; and being in hot, dry, sunny,
fiery, and warm breezy places. This is a time one when
breaks attachments and habits—giving up the past
(mentally) and possessions. Strong exercise is useful
(exercise a little past the point of fatigue).
10. Sádhaná
Váyu—for calm and peace—allows one to be less
talkative, or even silent, emptying the mind of
thoughts, worry etc.; surrendering fears, and anxieties
is also practiced.
Pitta—one focuses on positive energies of love,
peace, forgiveness, visualization, and artistic
creativity.
Kapha—practices active meditation, (e.g., study,
thinking, inquiring, reading scriptures, chanting aloud,
dancing, and singing) stimulates and activates the
mind until one feels strained.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
176
Purification Therapy
(£hodhana)
Unique to Áyurveda is a process of completely
expelling toxins from the body. First, through
palliation and purification, one loosens toxins lodged
in the body. This allows the toxins to return through
the bloodstream to their origin sites in the
gastrointestinal tract. Once there, the toxins can be
completely expelled from the body through five
methods known as pañcha karma. Pañcha karma (five
actions) actually includes three stages (see table
below).
Therapy Description
1. Preliminary (palliative)
employing oil and sweating methods (snehana
and svedhana). [often used throughout the year as
a general maintenance and preventive program]
2. Primary purificatory practices( pañcha karma)
uses emesis, purgation, enemas, nasal therapy.
3. Post PK therapies
rejuvenation and tonification.
Oil Therapy
(Snehana)
Using oils, both internally and externally, is a very
important Áyurvedic therapy
Warm, medicinal oils are applied in large
amounts all over the body. Some practitioners use
sesame oil for all three constitutions. Others use
medicated oils like mahánáráyan oil. Still others use
medicated oils in specific body sites, such as on the
chakras and marma points, or at specific trouble spots.
Essential oils may also be employed according to the
doßhas. It is the use of the oil that is important, and
not the massage technique or training. (Actually, a
professional massage produces the same effects as
snehana and svedhana). Specific Áyurvedic massage-
like techniques (abhyañga) will be discussed later.
Along with the application of oil, intake of oil or ghee
(snehapána) is also recommended. Sesame oil or ghee
is used for Váyu, sunflower or ghee for Pitta, and
mustard, canola, or flax seed oils for Kapha.
Oil Uses: Oils help loosen and liquefy toxins and
humors in the skin and blood (called the outer disease
pathway), dislodging and removing the heavy, sticky
toxins from the smallest channels. Thus, toxins begin
to drain from the central disease pathway (deeper
tissues) and start to flow into the GI tract. Secretions
are also activated, enabling easier doäha transport of
toxins (áma) and wastes (malas) as they return to the
GI tract for elimination. Oil lubricates and protects
tissues from damage, as áma returns to the GI tract.
Finally, since Váyu is responsible for movement, oil
lubrication restores proper Váyu functioning, allowing
for proper flowing of wastes and toxins to their
removal sites.
Special herbs blended with the oils enable the
tissues to expel the oil from tissues. Therefore, oil
does not accumulate in the body. Herbs like guæúchí,
kaóuka, harítakí, yaähóí madhu (licorice), and chitrak
have bitter properties that cause oils to be expelled.
Specific oil massage (abhyañga) therapies are
discussed later in this chapter.
Oils and purificatory therapies are useful for
arthritis, insomnia, paralysis, tremors, convulsions,
nervous exhaustion, dry cough, constipation, and
other Váyu derangements. Oil is also useful for
alcohol addiction, the elderly, children, eye problems,
tumors, sinus conditions, worms, ulcers, memory,
dryness, poisons, Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha diseases.
Such therapies promote alertness, slimming, toning,
and studying the body; improving strength, voice,
complexion, and they cleanse the female genital
passage. Oil builds plasma, reproductive fluid and
ojas (life-sap). Kapha doßhas use oil for worms and
gas.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 177
Sesame is the best oil. Overall, oil reduces Váyu, is
neutral for Kapha, and increases Pitta. Oils are used
during the rainy season.
Contraindications: There are some people for whom
oleation is not recommended. They in-clude people
who have very weak or very strong digestion, who
are very obese, who have stiff thighs, or who suffer
from diarrhea and toxins (i.e., they must be expelled
first). Oleation is also not used to treat throat diseases,
enlarged abdo-men, fainting, vomiting, anorexia,
abnormal child delivery, Kapha excesses, or
inebriation. Instead, clients are given nasal, enema,
and pur-gative therapies. Charak notes that while oil
reduces Váyu, it does not aggravate Kapha (as long
as oils are warmed).
Ghee Uses: Ghee is best used for improving intellect,
memory, and intelligence; plasma, re-productive fluid,
and ojas (life-sap). It helps soften the body, and
promotes clear voice and complexion.
Váyu: Medicated ghee, or ghee and black salt.
Its moistness balances Váyu.
Pitta: Plain ghee. Its cool and sweet nature
balances Pitta.
Kapha: Ghee with barley and t^ikatu (empow-
ers the herbs).
Ghee is used in the autumn. For Váyu/Pitta
imbalances in the summer, evening oleation is
advised. For aggravated Kapha, and throughout the
winter, unction on sunny days is advised. In
emergencies, and for those with extreme Váyu
disorders, oleation may be used anytime. Ingest-ing
ghee (snehapána) follows the same schedule.
Precautions: Do not use snehana for ascites, fe-ver,
delirium, drinking or with alcoholism, loss of appetite,
vomiting, fatigue, on cloudy days, rainy season, after
basti, purgative emetics or nasya, after premature
birth, for too strong or weak digestion, stiff thighs,
diarrhea, áma, throat diseases, artificial poisoning,
enlarged abdomen, fainting. Do not use oil for coma,
thirst, anal secretions, pregnancy, and excess
salivation. Use drying herbs for 10 days following
child-birth.
After taking ghee, one drinks hot water. After oil,
one drinks boiled rice water. This should cause
belching and a desire to eat. If one feels thirsty, they
may stimulate the regurgitating re-flex. Afterwards,
cool baths, head plasters, or towels are used. Those
with strong digestion can take more oleation. Those
with moderate diges-tion can use moderate amounts
of oil or ghee, and those with weaker digestion use
less unction. Results of snehana include proper flow
of Váyu, improved digestion, proper feces, moistness,
and initial fatigue.
As the snehana begins to get digested, one may
experience thirst, vertigo, lassitude, mental
disturbance, and burning sensations. After olea-tion,
one needs to rest, get to sleep early, avoid exposure
to wind and hot sun. One should ob-serve celibacy,
and eat light, simple foods, ac-cording to one’s doßha,
and not suppress bodily urges. If this is not followed,
serious diseases may develop. After snehana is
digested, one takes a hot shower, then eats a small
portion of plain rice or barley (at room temperature).
Snehana therapy lasts an average of 3 to 7 days, or
until the symptoms disappear. The elderly, the weak,
the very young, and those with thirst should take such
therapy with lunch. Persons currently drinking wine
are not eligible for sne-hana. Váyu doßha follows
snehana for 7 days, Pitta for 5 days and Kapha for 3
days.
Dose: There are 3 doses of drinking snehana,
according to the strength of the doßha .
Mild Strength: Váyu—oil stays in the system for
9 hours. This dose is for slight aggravation.
a
h
ß
o
D
y
p
a
r
e
h
T
r
of
s
y
a
D
u
y
á
V
7
atti
P
5
a
h
p
a
K
3

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
178
Its application develops the appetite. Use for 3
days.
Medium Strength: Pitta—oil stays in the system
for 6 hours. It is for moderate aggravation, and builds
and tones the system. Use for 4 to 6 days.
High Strength: Kapha—oil stays in the system for
3 hours. It acts as an emollient for extreme
aggravation. Use for 7 days.
#yaHe—   flaeiSmak;   snaI÷ataÿ  paócara#ae—   paEitak;
vaitak;   sapta   ra#ae—   saatmyataaó   parma~
Tryaheòa ¤hleßhmikaà sníhyát pa´charátreòa
paitikaà
Vatikaà sapta rátreòa sátmyatáò param
[Reference Bhog]
Drinking Snehapána
Various authors offer other suggestions.
Doses: Depending upon the strength of the person
and the severity of the disease, mild, moderate or high
doses are used. Snehana is ingested either first thing
in the morning or late in the afternoon (ideally 3:00
to 6:00 a.m. or p.m.) on an empty stomach. Only when
the appetite returns does one eat.
Mild: One to 4 days. The diet during snehana involves
3 days of avoiding very fatty foods, eating simply, no
food combining and eating warm, regular quantities
(according to one’s constitution or doßha). Before and
after snehana, take warm baths and drink warm water;
be celibate. Avoid becoming stressed, angry, or grief
stricken. Avoid exposure to cold, sun, travel, talking,
naps, and pollution. Do not suppress natural urges.
Take the dose just after sunrise.
Moderate: Four to 6 days. Avoid sticky, oily, and
incompatible foods.
High: Seven days/with hard bowels or until healthy
symptoms appear. The high dose always causes
intolerance, but persons are made to drink by holding
their nose and closing their eyes while drinking.
Some authorities suggest always using 7 days of
oleation in order to reach all 7 tissue layers. Others
follow the mild, medium, and high doses, depending
on which dhátus are unbalanced. Signs of effective
oleation include soft, shiny skin, softer skin and hair,
healthy elimination of stool that looks yellowish,
shiny, oily, and softer; urine may look brighter, and
urine and stool smell like ghee. Eye, ear, and nose
secretions shine slightly. Mental clarity, enthusiasm,
energy, and strength increase.
If diarrhea results from snehana, then persons have
only moderate or mild symptoms; for the 3rd and 4th
days of snehana, lemon juice is added to the snehana
formula (ghee with hot water may be used. Oil with
vegetable soup or hot water is an alternative).
a
h
ß
o
D
s
r
u
o
H
u
y
á
V
9
atti
P
6
a
h
p
a
K
3
y
a
D
e
s
o
D
a
h
ß
o
D
e
s
o
D
ts
e
T
.z
o
1
a
h
p
a
K
1
.z
o
2
2
.z
o
3
3
.z
o
4
atti
P
4
.z
o
5
5
.z
o
6
u
y
á
V
6
.z
o
7
7
.z
o
8

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 179
£hodhana (purification): Drink alone, soon after
digestion, drink the large or maximum dose.
£hamana (removal of mild doßha/disease
symptoms): Use a medium dose with fasting.
B^iμhaòa (toning): Take the minimum dose (a
small quantity) with food.
Precautions: Snehapána is not used for indigestion,
abdominal enlargement, acute fever, weakness,
anorexia, obesity, fits, intoxication, immediately after
basti (enema), vamana (vomiting), virechana
(purgation), with thirst, fatigue, after premature
delivery, or on rainy days.
Depending on when snehana is taken, different
parts of the body will be affected.
Unctuous Substances: Those who cannot comfort-
ably ingest plain oil or ghee may begin by eating unc-
tuous items. These substances include porridge
(odana), gruel (vilepí—grain with 4 to 8 times as
much water), gruel (yavágu—grain with 6 times as
much water), legumes, curry, vegetable soup,
kámbalika (curd, rock salt, sesame oil, and ghee),
sesame oil or sesame butter, sugar, organic milk, ghee,
lassi, pippalí, and ¤hatávarí.
Váyu doßhas do well with a little rock salt.
Pitta doßhas do well with ghee. Kapha
doßhas do well with t^ikatu.
For worms, a large dose of sesame oil is used.
Seasonal Use of Oil and Ghee
Herbs for particular diseases may be cooked in
the ghee or oil to apply snehana more effectively.
For example, gokßhura may be added to oil for uri-
nary problems.
Three Degrees of Boiling Oil and Ghee
     Ghee is ready when froth and cooking sounds dis-
appear, and the ghee emits an aroma. Oil is ready
when it becomes frothy on the surface, and an aroma
develops.
Sample Recipes
1. Pippalí, rock salt, yogurt, sesame oil, or ghee. This
sneha produces quick results. 2. Barley with milk,
and a small amount of rice and ghee.
3. Milk, ghee, cane sugar. This is an instant emulsive
preparation.
4. Barley fried in sesame oil, 1/2 boiled molasses,
rice, green dal, milk, ghee, lassi, jaggery, and salt.
la
e
M
d
etc
eff
A
tr
a
P
y
d
o
B
er
o
fe
B
re
w
o
L
g
nir
u
D
eld
di
M
retf
A
re
p
p
U
lla
F
w
o
c
e
e
h
g
y
n
ia
R
lio
r
e
m
m
u
S
tnioj
,s
e
ss
e
c
x
e
atti
P
d
n
a
u
y
á
V
s
g
nin
e
v
e
ni
d
e
s
u
lio
—
nia
p
r
et
n
i
W
atti
P
/a
h
p
a
K
d
n
a
u
y
á
V
/a
h
p
a
K
lio
—
nia
p
tnioj
r
o
s
e
ss
e
c
x
e
n
o
o
n
retfa
e
ht
ni
d
e
s
u
d
lo
C
r
et
n
i
W
e
sir
n
u
s
retfa
s
etu
ni
m
0
3
ot
5
1
lio
—
s
m
elb
o
r
p
tnioj
r
o
f
d
n
a
lio
B
y
c
n
etsis
n
o
C
e
s
U
s
e
n
i
h
r
r
E
dli
m
y
r
d/d
ra
h
hti
w
k
nir
d/d
o
o
f
its
a
B
\s
k
n
ir
D
m
uid
e
m
e
kil
-
x
a
w
/s
e
nih
rre
s
e
vla
s
t
n
io
n
A
d
ra
h
k
c
alb/ra
elc
ra
e/its
a
b
s
p
o
r
d

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
180
This preparation causes tissues to exude, entering
minute pores, not drying, and spreading        through-
out the body warming and transforming) [i.e., for
immediate oleation effects].
Precautions: Do not use this formula for skin
diseases, edema, diabetes. Instead use, 4a.
Triphalá, pippalí, guggul, ¤hilájit, gokßhura, ghee.
Oil snehana is very good for tumors, sinus ul-
cers, worms, excess Kapha, fat, and Váyu. It improves
digestion, clears the digestive tract, strengthens the
tissues, senses, slows the aging process, and improves
complexion.
Other snehana therapies include oil massage, en-
ema, douche, gargle, nose, ear, and eye drops, (See
pages 197 - 201 and 242 - 244)
Inadequate snehana administration: Causes dry-
ness, burning, weakness, and slower digestion.
Excess snehana administration: Causes yellow com-
plexion, heaviness, stuffiness, undigested food in the
stool, dullness, anorexia, nausea, vomiting.
Complications: Indigestion, thirst, fainting, dullness,
nausea, tympanitis (inner ear inflammation), fever,
stiffness, anorexia, abdominal pain, slowed digestion.
If ghee causes abdominal pain, hot water should be
drunk to produce vomiting. For severe thirst due to
excessive digestive fire, cold water should be drunk
after sneha.
Chronic Symptoms: Dry skin, itching, anemia,
edema, GI diseases, sprue (malabsorption of nutri-
ents in the intestines, leading to diarrhea, emaciation,
and anemia), hemorrhoids, numbness, difficult
speech.
Other forms of oleation include abhyañga, lepa,
gandúßha (mouth gargling), head, ear, and eye baths.
These will all be discussed later under Kerala
abhyañga (except for gandúßha, which is discussed
in Chapter 19 under mouth conditions and therapies).
Application of oil and oil pastes are discussed below.
Sudation or Sweat Therapy
(Svedhana)
isnagDasya   saUxmaeSva   yanaeSa   laInaó
svaedstau   daeSaó   nayaita   ]vatvamaý .
Snigdhasya súk¤hmeßhva yaneßhu línaå
svedastu doßhaå nayati d^ivatvam
Sweat applied to uncted persons liquefy impu-
rities hidden in minute channels.
Charak: Sidd. Ch. 1, verse 8
According to Aßhóáñga H^idayam, after oleation,
steam or sweating therapies are employed for effective
dislodging and liquefying of toxins and improving
digestion. Svedhana causes the body’s channels to
widen, enabling áma to easily flow from the tissues
back to the GI tract and improve circulation. Heat
allows the skin and blood (outer disease pathway) to
be cleansed. This relieves, cleanses, and reduces fat
tissue and muscle tension.
Heat also restores balance to Váyu and Kapha (i.e.,
removing coldness and stiffness) and reduces the
heavy, sticky nature of áma. Once toxins are back in
the G.I. tract, they are ready to be completely expelled
from the body through pañcha karma (five
purificatory actions).
Internal (e.g., spicy herbs) and external (e.g.,
jacuzzi, sauna) heat are used to dislodge wastes and
toxins. Castor, arka, red punarnavá, sesame, and
barley all induce sweat.
Four types of Svedhana therapies exist,
1. Tápa or fomentation—placing a heated cloth, a
metal object or warm hands on the body. This therapy
is best for Váyu and Kapha doßhas.
2. Upanáha or applying a hot poultice to the body
(before bed) made with the appropriate herbs and
foods to reduce the respective aggravated doßhas.
After the poultice is applied, an oiled and heated silk
or woolen cloth is wrapped around the body, and the

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 181
person goes to sleep for the night. It is removed in
the morning (in the winter it may be kept on longer).
This therapy is best for Váyu disorders. General
ingredients include wheat, barley, unctuous
substances, kußhóa, kákolí, and kßhír-kákolí.
Váyu: Poultices include vachá, aromatic herbs,
yeast, licorice, cedar, castor oil, ghee, lassi, milk.
Váyu/Kapha: Triphalá, t^ikatu.
Váyu/Pitta: Guæúchí, licorice.
Upanáha Recipe: General suggestions include
Váyu-reducing herbs, sour juice, milk, and a little
rock salt. Boil until it becomes a thick liquid and apply
to the whole body (in the direction against the hairs).
When it becomes cold, reapply. This process is
repeated many times.
Other heating therapies include exercise, staying in
warm, draftless rooms, wrapping oneself in heavy
clothes, and sunbathing.
3. Úähmá or warm steam is used by boiling the ap-
propriate foods and herbs for a doßha, and allowing
the steam to surround the body. Steam may be ap-
plied with a sweat box (with the head kept free from
heat) or apparatus like a pressure cooker. Appropri-
ate herbs are added to the water in the pot. The steam
is applied locally to an illness spot, like arthritis. This
therapy is used for Váyu and Kapha imbalances.
Stones, pebbles, mud, leaves, and sand are also
heated and applied to specific body parts. They are
more useful in Kapha disorders as they are a form of
dry heat.
4. Drava or Dhárá means pouring warm, medicated
liquid over the body. Again, herbs and foods are used
to reduce the respective excessed doßhas (or for spe-
cific health concerns). This method is useful for áma,
Kapha, and fat excesses, stiff thighs, and breast milk
disorders. The part of the body needing attention is
covered with a cloth, and then the medicated water is
slowly poured over the cloth. When Váyu disturbs
the entire body, a medicated water bath is used. The
water temperature is 85 to 100 degrees. This is also
useful for all diseases of the rectum and urinary tract.
Drava is used for Váyu/Pitta disorders. Useful herbs
include castor, vásá, vaå¤ha, arka, turmeric, and lico-
rice.
Two types of drava exist,
1. Parißheka: Medicated liquid is applied to
specific body parts (that are covered in cloth).
2. Avagáhan: Persons soak in a tub filled with a
medicated decoction.
Svedhana is best used for Váyu disorders (i.e.,
nervous conditions). It is used only after one has
undergone snehana (internal and external oil
application), is in a warm room protected from
breezes and has fully digested their last meal. Sudation
is applied in strong, moderate, or mild measure,
depending upon the strength of the person undergoing
therapy.
Sessions last 5 to 10 minutes for Váyu and Pitta
doßhas, and 10 to 15 minutes for Kapha doßhas.
Alternately, a strong intensity is used for strong
persons or severe diseases; moderate intensity is used
for persons with moderate strength or moderate
diseases; and a minimum intensity is used for persons
with minimal strength or minor diseases.
Kapha doßhas use a dry sudation (dry heat and
warming oils—for example, sitting under a blanket
with a space heater). Kapha/Váyu doßhas use both
dry heat and oily liquids (e.g., ghee). They can sweat
in warm rooms or in the sunlight. Ghee is used in
situations such as a Váyu excess in the stomach and
a Kapha excess in the colon. If used, sudation should
be administered very gently on the testes, heart, and
eyes. A cool cloth should be placed over these areas
to prevent exposure to heat.
For Váyu/Kapha excesses, (e.g., Váyu in the
stomach) first clients sweat without oil, then with oil.
For Kapha/Váyu excesses, (i.e., Kapha in the colon)
first clients are given oil/steam, then a steam treatment
without oil).
Svedhana is suggested for cough, cold, earache,
headache, monoplegia, hemiplegia, paraplegia,
constipation, absence or retention of urine. It is also
indicated for stiffness and tetany arthritis (muscle

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
182
spasms and tremors caused by poor metabolism of
calcium, and associated with poor parathyroid gland
functioning). It is also good for enlarged spleen,
fistula-in-ano, hemorrhoids, renal calculi, and before
surgery. Svedhana is also advised after an operation
that removes a foreign object, or after abnormal,
premature or normal delivery.
faItafaUlavyauparmae
stamBagaaErvainagaRHe   .
saójatae   maadávae   svaede   svaednaai}ritamaá®taa ..13..
£híta¤úlavyúparame stambhagauravanigrahe.
Saåjate márdave svede svedanádbhiratirmatá.
Svedhana is stopped only when cold, colic pain,
stiffness and heaviness subsides in the body,
or until softness and sweating are produced.
Charak Sú, Ch. 14, verse 13
Three Types of Sweat
13 Sveda Forms
According to Charak Saåhitá, 13 forms of sveda
(sweat) are available; some use fire to generate heat,
some do not. Oil abhyañga is required before
initiating any of the methods.
Whole Body Svedas
1. Sankara Sveda: (use of bolus). Piòæa Sveda is
such a therapy. It is discussed in detail on page 235.
2. Jentáka Sveda:, 3. Prastara Sveda: Similar to
sauna rooms.
4. Avagáhan Sveda: Persons lie in a tub filled with a
medicated decoction, milk, oil, or ghee. It is
administered every other day or every two days. This
process dilates the veins, arteries, hair follicles, and
strengthens the body. It is useful for Váyu disorders,
hemorrhoids, dysuria, and other painful diseases.
A person either sits in a tub filled with a decoc-
tion until they begin to sweat, or sits in a tub and has
oil, milk, or ghee poured over their shoulders until
the liquid reaches six inches above their navel.
After the medicated bath, persons are first mas-
saged, then take a warm bath (in plain water), and eat
nourishing foods according to their doßha. They rest
for the remainder of the day.
The therapy sessions cease after one feels relief
from cold, pain, stiffness, heaviness, and develops a
good appetite and softness of body parts.
5. Aßhmaghana Sveda, 6. Karßhú Sveda, 7. Kutí
Sveda, 8. Bhú Sveda, 9. Kúmbhí Sveda, 10. Kúpa
Sveda, 11. Holáka Sveda: Other ancient forms that
can be replaced by modern steam tents.
MODERN SWEAT-TENT
Partial Body Svedas
12. Náæí Sveda: Herbal decoctions are heated over a
low flame in a pressure cooker, steamer, or covered
pot with a hose placed over a hole in the top, and
pointed at the sore spot (e.g., bursitis), joint pain, or
other local condition.
1
erif
e
s
u
—
)
m
a
ets
,.g.e(
ta
e
h
la
n
retx
E
,s
e
htolc
m
ra
w
,e
sicre
x
e(
ta
e
h
la
n
retn
I
erif
o
n
—
).cte
2
)ta
e
h
la
n
retx
e(
y
d
o
b
elo
h
W
—
re
dlu
o
h
s
,.g.e(
y
d
o
b
e
ht
f
o
tra
P
íæ
á
n
,
a
k
e
h
ßir
a
p
)
3
erif
o
n/erif
—
u
y
á
V
r
o
f
—
)te
w
(
lio
hti
W
o
n/erif
—
a
h
p
a
K
r
o
f
—
)
y
r
d
(
lio
tu
o
hti
W
erif
Steam tent and 
massage table
Steamer or 
Pressure cooker

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 183
Sweat Box:
Woman with psoriasis undergoing svedhana in India
The tube has two or three curves to lessen the heat
of the vapor. Traditionally, the hose lengths are either
91.44cm/@36” (high dose), or 45.86cm/@18” (low
dose). The circumference of the tube is 22.86cm/@9”
at the steamer and 11.43cm/@4.5” towards the body
joint.
Aromatic, channel-clearing herbs (eucalyptus, cin-
namon, camphor, calamus, sage, da¤hmúl (10 roots)
are used with emollient tonics (i.e., ¤hatávarí, balá,
a¤hwagandhá, comfrey root, or marshmallow). Emol-
lients are used to soften, protect and heal. Steam burns
up localized toxins and restores or stimulates circu-
lation at these sites.
Váyu/Kapha—da¤hmúl
Kapha—varuòa, guæúchí, erand, vásá, arka,
and vaå¤ha.
Man with hemiplegia is undergoing Naæi Sveda in India
Náæí Sveda
13. Parißheka Sveda: The specific body part that
needs therapy is covered with a thin cloth. Then, a
decoction made with herbs suitable for the condi-
tion is heated and poured into a pitcher that has small
holes in its bottom. The pitcher is held over the body
part and the decoction sprinkled over the cloth. Suit-
able ingredients include grape juice, sugarcane juice,
rice water, sugar water, yogurt, honey water, barley,
cedar, ghee, acidic herbs, milk, and sweet herbs.
PARI§HEKA SVEDA PITCHER
Sveda Preparations: Váyu people must drink enough
fluids before sweating. Sour juices like lemon or
lime with a little rock or sea salt prevent dehydra-
tion and excess sweating. Caution is advised not to
allow the steam to create excess dryness for Váyu
doßhas. Kapha prak^iti can promote stronger sweat-
ing by the use of long pepper, black pepper, and
ginger (t^ikatu), or  some similar formulas. For Pitta

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
184
doßhas who have no Pitta diseases, burdock, dande-
lion, or red clover teas are drunk. This helps cleanse
the blood. Hibiscus or other astringents help prevent
excess sweating or heat buildup. It is advised not to
overheat the Pitta doßha with steam. All are advised
to keep the head (and eyes), heart, and groin cool
throughout the therapy. Cold, wet towels may be
placed on these sites to prevent them from becoming
overheated. A pearl necklace may also be placed on
these sites to keep them cool.
Signs of Proper Svedhana: Sweat, reddish skin, body
warmth and lack of chill or stiffness. Persons will
feel more enthusiastic and light.
Contraindications: Sudation is not administered to
the very obese, dry, weak, those with debilitating chest
injuries, those suffering from emaciation, or to those
with diseases stemming from alcohol usage or with
alcoholism. It is not used for blindness, abdominal
disorders (udara roga), herpes, skin diseases, TB,
gout, or administered to those who have just eaten
dairy, fats, and honey; nor is it used after purgation or
for prolapse and burns of the rectum. Further
symptoms requiring avoidance of sudation include
heart disease, high blood pressure, blood disorders
(e.g., anemia, leukemia), exhaustion, anger, grief, fear,
excess hunger, thirst, sweat; and jaundice, Pitta
diabetes, or Pitta diseases (chemical). Sudation is also
not administered to pregnant or menstruating women
(or those who have recently given birth). It is not given
to one who has fainted, undergoing sthambhana
(astringent) therapy, wasting, bleeding, diarrhea, low
ojas, starving. In emergencies, people with these
diseases are given mild sudation or náæí sveda.
Uses: Svedhana is given to those suffering from
difficult breathing, cough, runny nose, hiccup,
constipation, or hoarseness. It is used for Váyu or
Kapha diseases, áma/toxins, stiffness, heaviness,
body aches, pain in the waist, ribs, back, abdomen,
or lower jaw. Svedhana is used for an enlarged
scrotum, toe or finger contraction, tetanus, sprains,
or difficult urination. It is used for cancer or benign
tumors, obstructions of semen or urine flow, obstinate
Pitta urinary disorders, rigid thighs.
Although the main pañcha karma practices may
take only a few days, these preliminary practices
require 3 days to 3 months to work the toxins to the
GI tract.
Once persons feel that heaviness, coldness, pain,
and stiffness have been removed, they should rest for
at least 3/4 of an hour before eating or drinking. No
physical exercise should be done that day.
Cautions: Heavy application of oils can depress the
digestive fire and cause digestive disorders (i.e., loss
of appetite, constipation etc.). Beyond moderate use
of oil, digestion-promoting herbs are suggested, like
ginger, fennel, cardamom, or pepper. Further, the
same effects may be gained by mild, daily oil
application, and mild sweating herbs like diaphoretics
and expectorants (e.g., ginger, calamus, cinnamon).
These methods may be used over a longer time. Even
if one follows this life regime of oils and sweating, it
is suggested that one occasionally have a major
pañcha karma therapy to. This can be done seasonally
or yearly for to maintain good health.
Results of excess sweat therapy: Pitta and blood
excesses, thirst, fainting, weak voice and body,
giddiness, joint pain, fever, blue, black, or red skin
patches, vomiting. To antidote the excesses, astringent
therapy (i.e., light, cool, dry, bitter, astringent) and
sweet therapy are used.
If one only follows the preliminary practices, then
the toxins return to their site of accumulation, but are
not removed. This may cause distress or disease as
toxins can be reabsorbed and return to their site of
accumulation.
For Váyu doßhas, failure to follow oil and
sweating with an enema may create a variable
appetite, gas, distention, constipation, and insomnia.
Incomplete Pitta practices may cause

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 185
irritability, fever, and hyperacidity. For Kapha doßha,
it may cause loss of appetite, fatigue, or constipation.
Post Svedhana
After sudation, persons receive a slow and gentle
massage followed by a warm water bath (to calm the
person and to wash off the toxins that have been
expelled through the skin). A wholesome diet is
followed thereafter. Exercise and drinking of cold
water is are avoided on this day. Fresh air, a warm
bath or shower, and a nap after lunch is advised.
Pañcha karma therapies (see below) are
begun a set number of days after svedhana,
Vamana—second day after svedhana
Virechana—third day after svedhana Basti,
Nasya, Rakta Mokßha—just after
Pañcha Karma (five actions) returns toxins to their
sites of origin to be properly eliminated. This differs
from most other healing systems that mainly flush
the various organs or body systems regardless if the
toxins are present. Once the toxins are removed from
the organs and systems, no method exists to remove
them from the body gently. Thus, many healers tell
clients that they will feel bad for a few days as they
detoxify, then they will feel better. With pañcha
karma, the detoxification process happens without
discomfort or withdrawal symptoms, and the body is
completely rid of toxins.
Pañcha Karma
Primary Practices
(Pradhana
Karma)
Pañcha karma consists of five cleansing aspects:
emesis, purgation, medicated enemas, medicated
nasal oils, and toxic bloodletting. These therapies are
employed for acute diseases as well. For example,
emesis (vomiting therapy) may be used during acute
asthma attacks, obesity, and acute Kapha disorders.
As mentioned before, the person needs to be strong
before undertaking pañcha karma because these
reducing therapies temporarily weaken the system.
Additionally, pañcha karma is used to prevent the
accumulation of the humors, or as a seasonal health
maintenance and a longevity/rejuvenation program.
What is unique about this Áyurvedic approach is that
it is used not only for healing, but also for prevention
and rejuvenation (longevity).
Enemas that include tonics and nutritive herbs are
also used in supplementation therapy, as they build
tissues rather than reduce humors. Thus, pañcha
karma offers various therapies that may be used in
various ways, depending upon the person, disease,
season, culture, etc. The milder therapies may be used
seasonally in self-healing, prevention, and
rejuvenation.
Therapeutic Vomitng
(Vamana)
Of all the five pañcha karma therapies, this is the
most dangerous; one can strain to vomit and damage
the nerve reflexes. With proper guidance one learns
the method for oneself or consults a qualified pañcha
karma specialist. It is done regularly to cleanse the
stomach and remove áma (toxins) and mucus from
the náæís (channels) and chest. It is used for relieving
recent fever, diarrhea, pulmonary TB, and all lung

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
186
conditions, skin diseases (e.g., eczema, psoriasis,
leukoderma), diabetes mellitus, goiter, tumors, cough,
asthma, and difficult breathing. Vamana is also useful
for nausea, herpes, head and sinus diseases, allergies,
chronic colds, rhinitis, rheumatic diseases, arthritis,
viral disorders (e.g., herpes zoster), insanity, parasites
(filariasis), bleeding of a downward nature, and excess
salivation. It helps heal hemorrhoids, anorexia,
cervical adenitis, edema, epilepsy, confusion,
abscesses, and sore throats.
Vamana helps heal obesity, ear discharge, epig-
lottis, uvulitis, stiff neck, acute fever, Kapha fever,
and nasal discharge. It is also useful for indigestion,
gastroenteritis, alasaka, poison, chemical burn, and
diseases due to bad breast milk. When vomiting or
heart diseases are due to Kapha, then vamana is also
used (but never when Pitta causes these two dis-
eases—as per the below caution).
CidSàau   baHudaeSasau   vamanaó   iHtamaucyatae
Chardishu bahudoßhasu vamanaå
hitamuchyate - Sußhrut Saμhitá.
Vamana is used with Kapha excesses alone,
or when Kapha is predominant while being
associated with Váyu or with Pitta.
Precaution: Vamana is not recommended for preg-
nant women, with other Váyu excesses, before
oleation, when hungry, under constant grief, for chil-
dren, elderly, emaciated, Váyu obesity, wounded,
heart problems, high blood pressure, and vomiting
(Pitta or Váyu imbalances). It is not practiced with
weakness, enlarged spleen or abdomen, blindness,
intestinal parasites, upward movement of Váyu (re-
verse peristalsis) bleeding, immediately after an en-
ema, loss of speech, urine retention, or abdominal
tumors. Vamana is not for those having difficulty with
emesis, with strong digestive fire, hemorrhoids, gid-
diness, enlarged prostate, rib and chest pain, catchexia,
thrush, fatigue, with excess sex, study or exercise;
neurasthenia, constipation, helminthiasis, G.I. disor-
ders, prostatitis, aphonia, cataracts, headaches, ear-
ache, eye pain, confusion,neuromuscular disorders,
deficient emesis, or belching with edema.
Two types of vamana herbs exist:
a) Those that induce vomiting (vamaka). They
are hot (circulating throughout the body, loosening
and liquefying), sharp (separating qualities), and pen-
etrating (throughout the body). Therapies include
kuþaj, salt water, licorice, and vachá.
b) Herbs that further help or enhance the induc-
ing herbs (vamanopaga). Herbs include pippalí,
ámalakí, rock salt, neem, and madana phal.
Time: The best time to practice is during the late
spring or early summer (Kapha- provoking time) and
close to the full moon when the water element is high,
one day after snehana and svedhana, after a good
sleep, after food is digested, or after sunrise—6:00 to
900 or 10:00 a.m. (Kapha time).
After 7 days of oleation and sweating, the skin
should look shiny, soft, and slightly oily. Feces also
should look shiny and oily, and increased in quantity.
The smell of oil should be emanating from the skin
and stool. These are indications that persons are ready
for vamana.
Method: Two to three days after svedhana (and after
oleation), the evening before vamana, one eats Kapha-
increasing foods like sugar, dairy, bananas, sesame
seeds, and urad dal; causing Kapha excesses that
make vamana more easily applied. Just before sleep
persons can take 1/2 to 3/4 gram of vacha to stimu-
late secretions, further increasing stomach volume
n
igir
O
e
s
a
e
si
D
st
n
ei
d
e
r
g
n
I
a
h
p
a
K
íla
p
pip
m
ra
w
,tla
s
k
c
o
r
,
reta
w
atti
P
á
s
á
v
,
m
e
e
n
,
aloóá
p
dlo
c
reta
w
u
y
á
V
/a
h
p
a
K
la
h
p
a
n
a
d
a
m
kli
m
,
n
oits
e
gid
n
I
tla
s
k
c
o
r

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 187
of Kapha. The heating effect of vacha begins to re-
duce the áma and, because heat rises, prepares the
body for emesis.
The next morning the stomach remains empty (i.e.,
don’t eat), causing further secretions to de-velop in
surrounding tissues, promoting secre-tion movement
to the stomach. After meditation persons undergo mild
snehana and svedhana, increasing body temperature
and insuring expan-sion of tissues and subtle
channels.
Next one eats 11/2cups of a thin, sweet-tasting
porridge of rice or wheat cooked with milk, salt, and
a little ghee. The use of Kapha-increasing foods and
liquids coats the inner membranes and induces the
need to vomit. After about an hour, one prepares a
strong emetic tea like licorice, calamus, chamomile,
or madan phal. This will promote immediate emesis.
When the tea is properly prepared, persons will not
feel sick or uncomfortable. The entire process lasts
about one hour.
Recipe: The dose is 1 ounce of herbs to 2 cups of
water. Alternatively, 2 tbs. of salt added to each cup
of warm water may also be used. A third option is to
soak madan phal powder in honey overnight and
make into a paste. The next day 1/2 tsp. is licked with
the tongue. These methods are emetic—or vomit-pro-
moting. Vamana is not done on a full stomach (after
eating). Another recipe using madan phal adds 4 parts
of the herb with vachá (2 parts), rock salt (1 part),
and is used with raw honey as its vehicle (anupána).
If no urge to vomit exists, pippalí, ámalakí, vachá
and salt are added to the tea. The proper-ties of honey
and rock salt liquefy the mucus. In order for vamana
to proceed easily, persons can drink large quantities
of licorice tea prepared the night before as a cold
infusion (soaking the herb in room-temperature
water). Licorice collects toxins from tissues without
it being absorbed into the body itself.
a) Milder liquids include one or two cups of mild
carminative tea (mint, fennel, etc.—2 tsp. herbs are
infused into 1 cup of water). Children, the elderly,
debilitated, impotent, and frightened people drink
milk with raw sugar, honey, and rock salt. The amount
ingested depends upon the severity of the illness. A
moderate dose is 23/4 ounces of a decoction, fresh
juice extract, or infusion; 1 3/4 ounces for powders or
paste.
While facing the east, one should recite a prayer
of health. (e.g., “May Brahma, Dakßha, A¤hwinís,
Rudra, Indra, Earth, Moon, Sun, Air, Fire, Sages,
medicinal plants, and all the crea-tures, protect me.
May this therapy prove an effective rejuvenative for
sages, nectar for the gods, and ambrosia for the best
among ser-pents.”) Then the liquid is drunk.
b) After drinking mild liquids the person waits 48
minutes before vomiting. Sitting on a seat parallel to
the knees (some suggest squatting), one feels the
reflex, then attempts to vomit. If unable to vomit, the
person places a spoon or finger in the back of the
throat (without harming the throat) to stimulate the
emetic reflex. The head and ribs are supported by
another person, and the navel and back are massaged
in an up-ward direction. If excess Kapha exists, then
Kapha-reducing herbs (e.g., hot or pungent) are also
drunk. When excess Pitta exists, sweet and cold herbs
are used. For Kapha/Váyu diseases, salt, oily, and
sour herbs are used. If Kapha is deficient, emetic herbs
are used.
c) One makes sure the stomach is empty from
vomiting. Once the vomit reflex occurs, it is advised
to let it proceed all the way. Allowing for a few good
reflexes is easier than many weak ones. This ensures
the likelihood of not develop-ing side effects. Four,
six, and eight regurgita-tions define minimum,
medium, and maximum bouts. Alternately, when the
mucus and phlegm are released and bile begins to be
expelled, or until there is a bitter, sour, or pungent
taste in the mouth, one stops the process. If some of
the licorice has entered the small intestine, persons
may experience two or three loose stools over the
next 12 hours.
The amount expelled during vamana is meas-
ured by the practitioner to determine proper

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
188
elimination. For example, if persons drink 2 quarts
of licorice decoction and expel 3 quarts, this last quart
is the áma and excess Kapha. The color, consistency,
and odor are also observed to provide more
information on the effectiveness of the treatment.
Persons can follow a long-term emesis alternative
with the daily use of expectorants like ginger,
cardamom, and calamus or t^ikatu. These herbs are
taken with a mucus/Kapha-reducing diet and lifestyle.
Additional Decoctions
1. Triphalá may be added to the tea for excess
salivation, gland disorders, fever, anorexia, and
abdominal disorders.
2. Boiled milk is used for internal bleeding in a
downward direction or burning sensation in the heart
area.
3. Yogurt is used for Kapha-vomiting disorders,
bronchial asthma, and salivation.
4. Cold yogurt (about 51/2 ounces) is taken to
reduce pain in the chest, throat, or heart.
5. Butter is added for low digestive fire due to
Kapha or when the body is dry.
6. Neem, guæúchí, bh^i´garáj, pippalí, chitrak, ginger,
sesame seeds, and rice flower are used to reduce Pitta
in a Kapha organ.
Results/Post Emesis: Outcomes of correctly admin-
istered emesis include calmness, ease, clarity, im-
proved digestion, absence of symptoms of the illness,
and not too much discomfort. After emesis, persons
wash hands, face, and feet; and inhale herbal ciga-
rettes. Sleep or rest is very important. After sleeping,
hands, face, and feet are again washed. If hungry,
light food is taken in liquid form (solid food is not
taken for at least 4 hours when manda or rice water is
ingested).
1. Manda: Is drinking only the lukewarm water in
which white basmati rice is boiled. Some authorities
suggest that a small amount of ghee and a pinch of
black salt may be added to manda.
2. Peyá: The next meal is taken two hours later. Peyá
is a slightly thicker rice liquid made of 8 parts water
to 1 part white basmati rice. Rice is cooked until it is
very soft, thin, light, and porridge-like. (Two or three
meals of peyá are taken depending upon the degree
of purification used.)
Rest is required for the remainder of the day,
avoidance of speaking, strong emotions (e.g., worry),
drafts, travel, sex, sun, and suppressing natural urges
are required.
For mild purification, only 1 meal of peyá is
required.
For moderate purification, 2 meals of peyá are
required.
For strong purification, 3 consecutive meals of
peyá are required. Meals are taken only twice daily,
lunch (noon) and dinner.
3. Vilepí: After this, vilepí or thick rice soup, is served,
consisting of 4 parts water to 1 part white basmati
rice. A little sugar cane powder (e.g., turbinado sugar
or Sucanat) and a pinch of black salt can be added
for taste. A small slice of fresh ginger can be sauteed
with turmeric, cumin, coriander, or fennel in a small
amount of ghee to build the digestive fire. This is
taken in the same manner (once, twice, or thrice).
4. Odana: The next meal is soft, plain basmati rice
(odana), and vegetable soups. (Some authorities
suggest omitting the vegetables.)
5. Yuäha: Or rice and split yellow múng dal soup
meals are next taken with ghee, rock salt, and sour
tastes added (some practitioners suggest avoiding
the sour tastes). This meal begins on the third day
after vamana
6. Kicharí: Meals include ojas-increasing herbs (e.g.,
guæúchí, balá, a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí), depending
upon one’s doßha. Kicharí starts thin (3 parts water
to 1 part basmati rice and 1/4 part múng dal). Next, it
is prepared thicker using only 2 parts water to 1 part
rice.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 189
After this, regular meals are gradually introduced
as the digestive fire grows stronger. Just as a fire is
gradually increased from paper and twigs, to sticks,
and then to logs until there is a strong flame, so then
is food gradually increased after emesis naturally
strengthening the digestive fire until it is strongly and
healthily. The general rule of thumb is to eat only
when hungry.
Alternative post-pañcha karma or samsara-jana
diets are listed below.
Post-Strong Dose Purgation Meal Plan
*Moderate thickness gruel (vilepí/odana) is taken with little
or no ghee. Drink warm water after all meals from this point
until the end of the seven days.
+ Múng/yuäha soup is taken with a little ghee and salt; all
remaining meals (of the seven days) will include ghee and
salt.
** Some say to begin normal meals at this time.
Inadequate Vamana: If vomiting does not occur, or if
it is only partially eliminated, symptoms develop such
as itching, excess expectorating, itching, skin rashes,
or fever.
Purgation
(Virechana)
This is the simplest method of pañcha karma and
has most easily observed effects. It is an excellent
method to heal various conditions, including abdomi-
nal tumors, hemorrhoids, smallpox, patches of skin
sla
e
M
d
o
o
F
3
-
1
(
le
u
r
g
niht
á
y
e
p/a
d
n
a
m
)
6
-
4
(
le
u
r
g
etare
d
o
m
íp
eliv
r
o
elttil-)
o
n
.la
e
m
e
ht
hti
w
tla
s
d
n
a
e
e
h
g
e
ht
retfa
reta
w
m
ra
w
k
nir
D
e
ht
litn
u
la
e
m
.sla
e
m
8
1
e
ht
f
o
d
n
e
9
-
7
,p
u
o
s
niht
d
n
a
e
g
dirr
o
p
e
e
h
g
,
d
n
a
(
tla
s
a
h
ä
u
y
/
a
n
a
d
o
)
2
1
-
0
1
d
n
a
niar
g
(
la
e
m
re
k
ciht
-
n
a
e
b
ír
a
h
cik
,)
e
e
h
g
m
ra
w
k
nir
d
;tla
s
,
sla
e
m
retfa
reta
w
3
1
ot
ets
at
te
e
w
s
a
d
d
a
d
n
a
,e
m
a
s
la
e
m
e
ht
4
1
ot
ets
at
r
u
o
s
a
d
d
a
d
n
a
,e
m
a
s
la
e
m
e
ht
5
1
ot
ets
at
ytla
s
a
d
d
a
d
n
a
,e
m
a
s
la
e
m
e
ht
6
1
ets
at
tn
e
g
n
u
p
a
d
d
a
d
n
a
,e
m
a
s
la
e
m
e
ht
ot
7
1
ot
ets
at
rettib
a
d
d
a
d
n
a
,e
m
a
s
la
e
m
e
ht
8
1
tn
e
g
nirts
a
n
a
d
d
a
d
n
a
,e
m
a
s
la
e
m
e
ht
ot
ets
at
sla
e
m
la
m
r
o
n
e
m
u
s
er
y
a
D
n
o
o
N
-
.
m
.a
0
0
:
1
1
.
m
.p
0
0
:
6
-
0
0
:
4
1
n
a
m
a
v
le
u
r
g
niht
(
n
a
d
a
m
)
2
/le
u
r
g
niht
á
y
e
p
/le
u
r
g
niht
á
y
e
p
r
o
/
íp
eliv
3
/le
u
r
g
etare
d
o
M
íp
eliv
r
o
a
n
a
d
o
*
etare
d
o
m
/le
u
r
g
íp
eliv
r
o
a
n
a
d
o
*
4
etare
d
o
m
/le
u
r
g
a
n
a
d
o
*
g
n
ú
m
/p
u
o
s
a
h
ä
u
y
+
5
g
n
ú
M
/p
u
o
s
a
h
ä
u
y
+
g
n
ú
m
/p
u
o
s
a
h
ä
u
y
+
6
re
k
ciht
ír
a
h
cik
re
k
ciht
ír
a
h
cik
7
re
k
ciht
ír
a
h
cik
*
*te
e
w
s-
1
ets
at
8
te
e
w
s-ets
at
r
u
o
s-
2
ets
at
9
ytla
s-
3
ets
at
tn
e
g
n
u
p
-
4
ets
at
0
1
rettib
-
5
ets
at
tn
e
g
nirts
a-
6
ets
at
1
1
n
o
w
o
n
m
o
rf
sla
e
m
la
m
r
o
n

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
190
discoloration on the face, jaundice, chronic fevers,
and enlarged abdomen. Virechana heals poisoning,
vomiting, spleen diseases, abscesses, blindness, cata-
racts and other eye problems, colon pain, and colitis.
It further heals vaginal diseases, diseases of the se-
men, intestinal parasites, ulcers, gout, bleeding dis-
eases in the upward direction, blood toxins and dis-
eases, suppression of urine, and obstructed feces.
Purgatives eliminate excess Pitta from its site in
the liver, gall bladder, and small intestine (it does not
deal with the large intestine). The bitter purgatives
like rhubarb, senna, or aloe also clean the liver and
gall bladder, decongest bile and remove obstructions
to its flow. They are preferred for Pitta and liver
disorders (e.g., gall stones). Because this cleansing
weakens the digestive fire, it is not always
recommended for Váyu doßhas. Kapha doßhas,
however, benefit from this therapy, as they have excess
bile, congestion, fat, or phlegm. It also helps
constipation, old fevers, acute diarrhea, dysentery,
food poisoning, kidney stones, boils, carbuncles,
excess bile, or toxic blood conditions.
For those who have not had vamana (emesis), there
are 3 days of snehapána, followed by 3 days of body
oleation and sudation before beginning virechana
(purgation). If virechana follows a vamana therapy,
then after the 7 days of proper diet (samsarjana), 2
days of regular meals are eaten. On the 9th day,
snehapána (drinking ghee) is begun for 3 days. The
following 3 days persons receives oil abhyañga and
sudation for three additional days. On this 15th day
(since starting samsarjana) virechana is begun. If
sudation (sweating) is contraindicated, then virechana
begins after the third day of snehapána (drinking
ghee).
Precautions: Virechana is not recommended for those
people with recent fevers, poor digestion, bleeding
diseases of a downward nature (e.g., hemorrhoids),
ulcers, rectum ulcers, and diar-rhea. Nor is it
recommended for those who have recently received
a decoction enema, have hardened feces, suffer from
TB, and are greatly lubricated. It is not used for the
very young or very old, the weak, debilitated or
emaciated, while pregnant, during or immediately
before menstruation, or with prolapse of the stomach
or uterus.
Method: The stool is examined to determine the nature
of the purgation therapy to be used. Soft stools suggest
mild virechana (e.g., boiled milk, ghee, honey, and
cinnamon), while hard stools will require stronger
purgative herbs (like triphalá, castor oil, rhubarb, or
senna). For Pitta disorders, herbs of astringent, and
sweet tastes are added. Kapha excesses require
pungent herbs. Váyu disorders require rock salt, ghee,
and hot herbs. It is important for persons to undergo
3 to 7 days of oleation (internal and external) before
purgation if they haven’t already gone through the
process for vamana.
Time: According to Aßhþáñga H^idayam, the time of
purgation is after vamana (emesis), and after 9:00
a.m. (the end of the Kapha time of day). This is done
with rapidly acting purgatives. Others suggest
medium to mild doses to be taken just before sleep.
Still others suggest eating dinner around 7:30 p.m.
and taking virechana 9:30 p.m., then retiring to bed.
Some pundits say food should be fully digested while
others suggest waiting two hours after the meal, until
food passes out of the small intestine (fasting is
advised for stronger people). The best season for
virechana is late spring to early summer.
Sample Ingredients: A strong purgative like rhubarb
root (it may produce gripping). A mixture of rhubarb
(4 parts), fennel, ginger, and licorice (1 part each),
taken with 2 to 5 grams honey or warm water before
sleep to prevent gripping). Castor oil is a moderately
strong purgative (2 tsp. in warm water). Triphalá (10
to 30 grams with warm water, or boiled milk with
ghee and cinnamon) is a mild purgative. The first
approach is the strongest and not suggested for
thosewho are somewhat weakened or of Váyu doßha.
[The Sußhrut Saμhitá devotes an entire chapter of
additional purgatives  (Sútrasthána - Ch. 44).]

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 191
Result: The next day (or later that morning), about
five stools (movements) are passed, flushing toxins
from the small intestine. The number of stools can
range from 4 to 15, depending upon the doäha, health
condition, etc. If one has fewer than 4 stools, the pro-
cess is repeated within a few hours. Stools may be
loose, but if cramping or griping results, a little medi-
cated ghee can be taken, and cardamom or fennel
should be added to future purgatives. Traditional stool
amounts are 30 (maximum or ideal), 20 (moderate),
and 10 (minimum), or until Kapha is expelled in the
stool. An example of a quick acting purgative is cas-
tor oil with two times as much triphalá. Purgation
can be done for 2 to 3 days in a row in severe condi-
tions, or 2 to 3 times every other day. If one can sched-
ule this day for a weekend or other calm day, it will
be more beneficial, practical, and more relaxing. Mild,
short-term purgation may also be used, as needed.
Successful purgation: This results in clear minded-
ness, keen senses, stable tissues, strong digestion,
light, clean, strong, removal of symptoms, and slowed
aging.
Abnormal Bouts: These are noted by symptoms of
abdominal and heart discomfort, anorexia,
expectorating bile and mucus, itching, burning, skin
eruptions, rhinitis, gas, and no elimination of stools.
Excess Bouts: Symptoms include watery stool that
are white, black, or red in color, rectum prolapses,
thirst, giddiness, and sunken eyes.
Follow-up: Purgation is followed by hot spices to
increase the digestive fire (e.g., ginger, t^ikatu). They
are especially useful in the winter or, if the appetite
does not return to normal, after the therapy. Meals
are given as described for vamana (emesis) on page
189. After purgation and before any other purificatory
therapies, oleation is again given to strengthen the
person.
Lack of results: The person eats that day, and purgation
is given again on the next day. For weaker people or
those with unlubricated alimentary tracts, oleation and
sudation are given for 10 days, and then purgation is
re-administered.
Exceptions: Váyu doßhas, people who exercise
vigorously, those with a strong digestive fire and those
with dry alimentary tracts find that purgatives are
digested before they produce the desired results. For
these people, an enema (basti) is given first (see
below).
Those suffering from trauma, skin problems,
edema, herpes, jaundice, anemia, poisonous intake,
and diabetes are given mild oleation, as this alone
may produce the purging action.
Post-Virechana: Symptoms of successful virechana
include feeling lightness in body, calmness of mind
and in whom gas moves in a downward direction.
Rice and a lentil dal soup are suggested as restorative
meals.
Enema
(Basti)
Enema is half of the medicinal therapy,
or even the complete treatment.
Charak- Sid. Ch. 1 verse 39
Basti therapy is primarily used for Váyu
a
h
ß
o
D
s
e
ss
e
c
x
E
cit
u
e
p
a
r
e
h
T
g
n
ig
r
u
P
el
p
m
a
x
E
s
e
vit
a
g
r
u
P
u
y
á
V
,ytla
s
,to
h
ylio
,ála
h
pirt
,la
h
piaj
lo
g
b
a
h
¤í
k
c
o
r
,
re
g
nig
,tla
s
atti
P
,tn
e
g
nirts
a
te
e
w
s
,lio
r
ots
a
c
t^
virt
,b
ra
b
u
h
r
,
á
k
uóa
k
a
h
p
a
K
tn
e
g
n
u
p
,b
ra
b
u
h
r
,a
n
n
e
s
,uta
ki^t
ála
h
pirt

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
192
This enema moistens dry tissues and organs,
reduces hyperactive digestion, and Váyu disorders,
including nervous conditions. It is done in the day
during the spring and on colder winter days; and in
the night during the summer, the rainy season, and
on milder winter days.
Anuvásana Doses
The day after basti a warm ginger/coriander
decoction is drunk to prevent any adverse effects from
oleation.
2. Nirúha or Ásthápana (non-unctuous)— This
is a highly beneficial herbal decoction enema mixed
with milk and a little oil. Nirúha is given to those
with abdominal pain, distention, tumors, gout, splenic
diseases, diarrhea (without other associated diseases),
chronic fever, runny nose, obstructed semen, gas, or
feces; enlarged scrotum, urinary stones, amenorrhea,
or severe Váyu disorders. It provides health to the
healthy and gives strength to the tissues that are weak.
Symptoms of proper basti include feeling light-
ness in the body. Two, three, or four nirúha bastis
can be given in a row.
excesses, either alone, or as the predominant doßha
deranged. Basti is the Sanskrit name for urinary
bladder. Originally the bladders of larger animals, like
buffaloes and goats, were used as enema bags. The
colon is related to all other organs and tissues, so by
cleansing and toning the colon, the entire body is
healed and rejuvenated. The colon is the main organ
that absorbs nutrients. A healthy, functioning colon
is imperative for proper assimilation of nutrients.
Basti is unlike Western enemas or colonics.
Enemas only cleanse the rectum and sigmoid colon
(only the lower eight to ten inches of the colon)
causing an evacuating effect. Colonics remove feces
blocks but may weaken the mucus membranes and
dry the colon. This further imbalances Váyu’s normal
elimination process. Basti, however, treats the entire
length of the colon from the ileocecal valve to the
anus. Not only is feces flushed from the system but
also áma is removed from the tissues. Furthermore,
balanced and healthy colon function is restored as
tissues and organs are rebuilt.
General Benefits: Basti is useful for many disorders
including chronic constipation, sciatica, lower back
pain, arthritis, gout, and rheumatism. It also heals
numerous neurological disorders like Parkinson’s,
MS, muscular dystrophy, paraplegia, hemiplegia,
poliomyelitis, osteoporosis, and muscle and nerve
atrophy. Further, basti helps with mental conditions
such as Alzheimer’s, epilepsy, mental retardation, and
sensory disorders.
General Precautions: Basti is not used for babies, for
diarrhea, colon cancer, diverticulitis, rectal bleeding,
polyps, fever, and some forms of diabetes.
Three types of bastis exist:
1. Anuvásana (unctuous)—this enema remains
in the body for some time without causing harm.
Mainly herbal medicated oils and ghee are used. The
amount of oil used in anuvásana basti is 48 or 96
grams (1.7 oz. or 3.4 oz.). It is administered through
the rectum. It is given to all those who are suited for
nirúha (non-unctuous basti), especially those having
strong digestion, to those not receiving oleation, and
those with Váyu diseases (only). This form of enema
is given before nirúha.
h
t
g
n
e
rt
S
its
a
B
e
s
o
D
tla
S
k
c
o
R
le
n
n
e
F
&
m
u
m
ix
a
M
.z
o
0
1
.s
m
g
5.4
etare
d
o
M
.z
o
8.6
.s
m
g
3
m
u
m
ini
M
.z
o
4.3
.s
m
g
5.1
h
t
g
n
e
rt
S
its
a
B
e
s
o
D
m
u
m
ix
a
M
.z
o
9.3
3
etare
d
o
M
.z
o
7.7
2
m
u
m
ini
M
.z
o
3.0
2

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 193
Simple Nirúha Basti
-1-3/4 cup daçhmúl herbal decoction -1-
1/2 oz. sesame oil
-a little honey
-a pinch of black salt to increase colon secretions
3. Uttarabasti—is an upper-tract enema that uses a
combination of decoction and medicated oils. It is
delivered through the urethral and vaginal passages
for the particular problems associated with these
organs (page 197).
Precautions:
Enemas are not given for the following reasons,
Nirúha—This is not used for excess oleation, chest
injury, severe emaciation, diarrhea with áma (toxins)
or of a recent onset; vomiting, just after purificatory
therapies, or just after nasya (nasal oil therapy). It is
also contraindicated for asthma, coughs, salivation,
gas, poor digestion, rectal swelling, taken before food
is digested, or with an enlarged abdomen due to in-
testinal obstructions. This enema should not be used
when clients suffer from perforated alimentary tracts
and water, skin diseases, diabetes mellitus, or when
women are in their seventh month of pregnancy. Other
conditions when nirúha is not advised include after
drinking ghee, with aggravated doßhas, when fa-
tigued, hungry, thirsty, overworked, angry, anxious,
frightened, or drunk. It is also not used when there is
difficult breathing, hiccup, alasaka, cholera, dysen-
tery, urinary disorders, hemorrhoids, anemia, edema,
anal inflammation, confusion, anorexia, coma, obe-
sity dry throat, or lung injury. Nirúha is not used on
the very young or very old.
Anuvásana—This is not for persons unsuited for
nirúha, nor for anemia, jaundice, diabetes, rhinitis,
fasting, splenic diseases, diarrhea, constipation, and
an enlarged abdomen from Kapha excesses. It is not
suggested for those with eye problems, obesity, in-
testinal parasites, gout, goiter, lymphatic TB (swol-
len lymph glands), blood or tissue parasites, or for
those who have consumed poisons.
Anuvásana basti can be done the same day as
nirúha. If symptoms persist, a second application can
be given the 2nd, 3rd, or 5th day. The second
anuvásana can be stronger if stool is not passed within
48 hours.
Quantity:
Birth until 2 years old, 48 grams (@1.7 oz.) of
liquid are used. [For emergency cases only]
2 to 13 years old, each successive year it should be
increased by 48 grams (until it reaches 576 grams
or about 20 oz.).
13 to 18 years old, each successive year by 96 grams/
@ 3.4 oz. (until it reaches 1,152 grams or
approximately 41 oz.).
18 + years old, 960 grams (@34 oz.) are used.
The amount of oil used is 1/4 that of a decoc-
tion, according to each age group.
Herbs
Method: After oleation (snehana), sudation
(svedhana), (and if necessary) emesis (vamana), and
purgation (virechana); after elimination, on an empty
stomach, after performing prayers; considering one’s
doßha, the proper herbs, the practitioner, and having
other basti experts present, basti (enema) is given. If
a person is strong and is so suited, an oil enema is
given first. [According to the Aßhþáñga H^idayam,
from September through March, enemas are given
during the afternoon. In the remaining months, bastis
its
a
B
e
s
o
p
r
u
P
st
n
ei
d
e
r
g
n
I
ts
1
eta
v
ar
g
g
a
ot
a
h
ß
o
d
,tla
s
k
c
o
r
á
h
c
a
v
,
íla
p
pip
e
cir
o
cil
,
d
n
2
y
fic
a
p
a
h
ß
o
d
,e
cir
o
cil
a
w
lib
,
jaóu
k
d
r
3
e
zila
m
r
o
n
a
h
ß
o
d
,ats
u
m
,e
cir
o
cil
u
g
´
a
yír
p
kli
m
,
u
y
á
V
,e
cir
o
cil
,ra
d
e
c
á
h
c
a
v
,
a
w
lib
,
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
,
á
h
d
n
a
g
a
w
h
¤
a
a
tti
P
,e
cir
o
cil
,a
w
lib
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
a
h
p
a
K
,ra
d
e
c
á
h
c
a
v
,
a
w
lib
,
á
h
d
n
a
g
a
w
h
¤
a

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
194
are administered in the evening. Some suggest it be
always given in daytime. Regarding time of year,
some suggest basti during the late summer or early
fall]. Charak says non-unctuous enemas can be given
during the day in the winter and spring, and in the
evening during the remainder of the year.
1. An oil massage (abhyañga) and bath are given,
followed by an easily digestible meal (1/4 less the
usual quantity). Afterwards, they drink a liquid then
take a walk. Meditation or prayers are performed as
well. Next the person evacuates stool and urine and
then lies on a comfortable bed, neither too high nor
low (Charak adds, on white sheets with head facing
the East). They lie on their left side, with the left leg
extended and the right leg bent (knee close to chest)
for easier administration. A lubricated nozzle is
inserted into the rectum, approximately six inches,
after the air has been expelled from the enema bag.
Fluids are slowly released into the colon. Some liquid
is left in the bag to prevent air from passing into the
rectum. Different herbs are made into a decoction to
be used in the basti with the oil.
If stool, urine, or gas blocks the basti flow, a
smaller dose is given to ensure the oil enters into the
body (and not just the water).
2. After the basti is administered and the nozzle
is removed, the person lies on their back while the
practitioner gently hits the person’s buttock several
times. The person then slightly raises the heels and
buttocks and gently pounds against the bed. Next,
the foot of the bed is raised
three times, followed by extending both legs. A pil-
low is then placed under the legs, and the person re-
ceives an oil massage, working out any painful or
knotted spots. This helps the enema to stay in longer
(if the enema is soon expelled, another oil enema is
immediately given).
3. Nirúha or water-based basti is held in the body
for about 48 minutes. Anuvásana or oil basti must
remain in the body for 9 hours. Should the elimina-
tion reflex cause early release of the fluids, they are
reapplied.
If, after anuvásana, the person has regained a
strong digestive fire, they can eat a light meal in the
evening. If the oil does not come out due to the ex-
cessive dryness inside the body, and the person feels
good, it can remain inside overnight. It is expelled in
the morning by drinking warm water. If it does not
come out after 24 hours, the person is administered
an herbal (fruit) rectal suppository or strong decoc-
tion enema. Signs of proper administration of enema
include feeling relief from the toxins, and finding the
oil being expelled along with the feces, followed by
gas.
4. Basti is repeated on the 3rd or 5th day, or until
the fat is well digested. Those with excessive dry-
ness, or who exercise daily and have good digestion,
receive daily oil enemas.
5. When the body becomes well lubricated, a
purificatory decoction enema is given to clear the
channels (srotas) 3 or 5 days after the unctuous en-
ema (Sußhrut suggests the same day). It is given in
the afternoon, after the person digests a light meal,
and after oleation, sudation, elimination of feces,
urine, and meditation. The strength of the decoction
depends on the strength of the client.
After receiving an oil enema, a decoction en-
ema is given to restore balance between toning and
reducing. This balances all three doßhas. Oil enemas
are given after a span of three days so as not to im-
pair the digestion. For extreme Váyu excesses and
dryness, oil enemas may be given daily.
s
m
o
t
p
m
y
S
its
a
B
s
b
r
e
H
,re
dlu
o
h
s
,h
giht
,s
g
el
k
c
e
n
,d
n
a
k
ír
á
div
ík
atír
a
h
,íh
c
ú
æ
u
g
,
re
g
nig
y
ra
nir
u
,a
citaic
s
k
c
a
b
h
c
n
u
h
,s
m
elb
o
r
p
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
,lu
g
g
u
g
s
e
s
a
e
sid
atti
P
,á
k
uóa
k
,k
á
s
á
v
á
hþh
ßijñ
a
m
s
e
s
a
e
sid
a
h
p
a
K
m
e
e
n
,ála
h
pirt

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 195
a
h
ß
o
D
s
a
m
e
n
E
s
b
r
e
H
its
a
B
u
y
á
V
1
1
-
9
,ála
b
,lú
m
h
¤
a
d
,a
w
lib
,á
v
a
n
r
a
n
u
p
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
,íh
c
ú
æ
u
g
atti
P
7
-
5
,d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
ats
u
m
,á
hþh
ßijñ
a
m
a
h
p
a
K
3
-
1
,tla
s
k
c
o
r
,á
h
c
a
v
íla
p
pip
,a
w
lib
Oil is used for unctuous enemas.
Pitta doßhas may use ghee.
Results of Nine Bastis
An ideal therapy consists of a series of nine
enemas.
1st permeates the inguinal and pelvic region with
demulcent properties
2nd restores Váyu in the cephalic part of the head
3rd improves body strength and complexion
4th permeates the plasma (rasa)
5th permeates the blood (rakta)
6th permeates the muscles/flesh (máåsa)
7th permeates the fat (medas)
8th permeates the bones (asthi)
9th permeates the marrow (majjá)
This series is repeated twice;
once without oil, once with oil.
Non-unctuous (nirúha) enemas promote longevity,
intelligence, voice, complexion, and draw out feces,
mucus, bile, and urine. Unctuous (oil) enemas (used
after non-oil enemas) help the complexion, strength,
Váyu, mental clarity, energy, and weight. After oil
enemas, fasting is advised for the rest of the day. Oil
enemas are best for conditions of the head, heart,
bladder, and Váyu excesses. Pain, numbness, and
swelling may develop when Váyu is obstructed by
fat or Kapha. For these situations, unctuous enemas
are not advised as they will aggravate the fat and
Kapha conditions.
The number of enemas suggested are traditional,
but in today’s fast-paced life, it may not be practical
or necessary for persons to take so many enemas.
Readers and practitioners are advised to use intuition
and evaluate the results even one or two enemas
produce before possibly forcing more sessions. Just
as the dose of herbs has been found to be much less
in the west than in India, so too vamana, virechana,
and basti may need to be applied in moderation.
Post-Enema Precautions: It is always best to stay on
a wholesome diet, but if this is not possible, persons
should eat properly for at least double the length of
the basti therapy. For example, if one undergoes a
nine-day basti program, healthy foods should be eaten
for at least 18 days immediately afterwards. Other-
wise, persons may feel worse than they did before
they began the basti therapy.
After basti one is also advised to avoid excesses
of any kind, such as prolonged sitting, standing,
speaking, travel, naps, coition, cold, sun, grief, wrath,
and suppression of natural urges.
If too much oil has been administered during basti
and excess pressure exists, one may experience
aversion to food, an oily or greasy complexion, an
oily smell in the mouth, coughing, difficult breathing,
and dull senses. Also, each person may develop
symptoms specific to their doßha.
Váyu— astringent taste in mouth, yawning,
shivering, limb pain, Váyu discharges, vißhamsa fever
(i.e., malaria, viral fever, or fever due to injury).
Pitta—fever, burning, thirst, perspiration,
pungent taste; yellowish complexion, urine, and eyes.
Kapha—water brash, sweet taste in mouth,
heaviness, vomiting, difficult breathing, mucus, fever,
food aversion.
Receiving inadequate or cold enemas (either dry
or oily) without proper pre-cleansing can produce
scanty stools, cramps, heaviness, distended intestines,
or constipation.
Enemas after a heavy meal cause cramps, a heavy
stomach, no release of gas, heart problems, bad taste
or food aversion. If oleation, sudation, proper diet,
and elimination of stool have not been done properly,
one may experience heavy limbs, colic, abdominal
distention, difficult breathing, or heavy intestines.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
196
Decoction Enema
(Nirúha Dravya Kalpaná)
Preparation: (The recipe in Aßhþáñga H^idayam
Sú.; Ch 19, verse 381/2-40, is as follows),
• 960 grams (34 oz.) of the herbs appropriate for
ones doßha (constitution) are made into a decoction.
• [Herbs are boiled with 16 parts water
(approximately 4.2 gallons over a low flame) until 1/
4 of the water remains (about a one-gallon decoction).
• Next oil or ghee is added to the decoction, in
the amount of 1/4 of the decoction for Váyu, 1/6
quantity for Pitta, and 1/8 quantity for Kapha.
• 1/8 quantity of medicated paste is sometimes
added, making the decoction neither too watery nor
too thick.
• Lastly, 48 grams (@1.8 oz.) of raw sugar cane
(jaggery) or molasses is added, along with similar
doses of honey and salt, depending upon the doßha].
Author, Vághbhata, notes other views:
• Oil and honey are each 144 grams (5.1 oz.),
• Salt for the strong person is 12 grams,
(.42 of an ounce) medicinal paste is 96 grams (3.4 oz.).
• All other liquids are 480 grams (17 oz.).
Further, Charak offers a breakdown similar to
the Aßhþáñga formula for oil enemas:
• 1 year old 40 grams (@1.5 oz.).
• 2 to 12 years old—each year an additional
40 grams is added.
• 12 to 18 years old—80 grams (@3 oz.) are
added each year until it reaches 960 grams (@34 oz).
• 18 to 70 years old— 960 grams.
70 +— 800 grams (@28 oz.).
The order of mixing ingredients is honey, salt, oil
(or ghee), paste, and decoction. The ingredients are
well mixed and mildly warmed before being
administered to the person.
The flow of the enema should be moderate (i.e.,
not too forceful). After receiving the enema, the
person lies on their back with a pillow
under their head, concentrating on the enema. When
the elimination urge presents itself, they should squat
on their heels to expel the enema and wastes. If the
enema should stay in for 48 minutes, it becomes criti-
cal to expel it. Various substances, including oils, al-
kalis, hot and sour properties, are immediately given.
Alternatively, an herbal (from fruit) suppository is
given, along with sudation and—even frightening the
person, so as to expel the enema.
Decoctions may be given several times until the
person feels relief from the toxins. Once they are
feeling better they take a warm bath to remove any
lingering complications due to the enemas. Food
consists of rice and soothing herbal teas with ghee. If
the enema increases Váyu, an oil enema is
immediately given.
Charak suggests, that once the enema is expelled,
the person should be sprinkled with cool water and
given boiled rice. Later in the evening, after the earlier
meal is digested, the person eats a small and easily
digestible meal. Then an oil enema is given to restore
bulk.
Herbs used in decoctions by Charak include
guæúchí, gokßhura, sandalwood, triphalá, daçhmúl,
bilwa, vachá, musta, pippalí, also jaggery, honey,
ghee, oil, and rock salt.
Sample Decoction Basti
Calamus, ginger, fennel, 1-2 tsp. rock salt, and up
to 1/2 cup sesame oil, per quart of decoction. Licorice,
other demulcents, or oil is used because the enema
may be too drying or depleting. Cleansing enemas
are followed with an oil enema (1/2 cup sesame oil
in 1/2 cup warm water). This balances all three
doßhas.
Helps: Chronic constipation, colitis, arthritis, epilepsy,
paralysis, anxiety, neurosis, insomnia, sciatica, lower
back pain, kidney disorders, neuralgia, and Váyu dis-
orders.
Note: Vamana, virechana, and basti are not given
to people before age 10 or after age 70.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 197
Urethral Basti (Douche)
For complications of urine, genital tract pain,
prolapsed uterus, urine retention or incontinence,
menorrhagia, and during the menstrual cycle, douches
are advised. During menstruation the uterus is not
covered; therefore, it receives unction very easily. This
allows for easy release of Váyu.
After a meal (with ghee), passing stool, urine, and
after bathing, a person sits comfortably on a straight,
soft, knee-high seat. The catheter is introduced gently
into the orifice, neither too deep nor too shallow. The
nozzle is greased with ghee and 20 grams (.7 of an
ounce) of a decoction and is inserted into the body.
As the decoction is expelled, the process is repeated
another two times. If the third decoction is not
released, it is all right. Decoction herbs include
pippalí, black salt, apámárga, mustard, nirguòæí, and
cane sugar. The same procedures, restrictions,
complications, and signs of proper application of
unctuous enemas apply to douching.
For women, the catheter is 10 finger-widths long.
It is inserted into the genital tract up to four finger-
widths deep. In the urethra, it is inserted up to about
two fingers deep. The catheter is easily inserted while
the woman lies on her back, with legs fully flexed.
Douche is given 2 to 4 times over the course of 24
hours. After the douche, a somewhat thicker
suppository is inserted. This therapy continues for 3
days, with the dose gradually increased. After a 3-
day rest, the procedure is repeated.
Nasal Therapy
or Snuff (Nasya)
Áyurveda suggests that the nose is the gateway to
the head. Thus, nasal herb therapy is used for healing
diseases of the throat, neck, head, and senses (e.g.,
ears, nose, eyes, etc.). Nasya is also used for toning
and strengthening these areas.
Nasya is useful in relieving stiffness in the head,
neck arteries, throat, and jaw obstructions, coryza,
uvulitis, tonsillitis, cornea, vision and eyelid disorders,
migraines, disorders of the neck, shoulders, ears, nose,
mouth, head, cranium, and scapula. It helps facial
paralysis, convulsions, goiter, pain, tingling sensation,
loose teeth, tumors, hoarse voice, speech disorders,
and Váyu disorders of the mind, head, neck, and
throat. Nasya is also helpful in head diseases caused
by Kapha (e.g., stiffness, numbness, heaviness).
Saturating nasyas are recommended for Váyu
disorders (e.g., facial paralysis, trembling head).
Pacifying nasyas are useful for internal bleeding and
other Pitta head and neck disorders.
Snuff is suggested three times daily in the rainy,
autumn, and spring seasons when there are no clouds
in the sky. Snuff is said to improve vision, smell, and
hearing; keep hair from graying and falling out;
prevent stiff neck, headache, and lockjaw. It is also
said that snuff relieves chronic rhinitis, and head
tumors. The veins, joints, ligaments, and tendons of
the skull gain greater strength. The face becomes
cheerful and well developed; the voice becomes more
melodious. (See Charak: Sú. Chapter 5; verse 56-62
and Sußhrut: Chapter 50 for further information.)
Nasya herbs include balá, viæa´ga, bilwa and
musta. They are made into an oil decoction with
various other ingredients.
Three kinds of nasyas exist:
1. Virechana (purgatives)—for headaches, eye
problems, throat problems, swellings, enlarged
glands, parasites, tumors, skin diseases, epilepsy,
rhinitis, and loss of head movement. Ingredients
include the appropriate oil, herbal powders, pastes,
or decoctions; and are mixed with honey and salt.
Virechana is of two types: avapída (fresh herb
juices) and pradhamana (blowing of herb powders
through a tube). For formula, see below.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
198
t
n
ei
d
e
r
g
n
I
e
s
o
D
,.g.e(
b
re
h
tn
e
g
n
u
p
)íla
p
pip
.s
m
g
3
u
g
´ih
.s
g
m
5
2.1
3
tla
s
k
c
o
r
.s
g
m
0
5
7
n
oitc
o
c
e
d
r
o
,reta
w
,kli
m
.s
m
g
4
2
ra
g
u
s
r
o
,y
e
n
o
h
w
ar
:te
e
w
s
.s
m
g
2
1
ff
u
n
S
ss
e
r
P
w
ol
B
e
k
o
m
S
r
a
e
m
S
tc
n
u
niater
e
s
n
a
elc
etar
uta
s
y
fic
a
p
y
fic
a
p
-ta
u
c
a
v
e
g
ni
-a
u
c
a
v
e
g
nit
-ta
u
c
a
v
e
g
ni
-ta
u
c
a
v
e
g
ni
2. B^iμhaòa (nourishers)—for Váyu headaches,
migraines, loss of voice, dry nose and mouth;
difficulty speaking, opening eyes, or moving the arms.
Medicated oils help with premature graying and hair
loss; ringing in ears, neck, shoulder, and arm
disorders; dental problems, and headache on either
side of the head. It is also highly beneficial for
degenerative brain disorders such as Alzheimer’s, MS,
epilepsy, and mental retardation. Ingredients include
medicated ghee and extracts from plants.
3. £hamana (palliatives)—for discolored patches
on the face, blue patches on the skin and for hair and
eye diseases. Ingredients include medicated ghee,
milk, or water.
There are two general methods to administer
nasyas: powder form (blown through a tube); and
liquid drops (4, 6, 8 drops—minimum, moderate,
maximum). Traditional powder quantities are 6
grams, but even 1/2 gm. may be effective for
Westerners. The tub length is 6 a´guli long (6 finger
widths).
Five forms of nasya are used: snuffing, pressing,
blowing, smoking, and smearing. Two categories of
snuff exist: uncting and evacuating. Also, 2 types of
pressing are available: evacuating (¤hiro virechana)
and retaining (nasya). Blowing of powders into the
nose cleans the body channels (srotas). Smoking has
3 categories: pacifying, evacuating, and saturating.
Smearing promotes both evacuating and pacifying
results. The two most effective methods are powder
(inhaled through a tube) and liquid drops (4, 6, 8
drops—minimum, moderate, maximum).
Nasya
Snuff—uncting (nasya) and evacuation (¤hiro
virechana) are the most effective forms of nasya.
Snuff is subdivided into five categories, as shown in
the chart above.
1) Uncting (Sneha): Oil increases deficient oily matter
of the brain, reduces feelings of void or emptiness,
tones nerves and muscles in the neck, shoulders, and
chest. It improves eyesight, balding, premature
graying, loose teeth, earaches, cataracts, dry mouth,
nose disorders, loss of voice, Váyu-head disorders,
and wrinkles. Váyu- and Pitta-reducing herbs are
used. Four, 6, or 8 drops constitute the minimum,
moderate, and maximum doses. Other sources
suggest using only 3 drops.
2) Evacuating (£hiro-virechana): Powders of pippalí,
viæa´ga, apámárga, or any oil mixed with these herbs,
is used to reduce Kapha and mucus in the throat,
palate, or head. This procedure helps with food
aversion, headache, heavy head, cold, coryza,
hemicrania (headache on one side of the head),
edema, skin disorders, epilepsy, laryngitis, worms,
and hysteric convulsions. Four, 6, or 8 drops are the
minimum, moderate, and maximum doses.
3) Pratimarßha: This is also an uncting procedure in
which oil is dropped into the nose and expelled
through the mouth. Sußhrut says, 1 to 3 drops, or
whatever amount it takes for the oil to move through
the nose and reach the mouth. Sußhrut also suggests
that oil be used for Váyu and Kapha doßhas, and ghee
be used for Pitta doßhas. However, any medicated
Pitta-reducing oil is also suggested by other writers

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 199
(e.g., bráhmí oil). Pratimarßha is useful for those who
are wounded, emaciated, children, and the elderly;
and at all times and seasons (including rainy weather).
It strengthens the senses, helps prevent premature
graying and hair loss, thirst, head and mouth diseases,
and all disorders above the shoulders.
4) Avapída: This is an evacuative procedure. Fresh
pungent herbal juice is dropped into the nose. Then
the nostrils are pressed with both palms. Four, six, or
eight drops constitute the minimum, moderate, and
maximum doses. This method helps with tridoßhic
fevers, throat disorders, excess sleep, parasites, and
mental disorders (including epilepsy and insanity).
Some ingredients, for example, are licorice, black
pepper, vachá, and rock salt, made into a liquid with
warm water.
5) Pradhama: This is another evacuative method.
Here, evacuating six gms. of herbal powders are
blown into the nostrils through a tube six a´guli (six
finger widths). It is useful for those with extreme
doßha imbalances (e.g., unconsciousness).
Ingredients include rock salt and t^ikatu.
NASYA
Precautions: It is not advised to take nasya when
thirsty, after a meal or a fast, just before or after
bathing, with acute rhinitis, the last few months of
pregnancy, during menstruation, just after asthma
attacks or with difficult breathing, colds or coughing.
Nasya is also not used just after oleation, emesis,
purgation, basti, after sex or drinking too much water
or alcohol; on sun-less days, with acute coryza, anger,
grief, fatigue, when excited or suppressing natural
urges. Further, it is not used during bad weather or
for children under 7 years old, and the elderly over
80 years of age.
Pratimarßha is not used after wine, when weak,
with head-worms, and when doßhas are greatly
excessed and move around.
Time: Nasyas are taken before meals. Kapha doßha
take these nasyas in the morning, Pittas in the
afternoon, and Váyu doßhas in the evening or night.
Healthy persons take snuff in the morning in the
summer, afternoons in the winter and rainy seasons
(when it is not cloudy). Snuff is not taken during the
early rainy season, fall, and spring, except during
emergencies. Then, it is taken in the morning.
Nasya is taken daily, both morning and evening,
for Váyu head disorders, hiccup, tetanus, convulsions,
stiff neck, and for a hoarse voice. For all other diseases
it is taken only once daily for 7 days.
Method: Nasya is taken after elimination of stool and
urine, brushing teeth, smoking herbs and receiving
oleation (oil massage) to the neck, cheeks, and
forehead. The palms are first rubbed together until
warm and then placed over the face (as fomentation).
Alternatively, a warm wash cloth may be placed over
the sinuses. This process begins to loosen toxins and
expand the channels for easier toxin elimination.
Next, the persons lie on their backs on a bed in a
room with no drafts. Feet are slightly raised and the
head is slightly lowered. The limbs are extended.
Nasya oil is slightly warmed and then inserted into
the nostrils, (right nostril first), while the other nostril
is kept closed. Oil is sniffed up into the head. To better
achieve this effect, nostrils may be closed with the
fingers while inhaling through the nose begins. Then
fingers are released, causing a sudden rush of air into
the nostrils. This process can be done five to ten times.
Afterwards, the soles, neck, palms, ears, and face
are fomented again with warm palms, and gently

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
200
a
y
s
a
N
lla
m
S
m
u
i
d
e
M
e
g
r
a
L
ff
u
n
S
8/8
6
1/6
1
2
3/2
3
e
vita
u
c
a
v
E
4/4
6/6
8/8
a
h
ßr
a
m
ita
r
P
2/2
2/2
2/2
a
h
ä
o
D
e
m
i
T
a
y
s
a
N
u
y
á
V
.
m
.p/.
m
.a
0
0:6
-
0
0:3
atti
P
th
gin
di
m
r
o/d
n
a
n
o
o
N
a
h
p
a
K
m
.p/.
m
.a
0
0:9
-
0
0:6
massaged. Turning to the side, persons spit out any
oil that may have reached the mouth and throat. This
procedure is taken two to three times. Should fainting
occur, cold water is sprinkled over the body (but not
the head). After a purgative nasya, a medicated oil
nasya is administered (according to one’s doßha).
Persons lie on their backs for about two minutes,
inhale smoke from various herbs, then gargle with
tepid water several times to cleanse the throat from
the nasya.
In the above chart, Sußhrut suggests the number
of drops applied in each nostril, for small, moderate,
and high nasya doses.
Results of effective nasya include feeling light-
ness in the head, clear passages, easing of the origi-
nal symptoms, clear mind and senses. If nasya has
been done in excess, dry foods are eaten to restore
balance. If nasya has been insufficient, ghee is taken.
For more serious health concerns, the process is
followed for 7 days. After a few days rest, the pro-
cess can again be repeated for 14 days. After a few
days rest, nasya is again give for 21 days.
Suggested times for therapeutic administration
are shown below.
s
ei
d
e
m
e
R
s
r
e
d
r
o
si
D
,ra
g
u
s
w
ar
y
e
n
o
h
,.g.e(
ste
e
w
S
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
,)
slio
d
eta
cid
e
m
atti
P
d
n
a
u
y
á
V
,g
nig
nir
ra
e
,htu
o
m
y
r
d
,s
u
n
a
,sre
dlu
o
h
s
,k
c
e
n
,n
er
dlih
c
,s
ela
m
ef
,th
girf
,g
nidla
b
,ria
h
y
ar
g
er
uta
m
er
p
,s
e
ss
e
c
x
e
ain
arci
m
e
h
,hte
et
,s
e
niar
gi
m
,s
e
y
e
,e
s
o
n
,d
a
e
h
,s
n
o
sre
p
k
a
e
w
s
b
re
h
tn
e
g
n
u
P
,e
h
c
a
d
a
e
h
,dlo
c
,aix
er
o
n
a
,e
cio
v
f
o
ss
ol
,s
e
s
a
e
sid
re
dlu
o
h
s
e
v
o
b
a
sre
d
r
o
sid
nik
s
,y
s
p
elip
e
,a
m
e
d
e
,sitinih
r
cin
o
r
h
c
a
díp
a
v
A
)e
ciuj
b
re
h
tn
e
g
n
u
p
h
s
erf(
latn
e
m
,re
v
ef
tn
etti
m
er
,p
e
els
ss
e
c
x
e
,re
v
ef
cih
ß
o
dirt/cix
ot
,ta
o
r
ht
s
etis
ara
p
,sre
d
r
o
sid
a
n
a
m
a
d
a
r
P
,tla
s
k
c
o
r
,.g.e(
á
h
c
a
v
k
c
alb
,
,re
g
nig
,re
p
p
e
p
)ss
e
n
s
u
oic
s
n
o
c
n
u
,.g.e(
sre
d
r
o
sid
s
u
oire
s
,ra
g
u
s
e
n
a
C
íla
p
pip
re
g
nig
,tla
s
k
c
alb
,
k
c
a
b
d
n
a
sre
dlu
o
h
s
,
w
aj
,ta
o
r
ht
re
w
ol
,k
c
e
n
,d
a
e
h
,e
s
o
n
,ra
e
,e
y
e
s
e
s
a
e
sid
á
h
c
a
V
tla
s
k
c
alb
,re
p
p
e
p
k
c
alb
,
s
u
n
atet
,sre
v
ef
)cih
ß
o
dirt(
ere
v
e
s
,y
s
p
elip
e
,ytin
a
s
ni
Results: Generally, all nasyas promote clarity, sharp senses, and improved sleep patterns.
The use of purgatives includes relief of eye strain and tension, clean mouth, and clear voice.

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 201
Specific Therapies
The £há´gadhara Saåhitá outlines therapies for
specific health concerns and their doses. Virechana,
or evacuative nasya, is divided into two kinds, avapída
(fresh pungent herb extract juice) and pradhamana
(blowing pungent herbal powders in the nose).
Ingredients: Various cleansing herbs are used as
snuffs, decoctions, oils, ghee, and smoking to heal
the nasal passageways and head. Herbs used are
calamus, cloves, gotu kola, bayberry, sage, and basil.
Nasya works directly on the práòa and brain, and it
is good for all doßhas, though smoking may aggravate
Váyu or Pitta. It is useful in helping the sinuses by
using expectorant herbs, including vásák, ginger, and
black pepper.
Sinuses and brain: Gotu kola or calamus oil, or
ghee are used.
Nasal passages: Cloves, calamus, and bayberry
are smoked.
Doßhas:
Váyu persons take nutritional nasyas. Pitta/
Váyu persons use herbal sedatives.
        Nasal massage is also suggested to release
emotions that can be stored in the nose.
Kapha doßhas use calamus or gotu kola to
relieve headaches, heavy or lethargic heads, colds,
running noses, sticky eyes, hoarseness, sinusitis,
tumors, epilepsy, chronic rhinitis, attachment, greed,
and lust.
Nutritional Nasya: For Váyu doßha. Ghee, oils,
or salt are used for migraines, dry voice or nose,
nervousness, anxiety, fear, dizziness, emptiness,
negativity, stiff neck, dry sinuses, or loss of sense of
smell.
Sedative Nasya: For Pitta doßha. Use aloe vera
juice, warm milk, a¤hwagandhá, or gotu kola juice/
oil; for hair loss, conjunctivitis, or ringing in the ear.
Oil Nasya: For all doßhas. Decoctions and oils
together are used.
Complications: Symptoms of inadequate nasya
include deranged senses and dryness. As an antidote
to this, nasya is repeated using the proper amounts.
Excess, deficient, cold, hot, or sudden nasya may
cause thirst, belching, and aggravation of the
condition.
Nasal Massage: Pinky fingers are dipped into the
oil needed and gently inserted into the nostrils (one
at a time) as deep as comfortably possible. The
passage becomes lubricated through a gentle massage.
e
s
U
f
o
e
m
i
T
stife
n
e
B
g
nin
r
o
m
e
ht
ni
g
nik
a
w
n
o
p
u
d
ni
m
lu
fre
e
h
c
,e
s
o
n
e
ht
ni
s
u
c
u
m
y
x
a
w
s
e
v
o
m
er
hte
et
g
nih
s
u
r
b
retfa
hte
et
m
rif
,ets
at
,a
m
o
ra
te
e
w
s
e
m
o
h
g
niv
a
el
er
o
fe
b
n
oitullo
p
,ts
u
d
,e
k
o
m
s
m
o
rf
s
d
ra
u
g
efa
s
le
v
art
,n
oitio
c
,e
sicre
x
e
retfa
e
u
gitaf
s
e
v
o
m
er
e
nir
u/lo
ots
retfa
n
oisiv
y
v
a
e
h/llu
d
s
e
v
o
m
er
e
vla
s
e
y
e
,g
nilg
ra
g
retfa
s
e
y
e
e
ht
s
etar
o
giv
ni
h
c
a
m
ots
ytp
m
e
n
a
n
o
sle
n
n
a
h
c
re
n
ni
s
n
eth
gil/s
n
a
elc
sis
e
m
e
retfa
etite
p
p
a
s
etalu
m
its
,stc
u
d
ni
s
u
c
u
m
s
n
a
elc
Results of Pratimarßha Nasya

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
202
This relaxes the deeper tissues and can be done every
day or whenever under stress. First the massage is
done clockwise, then counter-clockwise.
Blood-letting
(Rakta Mok¤ha)
(Therapeutic toxic blood-letting) involves
releasing toxic blood from various body sites,
although mainly from the back. At first, blood should
be dark or purplish. When it turns bright red, therapy
is complete. Two to 8 ounces is the general amount
of blood released. Sometimes various sensitive sites
require only a prick to relieve problems. For example,
at the eyebrow a prick relieves headaches, and eye
inflammation. This process is no longer used in India
as often as it once was. In some countries a
professional license is required in order to practice
this therapy. Blood-letting is useful when wishing for
immediate results with Pitta disorders such as skin,
liver, spleen, and conditions like gout, headaches, and
hypertension. Late summer through early fall is the
best time for this procedure.
Precautions: Rakta mokçha is not used on babies, the
elderly, during pregnancy or menstruation, or with
anemia, edema, leukemia, bleeding, or cirrhosis.
Smoke Inhalation Therapy
Dhúma
Daily use of smoke inhalation is used for cough,
asthma, chronic rhinitis, voice disorders, bad smell
in the nose or mouth, pallor, hair disorders, mucus,
itching, and pain. It is also used for loss of hearing,
taste, or sight; stupor, hiccup, heavy head, head or
neck pain, hemicrania, earache, eye pain, throat or
jaw spasm, weak teeth or toothache, ear, eye, or nose
discharges, worms, sneezing, fatigue, dull intellect,
Váyu or Kapha diseases, and excess sleep.
Váyu doßhas use lubricating smoke (snigdha),
Váyu/Kapha doßhas use medium or madhya smoke,
and Kapha constitutions use tikßhna or strong smoke
therapies. Like other therapeutics discussed, the cat-
egories of smoke fall into the categories of mild, pal-
liative, purificatory, or purgative.
Others suggest two medicated smokes, and one
oil smoke daily. The result is the cleansing of the heart,
throat, senses, lightness of the head, and pacifying of
the doßhas. For calming the mind, sandalwood,
jaóámáò¤hí, etc. are useful.
Mild (lubricating) herbs are inhaled after
sneezing, yawning, defecation, urination, copulation,
surgery, laughing, and brushing teeth. It is done once
a day. Ingredients include guggul, musta, sesame, and
ghee.
Medium (palliative) herbs are inhaled at the end
of the night, after meals, and after nasya therapy.
Inhalation is done only once a day. Herbs include
licorice and (naturally) perfumed scents.
Strong (purgatives) are used upon waking from
sleep, after nasya, washing eyes, bathing, and
vomiting. Smoke is inhaled four times daily. Herbs
used include triphalá, vachá (calamus), and
frankincense.
h
t
g
n
e
rt
S
s
b
r
e
H
dli
M
)eta
cir
b
ul(
a
w
lib
,ats
u
m
,lu
g
g
u
g
,
,
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
,la
h
p
a
n
a
d
a
m
d
n
a
,lio
e
m
a
s
e
s
,n
o
rffa
s
e
e
h
g
m
uid
e
M
)e
vitailla
p
(
ala
ptu
,e
cir
o
cil
,
ath
ß
u
k
,
s
cita
m
o
ra
g
n
o
rt
S
)e
vita
g
r
u
p
(
,e
s
n
e
c
nik
n
arf
,á
h
c
a
v
ála
h
pirt
,lú
m
h
¤
a
d

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 203
6 Forms of Dhúma
Time: The procedure is to take 3 puffs 3 times. Some
authorities suggest smoking 8 times during the day
for Váyu and Kapha excesses, after bathing, meals,
vomiting, sneezing, brushing teeth, after snuff, eye-
salve application, and sleep.
Others suggest two medicated smokes and one oil
smoke daily. The result is the cleansing of the heart,
throat, senses, lightness of the head, and pacifying of
the doßhas.
Precautions: Smoke inhalation is not recommended
for people who have bleeding disorders, have
completed purgation therapy (virechana), or enema
(basti); or who suffer from enlarged abdomen,
diabetes, blindness, Váyu moving upward (e.g.,
belching), flatulence, or have just eaten fish, wine,
yogurt, milk, honey, ghee, or oils, or have ingested
poison, or have head injuries, anemia, and insomnia.
Smoking at improper times results in bleeding
disorders, blindness, deafness, thirst, fainting,
delusions, and intoxication (they are countered by
cold). Exhalation through the nose causes loss of
vision; exhale only through the mouth.
Herbal smoke inhalation is not given until 18 years
of age (some say after age 12). [Mouth gargle begins
at age five].
Excess/Untimely Smoking: Symptoms include deaf-
ness, blindness, dumbness, vertigo, internal hemor-
rhaging. Antidotes include using ghee snuff, and eye
salve. Cooling herbs are used for blood disorders.
Rough herbs are used for Kapha and Pitta disorders
(e.g., cardamom, kút, black pepper).
Preparation of Smoke Wick: A reed, 12 finger-widths
in length, is soaked in water for 24 hours, then
wrapped in 5 layers of cloth and smeared with a thin
paste of the appropriate herbs. The herbs are left to
dry; then the reed and cloth are removed. Ghee or
sesame oil is added to the herbs. Then, herbs are in-
serted into a pipe, and lit. Others suggest that the tube
be in 3 pieces, one fitting snugly into the other, and
that the inner tube be the thickness of the pinky fin-
ger. For coughs, powdered herbs are placed on hot
coals, and a tube is used to inhale the smoke.
Pipe lengths vary. For evacuative purposes it is 24
finger-width long (a´guli). For oil, it is 32 a´guli.
Regular therapies require 36 a´guli. The pipe is
straight, having three filters near the mouth, ending
with a nozzle. Tube thickness is as wide as the little
finger. Excess smoking may cause dryness and heat
in the head and throat, fainting, thirst, bleeding,
giddiness, and poor sense functioning.
Specific lengths of smoking tubes are assigned
for the three types of herbs, and methods of soaking
reeds (wicks).
Method: The person sits erect.
Slight congestion (movement): With the mouth
open, as smoke is inhaled through the nose, alternating
nostrils (one nostril open, the other closed). Inhalation
is through the nose, exhalation is through the mouth.
This is repeated three times.
Clogged (non-moving): Inhaled through the
mouth (to decongest or create movement). Exhale
through the mouth.
Throat congestion: First inhale through the nose,
then later through the mouth. Exhale through the
mouth.
The therapy used determines the reed length
(see table below).
a
ò
a
h
å
i^
B
)
g
nin
ot(
a
n
a
h
c
e
R
)e
vita
g
r
u
p
(
a
n
h
g
a
s
á
K
)
g
nic
u
d
er-
h
g
u
o
c(
a
n
a
m
a
V
)cite
m
e(
n
a
p
ú
h
d
a
ò
a
r
V
)
n
oita
gi
m
u
f
re
clu
(
a
n
a
m
a
h
£
)e
vitailla
p
(

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
204
* the tube needs to reach the ulcer
A length of two a´guli (finger widths) must be
left free. Paste is applied to the end of the nozzle and
smoked.
WICK
Signs of effective dhúma include clarity of the
senses, speech and mind; strong teeth, and a pleasant
odor in the mouth.
Follow-up Practices to Pañcha Karma
(Uttara Karma)
1. Pañcha karma is sometimes repeated, for it may
take several times to cleanse deeply seated toxins.
This is especially true when following short term
methods. Also, it may be repeated after 1 to 3 months.
Pañcha karma is recommended at least once a year.
2. It is important to resume or establish a diet and
lifestyle that is harmonious with one’s constitution.
If a person returns to old, bad habits, they may worsen
their condition by suppressing the renewed healing
energies. The toxins may then directly enter cleansed
tissues and go deeper than before, causing severe
diseases. During convalescence, persons avoid loud
talking, bumpy rides, long walks, excessive sitting,
and eating, if experiencing indigestion.
To avoid aggravating the humors, persons also avoid
eating unwholesome food, day naps, and sexual
relations. If any of these harmful experiences are
followed, follow-up toning and rejuvenation
processes are used to counteract the ill effects.
3. Once therapy is successful or complete, the next
step is rebuilding the tissues damaged by the disease,
giving them a new level of strength and purity. Oil or
ghee is first taken with gradual reintroduction of the
six tastes. First, sour, sweet, and delicious tastes are
taken. Then one takes sour and salty tastes. Next bitter
and sweet tastes are introduced. These dual tastes are
used in these combinations to make food delicious.
Lastly, astringent and pungent ones are taken in small
quantities as a hygienic measure to clean the mouth
and sliminess. Rebuilding the healthy cells and tissues
is known as rejuvenation, and is the basis of the
Áyurvedic approach to longevity. Deeper tissue
rejuvenation is most important because this is the
source of the body’s energy or life-sap (ojas). Herbs
that increase ojas for each dhátu (tissue) layer are
included in the chart at the top of the next page.
Bráhmí rasáyana, a mixture of gotu kola, ghee, and
other herbs is an important rejuvenative.
Organs and Herbs
Herbs and foods can be used specifically to rebuild
tissue layers, and herbs can also have a direct
rejuvenative effect on the various body organs and
tissue layers. (See lower chart on next page).
Life-Sap (Ojas) Increasing Herbs
To prevent future illness and develop a general
sense of well-being or balance, rejuvenation may
il
u
g
´
A
y
p
a
r
e
h
T
s
b
r
e
H
0
4
e
vitailla
p
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
2
3
g
nih
sir
u
o
n
e
e
h
g
lio
,
4
2
,g
nip
arc
s
g
nis
n
a
elc
s
eta
u
c
a
v
e
6
1
h
g
u
o
c
g
niss
er
p
p
u
s
re
p
p
e
p
k
c
alb
2
1
s
cite
m
e
m
e
e
n
,á
h
c
a
v
*
sre
clu
etair
p
o
r
p
p
a
s
b
re
h

Section 3: Therapeutics
                                 Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 205
s
b
r
e
H
g
n
i
d
li
u
B
-
n
a
g
r
O
s
n
a
g
r
O
s
b
r
e
H
s
g
n
u
L
ík
atíh
bib
tra
e
H
,n
o
m
a
n
nic
á
h
ß
k
á
r
d
,e
s
o
r
,s
d
e
e
s
s
utol
,s
eirre
b
n
r
o
ht
w
a
h
,g
n
e
s
nig
,
n
o
rffa
s
,d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
h
c
a
m
ot
S
,
w
olla
m
h
sra
m
,e
cir
o
cil
a
n
a
h
c
ol
a
h
¤
å
a
v
,ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
e
nits
etn
I
lla
m
S
,n
o
m
a
n
nic
,
m
o
m
a
d
ra
c
á
h
ß
k
á
r
d
,le
n
n
ef
,
la
g
n
ala
g
re
g
nig
,
re
vi
L
,to
o
r
n
oile
d
n
a
d
,)cire
m
r
ut
hti
w
(
le
g
e
ola
á
hþh
ßijñ
a
m
n
e
elp
S
s
ula
g
a
rts
a
,
ála
b
e
cir
o
cil
,g
n
e
s
nig
,
n
olo
C
ála
h
pirt
y
e
n
di
K
a
r
u
h
ß
k
o
g
,it-
of
,
í
m
h
á
r
b
,
tijálih
¤
niar
B
,s
u
m
ala
c
íp
h
ß
u
p
h
k
´
a
h
¤
,íh
¤
ò
á
m
áóaj
,ík
atír
a
h
,í
m
h
á
r
b
s
u
ret
U
,le
g
are
v
e
ola
ú
h
h
c
a
kip
a
k
,n
o
rffa
s
,
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
s
ets
e
T
,ála
b
,ú
h
h
c
a
kip
a
k
ila
s
u
m
k
c
alb
a
m
s
al
P
d
o
ol
B
elc
s
u
M
t
a
F
e
n
o
B
w
o
r
r
a
M
n
e
m
e
S
y
erf
m
o
c
to
o
r
ík
ala
m
á
ík
ala
m
á
e
e
h
g
y
erf
m
o
c
to
o
r
e
e
h
g
it-
of
-
h
sra
m
w
olla
m
n
a
v
a
y
h
c
h
¤
á
r
p
-
a
w
h
¤
a
á
h
d
n
a
g
-
a
w
h
¤
a
á
h
d
n
a
g
-
a
w
h
¤
a
á
h
d
n
a
g
-
a
w
h
¤
a
á
h
d
n
a
g
-
a
w
h
¤
a
á
h
d
n
a
g
h
siri
ss
o
m
e
e
h
g
ála
b
ála
b
lu
g
g
u
g
í
m
h
á
r
b
w
a
s
otte
m
la
p
y
re
p
pils
m
le
n
o
rffa
s
kli
m
g
n
e
s
nig
e
m
a
s
e
s
lio
s’
n
o
m
olo
s
la
e
s
ík
atír
a
h
s
utol
s
d
e
e
s
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
ír
a
v
áta
h
¤
cire
m
r
ut
h
rr
y
m
e
cir
o
cil
ála
b
Dhátu - Building Herbs

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
206
become a part of a person’s lifestyle. One should
sense of taste. The next few chapters describe also
follow an appropriate nutritional food plan
therapies of touch (abhyañga), the senses of (see
Appendix 3). Áyurveda offers rejuvenative
therapies that achieve balance through each of the
five senses. Herbs and foods harmonize the sense
of taste. The next few chapters describe therapies
of touch (abhyañga), the senses of smell (aromas),
sight, (colors), and sound (mantras and music).

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 207
Oil Application (Abhyañga)
Other aspects of pañcha karma include ¤hiro
dhárá (hot oil poured on the head), meridian
cleansing, abhyañga (pouring oil on the body), and
marma balancing (applying oil on sensitive points).
Because every practitioner has their own style of this
traditional therapy, both traditional and modern
approaches will be discussed.
History
More than 2,000 years ago in India, oils were found
that not only healed illness, but also prevented future
imbalances. These therapies were traditionally given
(to oneself or to others) on a daily basis. Oil was
poured onto the entire body (also called abhyañga),
head (¤hiro bhyañga and ¤hiro dhárá), ears (karna
púrana), feet (páda bhyañga), or specific sites that
required attention (marma bhyañga).
Lymphatic System: One important benefit from
abhyañga is the stimulation of the lymphatic system.
The lymph system is pervasive throughout the body,
except in the brain, bone marrow, and deep skeletal
muscle (though some scientists believe they may
extend there as well). The role of this system is to
carry nutrients to and remove toxins from the cells.
Some cells in the nodes destroy bacteria, viruses, and
other potential harmful particles. Other vessels send
fresh fluids from the other side of the node to the
heart.
Lymph contains about half the concentration of
proteins in the plasma, and returns the serum proteins
to the blood. Thus, this is a sort of self-feeding, 
system that means the body prepares its own food
and feeds itself. Additionally, it contains many white
blood cells that help maintain the body’s resistance
to immune disorders, forming these infection-fighting
cells in the nodes.
This system contains various amino acids. One
amino acid called tryptophan is needed for producing
energy and balancing the hormonal and nervous
systems. Melatonin a brain hormone synthesized from
tryptophan within the pineal gland, is believed to be
related to the thyroid, adrenals, and gonads. It has
been found to help calm excess mental activity.
Dopamine beta hydroxylase, is an enzyme believed
to be related to schizophrenia and other mental
disorders. Histaminase, another enzyme, breaks down
histamine. If histamine is in excess, it may cause
gastric acidity, lethargy, itching, headaches, pain in
muscles and nodes; and allergies. Thus, abhyañga
may help the body produce its own natural
antihistamines. Lymphs also play a role in the various
forms of edema.
The lymph system is Kapha in nature.
£hleßhaka Kapha is a mixture of lymph and synovial
fluid found in the joints and also runs through the
nervous system. Lymph provides the nerves with
receiving and transmitting signals. It also helps
develop antibodies that are important for the immune
system.
By rubbing the joints in a circular motion,
circulation is enhanced and rubbing the joints in a
circular motion secretes fluid secreted from the lymph
nodes. This causes more protein, glucose, minerals
oxygen, and antibodies, involved with the lymphatic
system, to circulate in the blood.
Benefits of Abhyañga:
The Aßhþáñga H^idayam, one of the triad of the
classical Áyurvedic texts, suggests abhyañga be given
on a daily basis to prevent and heal illness. Many
benefits arise from daily abhyañga. Let us look at
each benefit individually.
1. Reverses/prevents aging and increases
longevity
2. Removes fatigue and stress from work and
life overall
3. Heals and prevents nervous system disorders
4. Promotes good vision
5. Nourishes the body and promotes sturdiness
6. Remedies insomnia
7. Creates an electrochemical balance in the
  body.
8. Oil rubbed into the skin prevents dehydration

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
208
     and strengthens the nerves.
9. Oil helps the electromagnetic field of the body.
10. Stimulates antibody production, thus
strengthening the immune system.
Aging (Jará) is a natural process of the body, and
surely death is one of life’s certainties. Nevertheless,
the diseases caused in the aging process are removed
through abhyañga. Symptoms of aging include gray
hair and wrinkles; loss of sleep, teeth, impairment of
sight and hearing; weakened digestion and
elimination; and brittle bones (osteoporosis, arthritis,
weakened spine, calcification, stiffness, etc.). Other
signs of aging include pains, giddiness, Parkinson’s
disease, heart, artery, and blood pressure problems;
decreased mental function (memory, concentration,
etc.), and diseases of the various organs. Through
daily abhyañga life is maintained and people can live
a normal life span (longevity or Áyußh).
Method: Sesame, mustard, or almond oil, applied
to the spine, head, and feet, remove effects of old age
and increase longevity.
Fatigue (£hrama) results from hard work, stress,
poor diet, lack of exercise, not protecting oneself from
the environment, etc. These habits weaken the
muscles, nerves, and joints. Abhyañga provides a
passive exercise, cleanses stress from the muscles,
removes toxins from the organs, cells, tissues, and
blood; and tones the muscles and nerves.
Method: Rubbing, patting, squeezing of muscles.
Add sandalwood oil to the oil mixture.
For fatigue caused by straining muscles add a
pinch of salt to warm water and soak the limb.
Adding a heating oil such as mint, eucalyptus, or
mustard helps fatigue due to toxin accumulation.
Nervous disorders (Váyu Roga) occur due to
excess air (Váyu), which is the element that regulates
sensory-motor skills. It is also the most important
element because it regulates the other two doßhas
(Pitta regulates the metabolism and enzyme and
digestive functioning. Kapha regulates the body
organs). So, balancing Váyu is necessary; daily
abhyañga achieves this balance.
Method: Mahánáráyan oil removes air imbalances
that aggravate the nervous system.
Eye (Drißhti) sight is weakened by poor lighting,
poor posture, reading print that is too small,
excessive television, gazing at overly bright or
flashing lights, (e.g., the sun, neon, and flashing
signs), receiving excess sun, heat, or cold to the
head; excess eating and drinking of pungent and
oily foods. Additionally, old age causes
impairments such as cataracts, near- and
farsightedness, night blindness, optic nerve
problems, etc. Poor or improper diet creates an
inflamed or detached retina, atrophy of the optic
nerve, etc. Áyurveda also believes that constipation
causes various eye problems. Again, abhyañga
heals these impairments and corrects the visual
problems associated with the aging process.
     Method: Attending the spine, neck, head, and
feet. Before bed
a) massage the navel clockwise using sesame
or coconut oil.
b) foot massage, including pressing between
the big and index toes.
Other helpful measures for the eyes include
staring at a candle flame (at eye level),
massaging the temples, using a neti pot,
massaging the nostrils with ghee, ingesting
triphalá each morning, washing the eyes with
ghee.
Nourishing (Pußhti) the tissues (dhátus, i.e.,
plasma, blood, muscle, fat, bones, nerves/marrow,
reproductive fluid), are affected by poor eating habits,
digestion, and metabolic functioning. The result is
that foods are not digested and properly eliminated.
Undigested foods become toxic waste in the body
(áma) and hamper the natural absorption of nutrients.
Through abhyañga wastes are loosened, flow to their
sites of elimination, and are expelled as urine, feces,
and sweat.
Method: Rubbing, pressing, kneading.

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 209
     Sturdiness (Dárdhya) Stress, trauma, shocks, and
accidents diminish the body’s sturdiness. The inabil-
ity to overcome these blows to the system results in
many diseases and impairments. abhyañga relieves
these problems, allowing persons to recover and heal,
and prevents further weakening of their system. For
those who are physically incapacitated abhyañga
provides a passive form of exercise.
     Method: Rubbing, pressing, kneading.
     Sleep (Swapna) or rest is needed to recover from
the mental, physical, and emotional activities of the
day. Persons deprived of sleeping and dreaming de-
velop physical and mental diseases. Some people
sleep too much, some sleep too little. Sleeping pills,
caffeine, etc. are artificial attempts to balance one’s
unhealthy sleeping habits. Bad foods, overeating,
drugs, overwork, worry, anger, lethargy, fear, etc. cre-
ate these situations of insomnia and oversleeping.
Abhyañga removes toxins, calms the nerves, brings
the body and mind back into balance with nature,
and helps the person naturally adjust to daily rhythms.
     Method: Rubbing of oils to the feet and tense ar-
eas before bed.
Abhyañga and the Doßhas:
Besides removing general aging problems,
abhyañga provides specific benefits for people of
different constitutions.
Váyu doßhas tend towards excess dryness, both
on the skin (including wrinkles) and internally. They
may develop nerve and bone disorders, constipation,
anxiety, and weak immune disorders. Oil application
restores moisture to the skin, soothes the nerves,
strengthens the bones, and nourishes the tissues. Some
authorities suggest abhyañga against the direction of
the hair to open the pores, then reversing the direction.
Others suggest abhyañga only in the direction the
hair grows. Sesame oil is blended with general Váyu-
reducing herbs and essential oils or herbs and oils for
a specific health condition.
Pitta constitutions generally have heat excesses
such as skin rashes, ulcers, infections, eye, heart, and
blood disorders; impatience, and hot temper. Applying
oils that are sweet and cooling brings balance, and
also heals and prevents further occurrence of these
situations. Sesame oil is blended with general Pitta-
reducing herbs and essential oils or herbs and oils for
healing a specific condition.
Kapha people retain an excess of water, and tend
to suffer from symptoms such as weight retention,
edema, mucus, lung and sinus congestion; and
sluggish minds. Warm oils help remove the excessive
amounts of water and restore balance. Aßhþáñga
H^idayam also mentions the applying of fragrant
powders to reduce Kapha, liquefy fat, promote
compactness strength of the body parts; and create
good skin tone. Sesame, mustard, or canola oil is
blended with general Kapha-reducing herbs and
essential oils, or herbs and oils for specific health
conditions.
Pressure during abhyañga varies according to one’s
doßha. Váyu people need a light, gentle touch. Pitta
doßhas prefer a moderate touch. Kapha constitutions
enjoy deep muscle abhyañga. Further, a slow, pres-
sure is applied around the waist with slightly more
pressure exerted around the face and neck. The head
and feet receive even more pressure, and more time
is spent on these two areas. Soft, less fleshy, and less
muscular areas are also gently pressed (e.g., navel
region, temples, heart, and ribs).
Abhyañga Time:
Daily abhyañga is done 1 to 2 hours after eating,
preferably yoga or exercise (until persons break a
sweat) is practiced after abhyañga. It is best to wait
at least 1 hour after abhyañga before taking a bath to
let the oil nourish and detoxify all the tissue layers.
The oil also keeps the body and skin flexible. Oil is
applied at room temperature in the summer and
warmed in the winter. Herbal decoctions and essential
oils, according to one’s doßha, may be added to the
oils.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
210
Sesame oil (i.e., unscented), when used by itself,
is best applied on Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Saturdays, for auspiciousness, wealth, and longevity.
Abhyañga with unscented oil or without herbal oil is
not recommended on the lunar days, 3, 6, 8, 10, 11,
13, 14 (i.e., counting from the first day of the new
moon to the full moon. It is also not recommended
on the same days from the full moon to the new
moon). Infants and elderly may receive care on all
days.
All days are favorable for abhyañga when
the base oil is mixed with essential
flower oils, herbal plants, or using
mustard oil (for Kapha doßha).
Abhyañga is not given immediately after enemas,
emesis, or purgation therapy; during the first stages
of a fever, or with indigestion. It should also not be
given to persons with excess Kapha (áma or toxic)
disorders, such as obesity, unless the oils or powders
are specific to reduce áma and Kapha.
One unique advantage of medicated oil abhyañga
is that their healing properties are absorbed into the
system within two minutes. It nurtures all seven tissue
elements in less than 14 minutes. Ingesting herbs takes
a longer time because they pass through the digestive
system.
Specific Abhyañga Therapies:
Besides the general benefits of healing difficult
diseases and promoting longevity, each special
abhyañga method offers unique therapeutic proper-
ties. Some of the approaches offer both traditional
and modern uses. Traditional methods are used
along with pañcha karma practices. Modern
approaches are generally from India’s Kerala state.
These modalities can be used for healing by
themselves; there is no need for emesis, purgation,
and enemas.
Pressure: Two views on abhyañga pressure
exist: According to doßha and according to guòa
(quality). As mentioned above, a person can receive
abhyañga with light, moderate, or deep touch,
depending on whether they are Váyu, Pitta, or
Kapha doßhas, respectively. A second option is to
apply pressure according to how much purity
(sattwa), heat/energy (rajas), and grounding
(tamas) one needs. For example, if a person is
experiencing mild imbalances (e.g., the start of a
cold), then a gentle, sattwic touch is used. If a
moderate imbalance exists (e.g., a full-blown cold)
then more heat and energy (rajas) is used. Lastly, if
the imbalance is great (e.g., chronic bronchitis),
then an even deeper pressure (tamasic) must be
exerted.
Another dimension is also considered. If a person
is experiencing a Váyu (air) excess (e.g., constipation),
then moderate, warming (rajas); and deep, grounding
(tamas) pressures may be used. Likewise, if one’s
imbalance is too grounded (i.e., excess Kapha/
overweight) then moderate and light touches energize
and enlighten the overly grounded imbalance. Lastly,
if there is too much of the rajasic (heat) imbalance
(e.g., skin rash), then cool (mild/ sattwic) and moist
(deep/tamasic) pressure is exerted. The practitioner
chooses the most comfortable and balancing methods
for each client.
Yet another view suggests that for serious
disorders like high blood pressure, light abhyañga
(done only with the fingers from the middle of the
chest out to the sides), or no abhyañga at all is to be
done over the chest. Persons with low blood pressure
receive only foot abhyañga. Abhyañga is not advised
for fevers or skin diseases. Abhyañga is avoided over
troubled areas such as stomach diseases or bone
injuries.
Áyurveda suggests that abhyañga be given and
received by members of the same gender. This allows
for a better exchange of energy. Of course, family
members will enjoy giving and receiving abhyañga
to each other. This develops a greater bonding
experience.

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 211
One or Two-Person Abhyañga
One very popular Áyurvedic abhyañga is done
with two practitioners. As one person works one arm
(leg, head, or torso side), the second person works
with the corresponding body part, with identical
movements and pressure. Apart from receiving a har-
monious or balancing session, the feeling is most plea-
surable and pampering. Traditional abhyañga in-
volves six people, four to give the abhyañga, one to
keep the oil warm (and supply the practitioner with
fresh warm oil) and one to supervise. The person re-
ceives abhyañga in seven positions for approximately
15 minutes per position.
As with all Áyurvedic abhyañga, the main em-
phasis is on feeding the skin rather than on massage
techniques. Oil penetrates the skin, all the tissues are
fed, and the toxins contained within the tissues are
released. Oil takes five minutes to permeate the skin
completely. Then it spreads through the seven dhátus
(tissues). Oil moves through each dhátu in less than
two minutes (100 seconds).
The method suggested below describes a gen-
eral overview. For every practitioner differences in
style will exist. As abhyañga is practiced on family
members and clients, persons will slowly develop
their own style.
Two-person abhyañga uses approximately 1 1/4
cups of oil (appropriate to one’s constitution). One
method of abhyañga suggests a time schedule last-
ing approximately five minutes per set of body parts
(i.e., both arms, shoulders, neck, torso, back, legs,
and feet). This lasts about a 45 minutes.
Various techniques, such as rubbing, sliding,
kneading, etc., may be employed. Joints are massaged
in a circular motion. Generally, the hands follow the
contour of the body. One view suggests massaging
only in the direction of the hair. Another belief
considers massaging in the direction that the blood
flows. The key factor is that one practitioner
determines the style, speed, and pressure, while the
second practitioner mirrors these movements and
amount of pressure.
When oil is applied and rubbed in, toxins are
dislodged from the tissues and returned to the blood
system. Certain abhyañga strokes match the
movement of the five Váyus.
1. Strokes that begin at the head and move to the
navel remove excess Práòa Váyu and improve the
senses.
2. Strokes that start at the navel and end at the head
remove excess Udána Váyu, carbon dioxide, mucus,
and saliva.
3. Clockwise strokes around the navel balance
Samána Váyu, improving digestion, metabolism, the
small intestine, and liver.
4. Strokes that move from the heart to the
periphery and back balance Vyána Váyu, improving
blood circulation and the lymphatic system.
5. Moving the hands from the navel to the anus
and urethra balances Apána Váyu, improving
discharge of urine, feces, and menstrual fluid; and
improving parturition in women.
Steam therapy is employed immediately after
abhyañga to sweat the toxins out through the skin.
e
c
n
e
u
q
e
S
a
g
ñ
a
y
h
b
A
g
nitti
S
.1
k
c
a
B
n
o
ei
L
.2
e
di
S
tfe
L
n
o
ei
L
.3
e
di
S
th
gi
R
n
o
ei
L
.4
th
gi
R
n
o
ei
L
.5
nia
g
A
g
nitti
S
.6
nia
g
A
k
c
a
B
n
o
ei
L
.7
e
vit
a
n
r
etl
A
a
g
ñ
a
y
h
b
A
e
c
n
e
u
q
e
S
d
a
e
h
ot
g
niv
o
m
,le
v
a
n
m
o
rf
nig
e
b
s
e
k
o
rt
S
.1
le
v
a
n
ot
d
a
e
h
m
o
rf
n
r
uter
s
e
k
o
rt
S
.2
te
ef
ot
le
v
a
n
m
o
rf
e
v
o
m
s
e
k
o
rt
S
.3
le
v
a
n
ot
te
ef
m
o
rf
n
r
uter
s
e
k
o
rt
S
.4
e
ht
n
o
:s
e
m
it
e
er
ht
d
eta
e
p
er
si
ss
e
c
o
r
p
e
ht(
)y
d
o
b
e
ht
fo
s
e
dis
d
n
a
,k
c
a
b
,tn
o
rf

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
212
The remaining toxins flow back to their sites of
origin in the GI tract (stomach, small intestine,
colon). From these sites the toxins are removed
from the body through the various pañcha karma
therapies discussed earlier in this chapter.
One needs to be very careful and gentle when
working the temples, heart, and spine. It is also
important not to get oil in the client’s eyes.
For healthy persons abhyañga begins at the feet
and ends at the head. Some suggest that, for high
blood pressure, abhyañga be done on the head for 20
minutes. Points 11 and 12 in the Head Abhyañga
diagram [part 2 on page 214] reduce high blood
pressure, along with gently rubbing up and down the
sides of the neck. It is useful to place a cool towel on
the head and heart during abhyañga. If any person’s
pulse is 100 beats or more per minute, no abhyañga
is given at all.
A third school of thought suggests moving from
the soles of the feet and working toward the heart to
move impure blood to the heart for better functioning.
Áyurvedic Abhyañga Techniques
Following one’s intuition during abhyañga is
important; notice whether the client is comfortable.
The person giving the abhyañga also needs to be
comfortable, neither bending too low nor raising their
arms too high. If abhyañga is done on the floor, then
one should feel comfortable squatting or sitting in
siddhásana/siddha yoni ásana position. After the
abhyañga, both people should feel recharged.
Oil should not be cold when applied to the
person’s skin, or it will shock them, preventing
relaxation. Also, the practitioner’s hands should not
be cold. Rubbing the hands together will bring warmth
and healing energy. Working the muscles relaxes and
tones them, while working the bones strengthens the
skeletal system.
Techniques: Tapping, kneading, rubbing, squeez-
ing.
Tapping is first introduced to inform the body it is
about to receive abhyañga. It increases circulation
and strengthens muscles. Tapping is done with open
palms and relaxed fingers.
Kneading is done as if kneading dough. It increases
the energy flow, relaxes, removes stress, and
rejuvenates the body.
Rubbing is best done with oils according to one’s
doßha (only Kaphas can have a dry abhyañga);
otherwise, dry rubbing creates friction and aggravates
Váyu. Gentle rubbing is more relaxing, whereas
vigorous rubbing creates passive exercise. Oil rubbed
under the joints works the lymph system. Circular
motion on specific points (marmas—discussed later)
releases growth hormones. Comfortable pressure is
always be applied during abhyañga. Creating a
rhythm is another important part of the rubbing
technique.
Squeezing is the fourth phase in this abhyañga
process. Both hands are used to squeeze all the areas
that were rubbed using comfortable pressure. Cross
movements are also employed. Hands slide in the
opposite directions). Pressing special points (marmas)
is also advised. Applying oil to the fingernails is the
final stage in this process. Fingers are squeezed one
at a time; this ensures that the oil seeps into the cracks
between the nail and the cuticle.
e
vit
a
n
r
etl
A
d
r
3
a
g
ñ
a
y
h
b
A
e
c
n
e
u
q
e
S
te
ef
e
n
o
r
p
s
g
el
e
n
o
r
p
s
m
ra
e
n
o
r
p
ts
e
h
c
e
n
o
r
p
n
e
m
o
d
b
a
e
n
o
r
p
k
c
a
b
e
n
o
r
p
s
pih
e
n
o
r
p
d
a
e
h
g
nittis
k
c
e
n
g
nittis
e
c
af
g
nittis

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 213
     Some authorities suggest that healthy persons can
receive the circular portion of the abhyañga both
clockwise and counterclockwise, while persons with
an illness can receive only clockwise abhyañga.
Post Abhyañga: When the session is complete it
is advised that both practitioner and client lie in the
corpse ásana pose (Chapter 9) and rest for some time.
Sádhaná (meditation) is recommended. Aum, the
Gáyatrí mantra, personal mantra, or prayer may be
used.
Abhyañga Length: Depends upon the health and
age of the person.
Lymph: Working the areas where lymph glands
exist will cleanse and stimulate this system. Circular
motion all around joints stimulates the lymph.
Pregnant Women: Abhyañga is applied very
carefully and gently. Traditionally, abhyañga was
received on a daily basis during pregnancy. It was
found that proper abhyañga would result in a painless
delivery.
Post Partum: Traditional Áyurvedic care suggested
that the woman who had just given birth would receive
abhyañga for the next 40 days, while she rested. This
abhyañga would help return the body to its normal
size. Although this is not usually possible in today’s
world, it is advised the new mother should receive
abhyañga as frequently as possible.
New Born: Six days after birth, the baby would
receive traditional Áyurvedic abhyañga when they
were bathed. A dough ball of whole wheat flour was
made (tennis ball size), mixed with sesame oil
(mustard in the winter), and gently rubbed across the
baby’s body. This cleansed and strengthened the child.
Described below is a head abhyañga discussed in
Ancient Indian Massage, by Harißh Johari.
e
g
A
a
g
ñ
a
y
h
b
A
e
m
i
T
s
htn
o
m
6
-
s
y
a
d
6
s
etu
ni
m
5
1
).sr
y
3
litn
u
(
stn
af
n
I
s
etu
ni
m
0
2
-
5
1
sra
e
y
8
1
-
3
s
etu
ni
m
5
4
-
0
3
sra
e
y
0
4
-
8
1
s
etu
ni
m
5
4
-
0
4
sra
e
y
+
0
4
htla
e
h
ot
g
nid
r
o
c
c
a
s
e
s
a
e
sid
hti
w
elp
o
e
P
s
etu
ni
m
0
2
-
5
1
The hand contains all healing qualities; gentle touch brings wholeness. - ¼ig Veda
8 finger widths 
above eyebrows
cowlick (gently turn hair
in both directions)
1
2
3
1. Pour oil; then massage to both sides of head.
2. Twist cowlick; pour oil and massage into both sides of head.
3. Bend head forward and pour oil at this point and massage
          into back of head.
4. Next, press from point three and move hands and fingers up 
         the head to the forehead and back again.
4
4
4
4
pour oil at point 1 (optionally point 2 also)
spread with fingers only (not palms)
where neck 
and skull meet
pour oil here
Head Abhyañga

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
214
Head Abhyañga - [part 2]
5. Gently pound the top-middle of head from back to front, 
and back again.  This stimulates the circulatory and 
  nervous system's capillaries. 
6. Twist and gently pull the hair in all three spots (see 
diagram 1) to increase the flow of the cerebral spinal fluid.
7. Press and rub forehead from the middle to the sides to 
improve alertness, memory and balance of the pituitary 
and pineal glands.
8. Rub Utkßhepa marma counterclockwise to balance 
the eyes, lungs, and heart.
9. Gently rub the temples (Sthapani marma) counterclock-
wise to improve the colon, intestines and balance Váyu.
10. Rub behind the ear (clockwise) to balance the intes-
tines, colon and brain.
11. Gently press at the junction of the neck and head to
balance the nervous system, promote stability and lower
high blood pressure.
5
5
8
10
11
9
7
12
12. Rub the Vidhura marma behind the earlobe (clockwise) to lower hight blood pressure.
13. Rub finger tips along the top middle of the head (back and forth, pressing the skull (#5 line).
14. Twist and pull the hair in the three places, starting at the base of the scull and ending 
with the point eight a´gula above the forehead (see diagram 1).
Fingers gently
massage up and down
to reduce high blood
pressure
1. Gently rub and press the palms from the middle of the forehead, moving 
over the eyebrows, eyelids, nose and chin.  Then move towards the jaws and 
up, in front of the ears.
2. Press along the sides of the head, behind the ears, to the lower back of the 
head.  Then twist and gently pull the hair (see arrow #2).
3. 4. Follow the arrows in the picture, twisting and pulling the hair where shown.
5. Gently clap over the top of the head.
5
Head Abhyañga - [part 3]
2
3
2
4
4
3
1
1
1
5
1
1
1

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 215
Marma Abhyañga
Another form of abhyañga is the use of the major
and minor marma points. Marma is discussed in one
of the four main Vedas, and also detailed in the
classical Áyurvedic text, Sußhrut Saμhitá. The
marma points are similar to Chinese acupuncture,
only no invasive use of needles is involved.
Marma points are positions on the body where
flesh, veins, arteries, tendons, bones, and joints meet.
They may be seen as the junctions where Váyu, Pitta,
and Kapha meet; where sattwa, rajas, and tamas
meet; or where eternity and relativity meet. Some
say they are also the points where the three aspects
of Self-realization meet, i.e., inner Self, outer world,
and between the two (knower, known, and process
of knowing). They may also be the junctions between
the physical, astral, and causal bodies. In short, they
are points that have great importance to a person’s
body, mind, and spirit.
Movements are down,
(i.e., in the direction the
hair grows), and following
the contours of the body.
     Circles are made
around joints.
Circle around shoulder,
elbow, wrist, knee, and
 ankle joints.
Follow the 
contours
on the back
Abhyañga
Chest may 
follow circular 
pattern in the
direction of the 
hair.
[Hands may
move up lightly,
but pressure is
applied in the 
downward 
direction]
Another technique
is to massage from the 
inner arm to the leg—down,
and from the outer hand
and foot—up (in the 
direction of the blood
flow).
Although the marmas are the junctions of all five
principles (i.e., flesh, veins, arteries, tendons, bones,
and joints), at each point a predominance of one
principle exists. It is at these points where abhyañga
can most effectively restructure or rebalance the
system to function most healthily. Further, abhyañga
helps develop the preventive health and longevity of
the body and mind by ensuring the proper balance
and flow of hormones, fluids, immune factors, etc.
One hundred seven marma points exist on the body.
This makes it much easier to remember and work
with, compared with the thousands of points in
Chinese acupuncture. Áyurveda details major (mahá)
and minor marma points. The major points
correspond to the major chakras (secret energy points)
on the body, while the minor points are found around
the torso and limbs. Thus, healing through marma
abhyañga affects the chakras, physical health, and
the doßhas.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
216
The purpose of a marma abhyañga is to stimulate
the various bodily organs and systems. Like
acupuncture, these points are measured by finger units
(a´guli or a´gula) to detect their correct locations.
Many marma points are larger than acupuncture
points. Thus, they can be found more easily.
One school of thought suggests that marmas are
not so much points as they are circular bands around
certain parts of the body. For example, a marma exists
just above the knee (the width of the client’s four
fingers above the middle of the knee), known as Ani
Marma. This marma relates to the small intestine. It
is also situated on the back of the leg, directly behind
this spot. If one were to move the hands from the
front Ani Marma, in a straight line to the back (i.e.,
by working the sides of the leg that are in line with
Ani Marma) this marma would also be stimulated.
So when one works a marma point, they can affect
the front, sides, and back of a marma (i.e., encircling
the area around the arm or leg).
In ancient India, it was cautioned that these
marma points were to be guarded from harm. If these
points were pierced by arrows or hit forcefully, it could
result in disease, trauma or even death. Obviously,
places like the heart, forehead, and throat are vulner-
able areas, whereas sites on the arms and legs are
less vulnerable to severe injury. When imbalances
exist in the body, these same spots become sore.
Through marma abhyañga health is restored.
Marma points are grouped according to the region
of the body (arms [22 points] and legs [22 points] 11
per limb), abdomen [3 points], chest [9 points], back
[14 points], and head and neck [37 points]). They are
also grouped according to muscles [10 points],
tendons/ligaments [23 points], arteries [9 points],
veins [37], joints [20 points], and bones [8]. (Some
group these points slightly differently.)
Traditionally, marma points are grouped into three
categories: those on the legs and feet (£hankha
Marma), those on the trunk (Madháyamañga
Marma), and those on the neck and head (Jatrúrdhva
Marma).

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 217
Kurchcha £hirah
Gulpha
Indrabasti
Janú
Urvi
Ani
Katíka-
taruna
Kukundara
Nitamba
Párßhva
Sandhi
Brihati £hirah
Ansaphalaka
Krikátiká
Vidhura
Amsa
Marma Points
Talah^idaya
Kßhipra
Kurchcha
Kurchcha £hirah
Janú
Ani
Urvi
Kurchcha
Kurchcha £hirah
Indrabasti
Kurpara
Ani
Kurpara
Guda
Vitapa
Lohitákßha
Basti
Nábhi
Manivandha
Urvi
Urvi
Kakßhadhara
Stanyarohita
Apalápa
H^idaya
Stanamula
Apastambha
Nilá & Manyá
Kurchcha
Kßhipra
Adhipati
Sthapani
Vidhura
Apáñga
Ávartas
Phana
£hankha
Utkßhepa
Mátriká

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
218
a
m
r
a
M
g
e
L
&
m
r
A
a
m
r
a
M
e
zi
S
,r
e
b
m
u
N
,n
oit
a
c
o
L
s
n
r
e
v
o
G
a
y
a
di^
H
ala
T
2/1
)
b
m
il
re
p
1
,.e.i/stnio
p
4
(
s
elo
s
d
n
a
s
m
la
p
f
o
retn
e
c
htdi
w
re
g
nif
s
g
n
ul
a
r
pih
ß
K
)stnio
p
4
(
sre
g
nif/s
e
ot
tsrif
&
sre
g
nif/s
e
ot
gib
n
e
e
w
te
b
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
s
g
n
ul
,tra
e
h
a
h
c
h
cr
u
K
(
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2
ilu
g
´
a
e
v
o
b
a
,tn
eilc
f
o
)
a
r
pih
ß
K
f
o
-
re
g
nif
4
)
b
m
il
re
p
1
,.e.i/stnio
p
4
(
sto
o
r
b
m
u
ht
d
n
a
te
ef
s
htdi
w
a
k
a
h
c
ol
A
atti
P
a
h
c
h
cr
u
K
h
a
rih
£
re
g
nif
1
)
b
m
il
re
p
2/stnio
p
8
(
s
elk
n
a
e
ht
w
ole
b
ts
uj
stsir
w
f
o
s
e
dis
d
n
a
htdi
w
s
m
s
a
p
s
elc
s
u
m
its
a
b
a
r
d
n
I
2
1
-le
e
h
e
ht
hti
w
e
nil
ni(
elc
s
u
m
fla
c
e
ht
f
o
retn
e
c
)s
w
eiv
g
niy
ra
v
(
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2
r
o
2/1
)ti
e
v
o
b
a
sre
g
nif
,n
oits
e
gid
s
e
nits
etni
in
A
e
v
o
b
a
sre
g
nif
r
u
o
f
ú
n
a
J
tn
o
rf
)s
p
a
c
e
e
n
k
e
v
o
b
a
ts
uj(
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
.k
c
a
b
d
n
a
n
ois
n
et
elc
s
u
m
iv
r
U
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
)
k
c
a
b
d
n
a
tn
o
rf(
retn
e
c
h
giht
ato
r
S
a
h
a
v
a
k
a
d
U
a
h
ß
k
átih
o
L
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
)stnio
p
2
(
h
giht
d
n
a
nio
r
g
f
o
tnioj
ylp
p
u
s
d
o
olb
g
el
a
h
d
n
a
bin
a
M
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2
)stnio
p
2
(
tnioj
tsir
w
retn
e
c
ss
e
n
ffits
s
e
v
eiler
a
r
a
p
r
u
K
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
3
)stnio
p
2
(
tnioj
w
o
ble
n
o
re
vil
n
e
elp
s
,tra
e
h
a
r
a
h
d
a
h
ß
k
a
K
htdi
w
re
g
nif
1
)stnio
p
2
(
re
dlu
o
h
s
d
n
a
ts
e
h
c
n
e
e
w
te
b
n
ois
n
et
elc
s
u
m
a
h
plu
G
re
g
nif
2
)a
era
n
o
d
n
et
s
ellih
c
A
(
n
oitc
n
uj
fla
c/to
o
f
s
htdi
w
ss
e
n
ffits
s
e
v
eiler
ú
n
a
J
yltc
erid
d
n
a
p
a
c
e
e
n
k
f
o
retn
e
c(
n
oitc
n
uj
h
giht/fla
c
re
g
nif
3
)stnio
p
2
()e
e
n
k
f
o
k
c
a
b
e
ht
n
o
ti
d
nih
e
b
s
htdi
w
re
vil
n
e
elp
s
,tra
e
h
a
p
atiV
,a
h
ß
k
atih
o
L
m
o
rf
er
u
s
a
e
m
(
m
uto
rc
s
d
n
a
nio
r
g
n
e
e
w
te
b
re
g
nif
x
e
d
ni-
htg
n
el
,
m
uto
rc
s
s
d
ra
w
ot
d
elg
n
a
&
n
w
o
d
htdi
w
re
g
nif
1
)stnio
p
2
(
)ilu
g
´
a
2
-tniojdi
m
sti
ot
pit
elc
s
u
m
ylle
b
,n
ois
n
et
,e
c
n
eto
p
m
i
n
e
m
e
s

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 219
a
m
r
a
M
k
c
a
B
/x
a
r
o
h
T
:
k
n
u
r
T
a
m
r
a
M
e
zi
S
,n
oit
a
c
o
L
s
n
r
e
v
o
G
a
d
u
G
(
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
4
,
m
u
e
nire
p
ilu
g
´
a
)
,n
olo
c
,n
oitc
u
d
o
r
p
er
ts
1
,lo
ots
,s
a
g
,e
nir
u
a
r
k
a
h
c
n
oitalu
m
its
its
a
B
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
4
,le
v
a
n/sivle
p
n
e
e
w
te
b
a
h
p
a
K
,y
ra
nir
u
ih
b
á
N
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
4
,le
v
a
n
refs
n
art
s
nie
v
lla
f
o
ta
e
s
s
e
nits
etni
lla
m
s
,stnio
p
a
y
a
di^
H
s
htdi
w
sre
g
nif
4
,s
elp
pin
n
e
e
w
te
b
atti
P
nia
m
a
m
r
a
m
,
a
k
a
h
d
a
S
,atti
P
a
n
á
y
V
u
y
á
V
alu
m
a
n
atS
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2
,stnio
p
2
,s
elp
pin
w
ole
b
ts
uj
d
o
olb
,atti
P
,a
h
p
a
K
n
oitalu
cric
atih
o
r
a
n
atS
m
o
rf(
elp
pin
ts
a
er
b
e
v
o
b
a
alu
m
a
n
atS
ot
pit
re
g
nif
x
e
d
ni
e
ht
m
o
rf
,
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
,stnio
p
2
,)tnioj
di
m
m
ra
,atti
P
,a
h
p
a
K
s
elc
s
u
m
a
h
b
m
ats
a
p
A
2/1
,stnio
p
2
,a
era
e
n
o
b
rallo
c
di
m
-e
s
a
b
a
e
h
c
art
f
o
e
dis
re
htie
htdi
w
re
g
nif
/cite
hta
p
m
y
s
,d
o
olb
,e
v
re
n
cite
hta
p
m
y
s
ara
p
s
g
n
ul
a
p
ála
p
A
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
,stnio
p
2
,tip
m
ra
e
ht
/cite
hta
p
m
y
s
,d
o
olb
e
v
re
n
cite
hta
p
m
y
s
ara
p
a
n
u
r
ata
kíta
K
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
,stnio
p
4
,s
k
c
ottu
b
re
w
ol/e
nip
s
y
b
p
ot
m
u
rc
a
s
u
y
á
V
,n
oita
pits
n
o
c
,taf
a
r
a
d
n
u
k
u
K
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
,stnio
p
2
,e
nip
s
f
o
s
e
dis
hto
b
,s
k
c
ottu
b
e
v
o
b
a
ts
uj
,n
oitc
u
d
o
r
p
er
,ytilib
o
m
g
el
,n
oita
ni
m
ile
d
n
2
slo
rtn
o
c
a
r
k
a
h
c
a
b
m
ati
N
2
,)
k
c
a
b
n
o
(
e
n
o
b
pih
re
v
o
,ara
d
n
u
k
u
K
laretal
&
e
v
o
b
a
sre
g
nif
5
2/1
,stnio
p
ilu
g
´
a
,n
oits
e
gid
atti
P
&
u
y
á
V
C
B
R
,ytilativ
ih
d
n
a
S
a
v
h
¤r
á
P
m
o
rf
a
b
m
ati
N
,tnioj
di
m
e
ht
ot
pit
re
g
nif
x
e
d
ni
e
ht
m
o
rf
er
u
s
a
e
m
,
a
2/1
,stnio
p
2
,)e
dis
e
ht
ot
"
1
d
n
a
p
u
"
1
tu
o
b
a(
laretal
d
n
a
ilu
g
´
,n
oits
e
gid
,atti
P
n
oita
ni
m
ile
h
a
rih
£
ita
hir
B
d
nih
e
b
yltc
erid
(
e
nip
s
f
o
s
e
dis
hto
b
n
o
,s
e
d
alb
re
dlu
o
h
s
n
e
e
w
te
b
alu
m
a
n
atS
htdi
w
re
g
nif
2/1
,stnio
p
2
,)
atti
P
r
oja
m
a
.etis
n
oitalu
m
u
c
c
a
d
r
3
slo
rtn
o
C
a
r
k
a
h
c
a
k
ala
h
P
a
s
n
A
e
v
o
b
a
ita
hir
B
re
g
nif
2/1
,stnio
p
2
,)e
d
alb
re
dlu
o
h
s
di
m
-
to
o
r
m
ra(
htdi
w
,n
oita
s
n
e
s/h
c
u
ot
u
y
á
V
ht4
,y
h
p
o
rta
a
r
k
a
h
c
a
s
n
A
e
v
o
b
a
s
htdi
w
re
g
nif
5
a
k
ala
h
p
a
s
n
A
-s
e
n
o
b
re
dlu
o
h
s
n
e
e
w
te
b
&
re
dlu
o
h
s
n
e
e
w
te
b
re
g
nif
2/1
,stnio
p
2
,k
c
e
n
htdi
w
.k
c
a
b
e
ht
n
o
d
eta
c
ol
era
n
e
v
e
s
ts
al
e
h
T
.k
n
u
rt
&
x
ar
o
ht
e
ht
n
o
d
eta
c
ol
era
th
gie
tsrif
e
h
T

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
220
Marmas 
Head & Neck Marmas 
Governs 
Dhamani (Nilá & 
Manyá) 
both sides of the trachea 
(posterior/anterior sides of larynx, 
respectively, 2 points, 4 finger 
widths 
speech, taste, perception, 
blood, transfer marma 
Mátriká 
4 points on each side of the throat, 4 
finger widths 
blood circulation 
Krikátiká 
head/neck junction (back of head), 2 
points, 1/2 finger width 
tremors, disability, stiffness 
Vidhura 
just below the back of both ears, 1/2 
finger width 
hearing, head support 
Phana 
both sides of the nostrils, 1/2 finger 
width 
smell, sinus, ears, stress 
Apáñga 
outer corners of both eyes-ends, 1/2 
finger width 
vision, stress 
Ávartas 
above both outer eyebrows, 1/2 
finger width 
depression, vision, posture 
£hankha 
temples-front bone (above 
eyebrows), 1/2 finger width 
colon 
Utkßhepa 
1 finger width above £hanka, 2 
points, 1/2 finger width 
colon 
Sthapani 
center of eyebrows, 1/2 finger width 
main Váyu marma, mind, 
nerves, hypothalamus 
£hringataka 
[4 points] cleft, under nose, outside 
eye bones, nose tip 
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 
nerves 
Simanta 
sideways and upwards on the skull, 4 
finger widths 
sanity, grounding, 
intelligence, blood 
Adhipati 
crown chakra (baby's soft spot), 1/2 
finger width 
mind, nerves, epilepsy

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 221
Guda
1st chakra- Múládhára
reproductive, urinary, 
menstrual systems, obesity,
prostate, excretory, Apána Váyu
Basti
2nd chakra-
Swádhißhóhán
All Kapha functions,
water metabolism, 
urinary system, pituitary,
gonads (testes & ovaries),
(main Kapha marma)
Nábhi
3rd chakra- Manipúra
small intestine, subtle
body, Pachaka Pitta,  
adrenals, pancreas
Samána Váyu
H^idaya
4th chakra- Anáhata
circulation, blood, spiritual
goals, discrimination, thymus,
Sadhaka Pitta, Vyána Váyu 
(main Pitta marma), 
Nilá & Manyá
5th chakra- Vißhuddha
     blood, liver, spleen
       thyroid
Adhipati
7th chakra- Sahasrára
mind, nerves, ether, pineal
Marmas and Chakras
Sthapani
6th chakra- Ágñá
mind, nerves, colon, heart,
 lungs- respiratory system,
bones (main Váyu marma)
pituitary

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
222
a
m
r
a
M
e
h
t
d
n
a
st
n
io
P
s
ato
r
S
)s
m
ets
y
S
yli
d
o
B
(
.k
r
o
w
a
m
r
a
m
h
ti
w
d
e
c
n
ala
b
o
sla
e
r
a
)s
a
t
o
r
s(
s
m
ets
y
s
yli
d
o
b
s
u
oir
a
v
e
h
T
ato
r
S
a
m
r
a
M
s
n
r
e
v
o
G
a
h
a
v
a
ò
á
r
P
in
a
p
a
htS
a
m
hts
a/s
g
n
ul
,tra
e
h
,n
oitarip
s
er
a
h
a
v
a
n
n
A
its
a
B
a
r
d
n
I
,a
e
h
rraid
,a
e
s
u
a
n
,s
a
g
,n
oits
e
gid
ni
/n
oits
e
gid
s
e
nits
etni
,h
c
a
m
ots
a
h
a
v
a
k
a
d
U
iv
r
U
/its
a
B
s
ete
b
aid
,s
a
erc
n
a
p
,
m
silo
b
ate
m
reta
w
a
h
a
v
a
s
a
R
á
y
n
a
M
/áli
N
sre
d
r
o
sid
a
h
p
a
K
,s
d
n
alg
h
p
m
yl/cita
h
p
m
yl
a
h
a
v
atk
a
R
á
y
n
a
M
/áli
N
/a
y
a
di^
H
á
kirtá
M
/a
rih
£
ita
hir
B
,s
e
h
s
ar
nik
s
,n
e
elp
s
,re
vil/nib
olg
o
m
e
h
,d
o
olb
sre
d
r
o
sid
g
nid
e
elb
a
h
a
v
a
s
å
á
M
/a
d
u
G
/a
y
a
di^
H
ala
T
its
a
b
a
r
d
n
I/atih
o
r
a
n
atS
s
ete
b
aid
,s
a
erc
n
a
p/
m
silo
b
ate
m
reta
w
a
h
a
v
a
d
e
M
a
d
u
G
e
n
ar
b
m
e
m
lare
c
siv
,s
y
e
n
dik
/)e
s
o
pid
a(
taf
a
h
a
vihts
A
/ita
pih
d
A
/in
a
p
a
htS
a
p
e
h
ß
kt
U
/a
h
k
n
a
h
£
slia
n
,ria
h
,n
olo
c
,s
e
n
o
b/latele
k
S
a
h
a
v
ájja
M
/a
k
ata
g
nir
h
£/atn
a
m
iS
ita
pih
d
A
/in
a
p
a
htS
,stnioj
,s
e
n
o
b
/
w
o
rra
m
-
m
ets
y
s
s
u
o
v
re
n
y
rr
o
w
,yteix
n
a
,ain
m
o
s
ni
,y
r
o
m
e
m
a
h
a
v
a
r
k
u
h
£
a
p
atiV
/a
r
a
d
n
u
k
u
K
/a
d
u
G
,e
c
n
eto
p
m
i
,slatin
e
g/e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
er
ela
m
B
T
,etats
o
r
p
a
h
a
v
a
rtú
M
/a
n
u
r
ata
kíta
K
its
a
B
/r
a
d
n
u
k
u
K
re
d
d
alb
y
ra
nir
u
,n
olo
c
a
h
a
v
a
h
sír
u
P
/a
d
u
G
/á
kitá
kir
K
/ihta
p
d
A
/iv
r
U
/ih
d
n
a
S
/its
a
B
/a
k
n
a
h
£
a
n
u
r
ata
kítr
a
K
,sitilo
c
,n
oita
pits
n
o
c
,a
e
h
rraid
,s
u
n
a
,
m
utc
er
s
dio
h
rr
o
m
e
h
,lo
ots
ni
d
o
olb
a
h
a
v
a
d
e
w
S
/atih
o
r
a
n
atS/alu
m
a
n
atS
its
a
B
/a
r
a
h
d
a
h
ß
k
a
K
g
nita
e
w
s
,s
er
o
p
nik
s
,e
u
ssit
e
s
o
pid
a
a
h
a
v
a
v
atr
A
/a
n
u
r
ata
kíta
K
its
a
B
/r
a
d
n
u
k
u
K
,S
M
P
/s
e
b
ut
n
aip
ollaf
,s
u
retu
-s
ela
m
e
F
,e
s
u
a
p
o
n
e
m
,s
m
elb
o
r
p
n
oita
u
rts
n
e
m
/ytilitref
a
n
á
p
A
u
y
á
V
a
h
a
v
a
y
n
atS
m
atih
o
r
a
n
atS/alu
m
a
n
atS
its
a
B
/a
r
a
h
d
a
h
ß
a
K
/
ts
a
er
b
,n
oitatc
al/s
elp
pin
,sts
a
er
b
-s
ela
m
e
F
s
e
ss
e
c
s
b
a
d
n
a
sr
o
m
ut

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 223
We have detailed the three doßhas, Váyu (air), Pitta
(fire), and Kapha (water). A doßha excess means an
increase of that element in the body and/or mind.
These excesses or imbalances are mild or severe
diseases (depending upon the degree of the excess).
For example, excess Váyu can develop into
constipation, dry skin, anxiety, etc. Further, most
illnesses can be caused by any doßha excess (e.g.,
asthma can be caused by any of the doßhas. Each
doßha has its own unique set of symptoms. This
enables one to detect the doßha causing the disease).
This yogic or spiritual tool is unique to Áyurveda.
Thus, one can fine tune or note distinctions instead
of merely working with generalizations. This insight
into individualized symptoms is an invaluable tool in
determining the root cause of an illness.
Each doßha has five aspects—or sub-doßhas —
that further describe the different activities that each
doßha performs. The sub-doßhas govern various body
functions. For example, we know that one function
of  Váyu is related to stool elimination. One sub-doßha
exists to specifically govern the downward movement
of the air, called Apána Váyu. This added insight al-
lowed the ancients to know which marma points were
related to downward moving air, and to properly
stimulate or reset this downward flow. Through
abhyañga and stimulating marma points the down-
ward flow air flow can be restored or balanced.
 
Basti
Kapha
Swádhißhóhán-
2nd chakra
H^idaya
Pitta
Anáhata-
4th chakra
Sthapani
Váyu
Ágñá- 
6th chakra
Doßha Marma Points
Three of the seven marmas relate specifically to the three doähas,
and are the primary marmas worked with.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
224
Váyu Major Marma Points
Guda
reproduction,
colon, urine, gas
stool, 1st chakra
stimulation
Basti
urinary,
near colon
Nábhi
seat of all veins 
and nerves; 
transfer point
Nilá & Manyá
(transfer point)
Adhipati
mind, nerves,
epilepsy
Sthapani
mind, nerves,
hypothalmus 
(main Váyu marma)

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 225
Secondary marma points exist for Váyu; these
points are used with the main marmas as assisting
points. One traditional Váyu method involves the use
of one hand on the main Váyu marma point
(Sthapani), while the other hand is used on the minor
Váyu marma points.
This approach is  similar to polarity therapy, which
was derived from Áyurvedic marma abhyañga.
Persons will also notice that a ‘mirroring’ effect
occurs; some of the same points are sited on both the
arms and legs.
Secondary Váyu Marmas
Talah^idaya
lungs
Kßhipra
Janú
lungs
Urvi
Indrabasti
colon, lungs
Kurpara
lungs
Kurpara
Vitapa
impotence
Lohitákßha
constipation,
 reproductive
Urvi
Urvi
gas, 
constipation
Kßhipra
lungs
Vidhura
deafness
£hankha
colon, clarity, 
consciousness
Utkßhepa
colon 
Indrabasti
Janú
Urvi
Katíka-
taruna
constipation
Kukundara
constipation,
reproductive &
urinary systems
Nitamba
constipation
lower colon
Krikátiká
constipation
Vidhura

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
226
Apána- downward air:
anus, thighs, elimination
(semen, ovum, feces, urine, fetus)
Nábhi
Samána- 
equalizing air:
small intestine, 
digestion, 
elimination
H^idaya
Vyána- pervasive air:
muscle joints, circulation, 
walking, lifting, body  
movements, opening/
closing eyes
Nilá & Manyá
Udána- upward air:
throat, speech, 
memory,
complexion,
will, higher
aspirations
Adhipati
Prá`a- outward air: mind, 
nerves, senses/sneezing, 
belching, expectorating, 
inspiration, swallowing
Basti
Guda
Marma Points and the 5 Váyus
Basti
urinary
H^idaya
circulation, liver
spleen, skin
(main Pitta marma) 
Nilá & Manyá
blood
Sthapani
mind
Major Pitta Marma Points

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 227
Kßhipra
Janú
liver, spleen
Ani
Urvi
Indrabasti
digestive fire, 
esophagus, stomach, 
small intestine
Kurpara
liver, spleen
Ani
Kurpara
Vitapa
male reproduction
Lohitákßha
blood
Urvi
Urvi
blood
Kakßhadhara
male reproduction
Stanarohitam
small intestine, blood
Stanamula
small intestine, blood
Kßhipra
vision
Apáñga
vision
Ávartas
vision
Mátriká
circulation
Indrabasti
Janú
Urvi
Ani
Katíka-
taruna
pallor from 
loss of blood
small intestine
Párßhva
Sandhi
blood in
abdomen
Brihati £hirah
heat excess, blood
Ansaphalaka
small intestine
Ápastambha
blood in chest, 
cough, asthma
Minor Pitta Marma Points

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
228
Final Abhyañga and
Energy Transfer Marmas
After abhyañga the practitioner checks the major
doßha marma points (Sthapani—third eye,
H^idaya—heart, Basti—below the navel) feeling for
energy and heat comparisons. If one mahá marma
still feels out of balance, additional time is spent
balancing the transfer marmas, the throat (Nilá and
Manyá), and navel (Nábhi) chakras.
The process begins with one hand on, or over the
crown chakra (adhipati) and the other hand on, or
over the main doäha marma of the client.
Next, one palm lightly rests on, or is held slightly
above one of the mahá marmas. The other palm is
placed on, or over the throat transfer point, then after
a while, moves to the navel transfer point. For ex-
ample, if there seems to be too much air in the region
between the eyebrows (Sthapani Marma), the prac-
titioner keeps one palm on, or over this marma. The
other palm is on, or over the throat. This position is
held for some time, then the hand over the throat
moves on, or over the navel. When the hand is by the
throat, excess air transfers out of the head and sends
in extra warmth or fire from being near the heart
marma (Pitta mahá marma). Similarly, when the hand
is by the navel, it sends moisture from the nearby
Basti marma (a Kapha mahá marma) in the direc-
tion of the head.
Katíkataruna
Bhrájaka Pitta-
complexion, skin
 
Nábhi
Pachaka Pitta-
small intestine's 
digestive fire,
supports all Pittas
/Ranjaka Pitta-
blood, liver, 
stomach, small 
intestine, spleen; colors 
bile, blood, stool
H^idaya
Sádaka Pitta-
digests truth and
spiritual goals
Adhipati
Sádhaka Pitta-
digests truth and
spiritual goals
Nilá & Manyá
Bhrájaka Pitta-
complexion, skin
Kurchcha
Alochaka Pitta-
vision
Kurchcha
Marmas and the 5 Pittas

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 229
Talah^idaya
lungs
Kßhipra
Ani
thigh swelling
Urvi
Ani
arm swelling
Basti
Kapha conditions
(major marma)
Urvi
water metabolism,
pancreas
Kßhipra
lungs
Adhipati
alertness
(major marma)
Kapha Major and Minor Marma Points

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
230
The sizes of the marmas are measured by fin-
ger breadth, called a´guli or a´gula (e.g., 1 a´guli
is the width of one’s own finger). All marma mea-
surements are made with the client’s own fingers, not
the fingers of the practitioner. Most of the marmas
have the same meaning as their position, making it
easy to remember their location. The charts below
oup the marmas according to size.
a
m
r
a
M
n
oiti
n
ife
D
a
m
r
a
M
n
oiti
n
ife
D
a
y
a
di^
h
ala
T
s
elo
s
d
n
a
s
m
la
p
f
o
retn
e
C
ita
hir
B
h
a
rih
£
k
c
a
b
e
ht
f
o
n
oig
er
e
g
ral
its
a
b
a
r
d
n
I
s'a
r
d
n
I
d
n
a
s
m
ra
er
o
f-
di
m
:re
d
d
alb
s
e
vla
c
a
k
ala
h
p
a
s
n
A
e
d
alb
re
dlu
o
h
S
in
A
d
n
a
s
m
ra
re
p
p
u
f
o
n
oig
er
re
w
o
L
s
g
el
a
s
n
A
re
dlu
o
h
S
a
h
ß
k
atih
o
L
m
ra
f
o
a
era
latn
o
rf
re
w
ol
:d
e
y
e
d
e
R
stnioj
g
el
d
n
a
á
kitá
kir
K
tnioj
k
c
e
N
atih
o
r
a
n
atS
ts
a
er
b
e
ht
f
o
n
oig
er
re
p
p
U
a
r
u
h
diV
ytivitis
n
e
s
m
o
rf
ss
ertsi
D
a
h
b
m
ats
a
p
A
e
ht
s
eirra
c(
ts
e
h
c
e
ht
f
o
s
e
dis
re
p
p
U
)e
cr
o
f
efil
a
n
a
h
P
lirts
o
n
:d
o
o
H
s'tn
e
p
re
S
s
e
dis
a
p
ála
p
A
stip
m
ra
e
ht
:d
e
d
ra
u
g
n
U
a
g
ñ
á
p
A
sre
n
r
o
c
e
y
e
retu
o
a
n
u
r
ata
kíta
K
f
o
retn
e
c
:
m
u
rc
a
s
e
ht
m
o
rf
g
nisi
R
s
k
c
ottu
b
e
ht
atr
a
v
A
m
o
rf
yti
m
ala
C
ytivitis
n
e
s
a
r
a
d
n
u
k
n
u
K
e
nip
s
f
o
s
e
dis
hto
b
g
nik
ra
m
nio
L
te
e
m
s
k
c
ottu
b
ere
h
w
e
s
a
b
a
p
e
h
ß
kt
U
e
v
o
b
a
:s
d
ra
w
p
u
n
w
o
r
h
T
s
elp
m
et
a
b
m
ati
N
n
oig
er
s
k
c
ottu
b
re
p
p
U
in
a
p
a
htS
tr
o
p
p
u
s
g
nivi
G
ih
d
n
a
s
a
w
h
¤r
á
P
tsia
w
e
ht
f
o
s
e
di
S
ita
pih
d
A
e
ht
f
o
n
w
o
rc
:d
r
olre
v
O
d
a
e
h
1 a´gula
a
m
r
a
M
n
oiti
n
ife
D
a
p
atiV
m
u
e
nire
p
a
r
a
h
d
a
h
ß
k
a
K
stnioj
re
dlu
o
h
s
f
o
p
ot
s
k
n
alf
g
nidlo
h
p
u
iv
r
U
s
m
ra
er
o
f
d
n
a
s
h
giht
f
o
n
oig
er-
di
m
e
di
w
a
rih
¤
a
h
c
h
cr
u
K
e
ot
gib/b
m
u
ht
f
o
e
s
a
b
a
h
c
h
cr
u
K
f
o
d
a
e
h

Section 3: Therapies                            Abhyañga/Marmas                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 231
2 a´gula
3 a´gula
4 a´gula
(Some say the size of one’s own palm)
Reference: Aßhóáñga H^idayam Ch. 4; v.60-63.5
Different authorities use slightly different measurements
Abhyañga Oils
Áyurveda offers numerous oils for various pañcha
karma, abhyañga, and nasya treatments. Presently
many of the oils are not readily found in the US.
Bráhmí, chandan, neem, and ma-hánáráyan oils
seem to be among the main oils used. Below is a
sample of some Áyurvedic oils and which diseases
they help. Oils often can be applied externally, taken
internally, and as nasal drops.
Doßha Marma Oils
Essential oils appropriate to one’s doßha are
placed on the marma points that relate to their doßha.
On the next page is a partial list of these oils. For
further explanations about oils, see Chapter 8 on
aromatherapy.
a
m
r
a
M
n
oiti
n
ife
D
a
h
d
n
a
bin
a
M
tele
c
ar
b
a
h
plu
G
tnioj
elk
n
a
alu
m
a
n
atS
to
o
r
ts
a
er
b
a
h
k
n
a
h
£
s
elp
m
et
:h
c
n
o
c
a
m
r
a
M
n
oiti
n
ife
D
ú
n
a
J
tnioj
e
e
n
k
a
r
a
p
r
u
K
tnioj
w
o
ble
a
m
r
a
M
n
oiti
n
ife
D
a
d
u
G
s
u
n
a
its
a
B
re
d
d
alb
a
y
a
di^
H
tra
e
h
ih
b
á
N
le
v
a
n
áli
N
ta
s
nie
v
f
o
r
olo
c
:e
ulb
k
ra
d
n
oita
c
ol
siht
atn
a
m
iS
g
nid
n
u
o
rr
u
s
&
llu
k
s
:ti
m
m
u
s
stnioj
á
kirtá
M
:re
hto
m
s'le
ss
e
v
d
o
olb
m
o
rf
d
a
e
h
ot
w
olf
s
eiretra
ere
h
a
h
c
h
cr
u
K
ta
s
n
o
d
n
et
r
o
s
elc
s
u
m
:to
n
k
s
e
ot
gib/s
b
m
u
ht
f
o
e
s
a
b
a
k
ata
g
nir
h
£
:ste
erts
r
u
o
f
f
o
s
d
a
o
rss
o
rc
htu
o
m
f
o
etala
p
tf
o
s
á
y
n
a
M
r
o
n
o
h
li
O
e
s
U
í
m
h
á
r
B
s
e
y
e
&
d
a
e
H
n
a
d
n
a
h
C
,
m
silo
h
o
cla
,re
v
e
F
,g
nin
r
u
b
,n
ois
u
f
n
o
c
,e
cid
n
u
aj
,
m
sita
m
u
e
h
r
s
e
s
a
e
sid
latn
e
m
m
e
e
N
r
o
a
b
r
ú
D
ff
u
r
d
n
a
D
a
h
d
n
a
G
s
er
utc
arf
,s
niar
p
S
a
b
a
ríh
s
K
s
u
o
v
re
n
,aig
elpi
m
e
H
,tu
o
g
etu
c
a
,sre
d
r
o
sid
,nia
p
cita
m
u
e
h
r
sis
ylara
p
n
a
y
á
r
á
n
á
h
a
M
,s
d
n
alg
,ain
arci
m
e
H
,sis
ylara
p
laic
af
,sitir
htra
,n
oitp
e
c
n
o
c
nia
p
a
h
ä
a
m
á
h
a
M
r
o
laic
af
,aig
elpi
m
e
H
w
ajk
c
ol
,sis
ylara
p
m
ra
m
u
k
m
u
K
s
elp
m
ip
,e
n
c
A
s
a
sr
a
r
a
N
s
p
ylo
p
la
s
a
N

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
232
a
m
r
a
M
a
h
ß
o
D
sli
O
u
y
á
V
a
tti
P
a
h
p
a
K
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
e
s
o
R
e
s
o
R
e
ni
m
s
a
J
e
ni
m
s
a
J
yli
L
yli
L
allin
a
V
allin
a
V
re
d
n
e
v
a
L
re
d
n
e
v
a
L
ilu
o
h
cta
P
ilu
o
h
cta
P
lis
a
B
lis
a
B
e
s
n
e
c
nik
n
ar
F
e
s
n
e
c
nik
n
ar
F
h
rr
y
M
h
rr
y
M
e
g
a
S
e
g
a
S
ra
d
e
C
ra
d
e
C
k
s
u
M
k
s
u
M
s
uto
L
s
uto
L
s
utp
yla
c
u
E
s
utp
yla
c
u
E
n
o
m
a
n
ni
C
n
o
m
a
n
ni
C
m
uin
are
G
ss
ar
g
n
o
m
e
L
ain
e
d
ra
G

Section 3: Therapies                            Kerala-Style Abhyañga                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 233
Keralíya Áyurvedic Abhyañga
Contemporary Methods
Kerala is a state in southern India where pañcha
karma abhyañga has been preserved. However, un-
like pañcha karma, it is used more for rejuvenation
purposes than for cleansing. Various contemporary
forms of abhyañga are used in Kerala, and are very
effective. Some modern authorities note that some of
these practices are especially useful in healing seri-
ous mental disorders. However, other modern authori-
ties believe they aggravate the condition. Practitio-
ners have noted that procedures such as ¤hiro dhárá
have evoked troubling past emotions in some per-
sons. Therefore, persons who have very deep emo-
tional problems may be advised by some practitio-
ners to heal through herbs, aromas, and professional
counseling first.
Several important differences exist between
Kerala and ancient pañcha karma therapies.
Even though there are numerous treatments in
Keralíya Pañcha Karma they all fit into five major
categories.
s
el
u
R
t
n
eic
n
A
s
el
u
R
ala
r
e
K
a
m
r
a
k
a
h
c
ñ
a
p
ts
u
m
g
nir
u
d
yln
o
e
n
o
d
e
b
s
n
o
s
a
e
s
niatre
c
a
m
r
a
k
a
h
c
ñ
a
p
n
a
c
lla
ni
e
n
o
d
e
b
s
n
o
s
a
e
s
era
ta
e
w
s
d
n
a
lio
y
ra
ni
m
iler
p
s
eip
are
ht
e
ht
era
ta
e
w
s
d
n
a
lio
s
eip
are
ht
elpic
nir
p
n
oitutits
n
o
c
e
ht
ta
ert
ss
e
nlli
e
ht
ta
ert
g
nic
u
d
er/n
oita
cifir
u
p
d
etn
eir
o
g
nin
ot/n
oitailla
p
d
etn
eir
o
s
eip
are
ht
e
vif
yln
O
e
vif
n
a
ht
er
o
m
s
eip
are
ht
o
ot
n
e
h
w
e
n
o
d
to
n
n
e
h
w
r
o
;dlo
c
r
o
to
h
)
y
niar
r
o
y
d
u
olc
e
vitc
effe
yllaic
e
p
s
e
y
niar
n
e
h
w
y
p
a
r
e
h
T
stife
n
e
B
.1
a
m
r
a
K
á
r
á
h
D
)
á
r
á
h
D
o
rih
£
(
n
a
h
á
g
a
v
A
a
k
e
h
ßir
a
P
,d
ni
m
e
ht
f
o
s
e
s
a
e
sid
a
ò
á
r
P
,e
s
o
n
,s
e
y
e
,sra
e
,S
N
C
,u
y
á
V
,y
sla
p
laic
af
;ta
o
r
ht
d
n
a
,sre
d
r
o
sid
s
u
o
v
re
n
,ain
m
o
s
ni
,g
nitniaf
,sis
o
h
c
y
s
p
,y
r
o
m
e
m
,n
oitarip
sre
p
ss
e
c
x
e
,n
ois
u
f
n
o
c
.cte
,a
m
o
c
,
m
silo
h
o
cla
.2
a
k
e
S
a
y
á
K
)lih
cih
zi
P
(
,htg
n
erts
e
u
ssit
s
eto
m
o
r
p
,rets
ul
,erif
la
cig
oloib
,n
oix
elp
m
o
c
s
ajo
,s
e
s
n
e
s
ra
elc
,
,s
m
s
a
p
s
elc
s
u
m
,sre
d
r
o
sid
u
y
á
V
sre
d
r
o
sid
elc
s
u
m
e
vitare
n
e
g
e
d
.3
a
d
e
w
S
a
æ
ni
P
laic
af(
ralu
c
s
u
m
o
r
u
e
n
sla
e
h
ralu
c
s
u
m
,S
M
,sis
ylara
p
ci
m
ets
y
s
e
m
o
s
d
n
a
,)
y
h
p
o
rta
e
ht
f
o
lu
fe
s
u
ts
o
m
/s
e
s
a
e
sid
s
eip
are
ht
.4
a
p
e
L
a
n
n
A
n
e
h
w
d
e
s
u
a
d
e
w
S
a
æ
ni
P
s
e
o
d
)s
niar
g
d
eta
cid
e
m
(
k
r
o
w
to
n
.5
a
p
e
L
o
rih
£
sre
d
r
o
sid
niar
b
d
n
a
latn
e
M
5 Keralíya Pañcha Karma Categories
     Both dhárá and lepa are palliative measures that
eliminate excessed doßhas. They remove stagnant,
sticky toxins from the body’s channels (srotas) with-
out applying traditional reducing methods
(¤hodhana). Both can be given at all times in all sea-
sons.
1. Dhárá Karma
 Three forms of this therapy exist.
Dhárá karma makes use of medicated oils, milk,
(
s
hta
b
d
a
e
h
.1
)
á
r
á
h
d
o
rih
¤
s
hta
b
y
d
o
b
elo
h
w
.2
(
)
á
r
á
h
d
a
g
n
á
v
r
a
s
(
hta
b
la
c
ol
.3
á
r
á
h
d
a
g
n
á
k
e
)

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
234
ghee, etc. (see page 246). Sarvánga Dhárá
(Avagáhan—medicated baths) and Ekánga Dhárá
(Parißheka—liquid sprinkling) were previously dis-
cussed under sudation therapy on pages 182 to 183.
Dhárá karma makes use of medicated oils, milk,
ghee, etc. (see page 246). Sarvánga Dhárá
(Avagáhan—medicated baths) and Ekánga Dhárá
(Parißheka—liquid sprinkling) were previously
discussed under sudation therapy on pages 182 to
183.
Medicated oils include bh^i´garáj, balá, musta,
sandalwood, licorice, medicated milk, and medicated
decoctions. Examples of ingredients for each doßha
include the following:
   Váyu—balá, da¤hmúl, bh^i´garáj, sesame oil.
Pitta—sandalwood, coconut water, bh^i´garáj,
               musta.
  Kapha—licorice, balá, bh^i´garáj.
2. Káya Seka (Pizhichil)
This form of abhyañga is said to be most
beneficial for rejuvenating the nervous system. In this
method, the medicated oil used during dhárá karma
is poured over the person’s body from a height of 15
a´guli (head) and 13 a´guli (body), while
simultaneously being rubbed into the body. These
heights may cause the oil to splash on practitioners,
so old clothing is worn. Pizhichil is also known as
Taila Seka or Sarvánga Senchana. This method
strengthens the tissues and promotes the biological
fire.
Oil and ghee can be reused for another 3 days, but
must be replaced on the 4th day. When milk and
vinegar are used they are replaced daily.
Healthy persons can receive káya seka twice daily,
using a mixture of sesame oil and ghee. For weaker
persons a 2- to 6-day interval between sessions is
advised. The body’s luster and beauty are enhanced,
ojas becomes stabilized, and sense organs are cleared.
The process also promotes longevity, regeneration,
and rejuvenation of the body. It is especially good for
Váyu disorders. The same massage table, eye
protection, and other oil requirements used in pinæa
sveda and ¤hiro dhárá are applied here (see page 240).
For healthy persons, warm sesame oil and/or ghee
are used along with rejuvenating herbs (e.g.,
¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, guæúchí). Medicated milk
or sour vinegar can be used in place of medicated oil.
For Pitta disorders, oil or ghee can be unheated. Kapha
and Váyu disorders require warm oil. However,
unheated oil is used on the head in all cases.
Four practitioners attend the seated person. Two
practitioners massage from the shoulders to the navel,
and the other two practitioners massage from the navel
to the feet. In this approach, cloths are soaked in ghee
or oil and squeezed on the body (or oil is poured on
the body from vessels) with the right hand. The left
hand rubs the oil into the body. Again, insuring
uniform pressure and movement, at a moderate speed,
among all the abhyañga practitioners is important.
Hand strokes start from the upper portion of the body
and move downward.
A cloth is tied around the eyebrows to prevent
liquids from dripping into the eyes. Again, oil applied
to the body is lukewarm, while the oil applied to the
head is at room temperature. A fifth practitioner keeps
the cloths in warm oil and replaces them as they cool
off. When lying down, the head faces the east in the
morning and the west in the evening. The person
receives massage for 1 hour in the same seven
positions as in pinæa sveda (page 236).
If the treatment lasts for 14 or 21 days, the hour-
long session is gradually increased by 5 minutes from
the 2nd day on, until it reaches 11/2 hours. When it
reaches 11/2 hours (i.e., the 7th day), the time of each
session is shortened by 5 minutes. For the 21-day
series, upon reaching the 7th day (11/2hours), the
sessions remain at the 11/2 hour time through the 14th
day. From the 15th day on, each session is reduced
another 5 minutes. It is stated that the oil fully
penetrates one tissue layer (dhátu) a day. Thus, on
the 1st day the oil is absorbed only into the skin. Since
there are seven dhátus, it takes seven days for oil to
completely penetrate all the tissue layers.

Section 3: Therapies                            Kerala-Style Abhyañga                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 235
Some authorities suggest that Váyu disorders re-
quire a 2-hour session and Váyu/Kapha disorders only
require 1 hour. In these cases, the oil is applied first
and absorbed for a 100 to 300 count before massage
begins. These times should correspond with the fore-
head, chest, and armpits beginning to perspire. The
abhyañga is then over.
At the end of the session the client sits again while
their shoulders and back are massaged vigorously.
While this is happening, the oils are wiped off with a
towel.
If persons feel tired after receiving the abhyañga,
they may be lightly fanned, sprinkled with cold water;
then rest. Afterwards, the body is massaged, and the
excess oil is rubbed off with a towel. Fresh oil is then
applied to the body and head, and chick-pea flour
(besan) is sprinkled over the oil to remove the excess.
The head and body are then cleansed again of excess
oil by wiping off the flour. Persons then bathe in
lukewarm water (room temperature water for the
head) to wash off the flour. After bathing, they put on
clean clothes and drink a cup of ginger/ coriander
tea. If hungry, they may eat a light, boiled meal with
carminative herbs (e.g., turmeric, cardamom) for
Váyu and Kapha doßhas, or coriander and fennel for
Pitta doßhas.
Following káya seka, persons remain on this diet
for as many days as they have received treatment.
The number of abhyañgas depends upon the strength
of the person and the strength of the disease they have.
They may receive abhyañga daily, or on every second,
3rd, 4th, or 5th day; abhyañga requires 14 days for
one course of treatment.
3. Pinæa Sveda (Navarakizhi)
This is considered the most important of all the
Keralíyan methods. It is also used in traditional
pañcha karma. Pinæa sveda is a rejuvenation
technique that causes the entire body to perspire by
using medicinal puddings followed by abhyañga.
Pinæa sveda makes the body supple, and removes
stiffness, and swelling in the joints. It heals Váyu dis-
eases, clears obstructions, improves blood circula-
tion, removes wastes from the body, improves com-
plexion, increases Pitta, strengthens digestion, and
restores vigor. It also prevents excessive sleep while
promoting sound sleep. This therapy is very effec-
tive in healing disorders of the nervous system and
brain (e.g., paralysis, MS, chronic rheumatism, os-
teoarthritis, gout, muscle emaciation, and toxic
blood). It makes the entire body strong, sturdy, and
well developed. The senses are sharpened and the
aging process is slowed. Insomnia, high blood pres-
sure, diabetes, skin disorders, balding, premature
graying, and wrinkles are prevented. It is helpful for
all neuromuscular diseases and some systemic (whole
body) diseases.
In this procedure a warm bolus of medicated grain
is applied to the body. Snehana or body oil application
is a prerequisite for pinæa sveda. A cloth is tied around
the eyebrows to prevent oil from dripping into the
eyes.
PINÆA SVEDA BOLUS
Preparation of Decoction and Pudding: About 17.5
ounces of balá root (crushed chips) are poured into
two gallons of water and boiled until only 1/4 of the
water remains. This decoction is then strained, leav-
ing a 1/2 gallon quantity. One quart of this decoction
is mixed with one quart of cow’s milk. The other quart
is retained for later use. Next, about 17.5 ounces of
dehusked and crushed rice is added and cooked until
the decoction becomes a semisolid pudding
(páyasam).
Eight pieces of soft and strong cloth, about 15
square inches in size, are used to hold the pudding.
The pudding is divided equally into 8 portions and
placed in the cloths. The edges of the cloths are
wrapped together and tied with string.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
236
For Váyu diseases, some authorities suggest using
black gram, ghee, oil, porridge, or puddings. Pinæa
Kapha disorders can be done with barley or sand.
Pre-Pinæa sveda: Traditionally, persons giving
abhyañga offer some prayers and meditate before
beginning the therapy. Then, oil is applied over the
head and body of the client. Head oil is not very
greasy; body oil is greasy (medicated oils differ
according to illness). Oil application helps maintain
the uniformity of the heat of the pudding ball (bolus)
and protects the skin from sudden evaporation and
perspiration. Experimenting sudden cold or draft after
the treatment may cause various forms of respiratory
diseases.
A piece of cloth is tied around the eyebrows to
prevent oil from dripping into the eyes and irritating
them. A special abhyañga table is used, just like the
¤hiro dhárá table (see p. 239). Practitioners use a table
with or without legs; standing or squatting while
giving abhyañga. Four practitioners are required,
along with a supervisor and an attendant who heats
and replaces the boluses. All four practitioners need
to use the same degree of pressure when rubbing.
The atmosphere is quiet. Traditionally men do
abhyañga on men and women on women. All clothing
is removed except undershorts. The room is well
ventilated, with soothing lighting. Drafts, dust, and
direct sunlight are to be avoided.
Four bundles are removed from the simmering
liquid and left to cool for five minutes. The bolus is
held by the tuft in the right hand and placed on the
back of the left hand to check the temperature.
Method: The session always begins at the neck,
and the movement is always in the downward
direction. Two practitioners are on each side of the
person. Two persons work in simultaneous motion,
at the same temperature and pressure, from the neck
to the hip. The other 2 persons work in unison from the
hip to the soles of the feet. While the first 4 bundles are
used, the remaining 4 are kept heated in the decoction. As
the bundles cool, the attendant replaces them with the warm
ones and reheats the cool boluses. The attendant ensures
that no interruption during abhyañga occurs. The attendant
constantly replaces the practitioners’ cooled boluses with
warm bundles.
Persons receive Pinæa sveda in seven alternating
positions. Abhyañga continues for 15 minutes in each
position.
When the liquid in the bowl is used up, the bo-
luses are opened and the pudding is applied over the
body and rubbed for 5 minutes. It is then gently
scraped off with a blunt edge and the head is gently
wiped dry with a towel.
The head and body are then anointed with the ap-
propriate medicated oils (according to the nature of
the illness or doßha).
Post-Abhyañga: Next, the client takes a lukewarm
bath with the appropriate herbal decoction added to
the water. The head is not washed or submerged in
the bath water; water at room temperature is used to
wash the head. Chick-pea flour is rubbed on the body
and head to remove the excess oil.
After the bath, persons are wrapped in cotton or
wool and rest for about an hour (but do not sleep),
avoiding drafts, sun, noise, dust, cold, and smoke. At
this time persons are advised to medietate or men-
tally recite holy scriptures of their respective faiths.
After an hour, persons may eat a light meal.
g
nittis
.1
rie
ht
n
o
g
niyl
.5
k
c
a
b
n
o
g
niyl(
e
n
o
r
p
.2
)
k
c
a
b
s'e
n
o
tfel
rie
ht
n
o
g
niyl
.6
e
dis
rie
ht
n
o
g
niyl
.3
e
dis
th
gir
g
nittis
.7
tfel
rie
ht
n
o
g
niyl
.4
e
dis

Section 3: Therapies                            Kerala-Style Abhyañga                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 237
Depending upon the strength and nature of the
disorder persons are experiencing,
Pinæa sveda may be applied daily,
or on alternating days for
7, 9, 11, or 14 days.
Pinæa sveda is good for persons of all ages, but
caution is advised for those with heart diseases.
However, if boluses are applied with uniform
temperature, no adverse effects will develop.
Lepas
Medicinal Plasters
These methods are considered the most important
method to reduce inflammatory swellings. All plasters
are applied against the direction of the hair (i.e., in an
upward direction). Plasters are removed as soon as
they dry (except when drawing pus to a head). For a
further introduction to plasters, see the earlier
discussion under sudation on page 180.
Lepas can include a number of ingredients:
kußhóa, vachá, barley, oil, ámalakí, and mixed with
water. The consistency of lepas is semisolid, and is
neither too thin nor too thick.
If oil or ghee is included in the lepa, 1/4 the amount
of the herbs is added for Váyu doßha, 1/6 the amount
of herbs is used for Pitta lepas, and 1/8 the amount of
herbs is mixed for Kapha doßha.
Three forms of this procedure exist.
1. Pralepa: These pastes are thin and cold, and
have either absorbing or non-absorbing properties.
They restore deranged blood and Pitta.
2. Pradhena: These pastes are applied either thick
or thin, cold or warm. They have non-absorbing
properties. They reduce Váyu and Kapha excesses;
purify and heal ulcers; and reduce swelling and pain
(in either ulcerated or non-ulcer conditions).
3. Alepa/Átepanam: These pastes are applied over
ulcers. They are either arrestive or astringent. Results
include stopping local bleeding, softening ulcers,
withdrawing local bad flesh, stopping pus from forming
in ulcers, correcting doßhas, relieving Pitta-burning
sensations, Váyu aches and pains, severe itching caused
by Kapha, and cleansing the skin, blood and flesh.
The £hár´gadhar Saåhitá discusses these types
of lepas and their respective paste thickness.
An example of a lepa for all forms of edema
includes ingredients like punarnavá, cedar, and
ginger.
A da¤hmúl and milk plaster is useful for acute pain.
Ghee is added in plasters for Váyu rheumatism.
Unlike abhyañga oil, plaster is not reused.
Anna Lepa
When Pinæa Sveda is contraindicated or ineffective,
Anna Lepa is used. This Keralíyan therapy is not
merely contemporary treatment. Its use is discussed
in the ancient Áyurvedic texts, Charak Saåhitá and
Aßhþáñga H^idayam. Preparation of ingredients,
methods, and proportions for Anna Lepa are the same
a
p
e
L
ss
e
n
k
ci
h
T
.1
a
h
ß
o
D
g
nic
u
d
er-
(
a
n
h
g
a
h
ß
o
d
)
4/1
ilu
g
´
a
la
v
o
m
er
n
o
sio
P
.2
(
a
n
h
g
a
h
ßiv
)
3/1
ilu
g
´
a
(
cite
m
s
o
C
.3
a
y
ni^
a
v
a
p
ela
h
k
u
m
)
2/1
ilu
g
´
a

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
238
as for Pinæa Sveda; only medicated grains are used without
the oil application.
£hiro Lepa
The use of herbal pastes to treat brain disorders,
and head and neck diseases is also discussed in the
traditional Áyurveda texts, Charak Saåhitá, Aßhþáñga
H^idayam and Sußhruta Saåhitá. Herbs include
sandalwood, kußhóa, balá, musta, licorice, triphalá,
da¤hmúl, and are chosen according to the health con-
cern.
The procedure is simple. Medicated oil (e.g.,
bráhmí, bh^i´garáj, ámalakí) is applied to the hair
and scalp before the herbal paste is applied to the
hair (not on the forehead). It is removed from the
hair after 11/2 hours. Steam therapy is then applied to
the body. After ¤hiro lepa a lukewarm medicated bath
is given (as described under Pinæa sveda).
£hiro Lepa:
1. Oil is kept in hair for 11/2 hours 2.
Steam therapy 3. Lukewarm medi-
cated bath
£hiro Lepa is given either: 1.
Once
2. Alternating days or
daily for 1 week
Other forms of abhyañga exist in Kerala and
throughout India; there are too many to mention here.
Áyurveda, like most professions in India, is a family
tradition passed on from parent to child. Thus, many
methods are unique to each family.
£hiro Dhárá
(Hot Oil Flow On The Head Abhyañga)
Unique to Áyurveda is the hot oil flow on the head.
Warm oil poured on the forehead is one of the most
divine, relaxing therapies one can experience. ‘£hiro’
means head, and ‘dhárá’ means flow. When people
get up from this therapy, a healthy glow radiates from
their skin. People look 20 years younger. Eyes gleam
with tranquillity while lips wear a smile of serenity.
£hiro dhárá helps with diseases of the head, Práòa
Váyu, neck, eyes, ears, nose, throat, and nervous
system. It also relieves insomnia, asthma, cholesterol,
enlarged prostate, ulcers, rheumatism, etc., and is used
to heal difficult diseases like diabetes, schizophrenia,
and epilepsy. Various methods of ¤hiro dhárá exist.
The traditional approach includes giving the client a
short haircut and combing the hair. A modified version
is described here, taking into consideration modern
day practicalities of time and finances.
General Method: The client lies on an abhyañga table
or a specially built oil table which drains the excess
oil. The oil is held in a quart-sized bowl. A small
hole, a little less than 1/2 inch, is in the bottom-middle
of the bowl. A spigot might be attached to the bottom
of the bowl to more accurately control the oil flow.
The bowl material retains heat, so the oil does not
cool before it is poured on the client’s head. If the
bowl hangs over the client’s head, the therapist doesn’t
have to hold the bowl for the entire session (45
minutes, to 1 1/2 hours). Three holes must be in the
top of the bowl so that a chain or string can be used to
suspend the bowl from the ceiling or mobile stand.
The distance from the hole or spigot to the forehead
is 2 to 3 inches.
MODERN  £HIRO DHÁRÁ
}

Section 3: Therapies                            Kerala-Style Abhyañga                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 239
A traditional bowl was set up a little differently.
Inside the bowl, half a coconut shell was placed open-
side down. It too had a hole at its base. A string, about
6 finger-widths long was placed through the hole and
tied to a stick (2 to 3 inches wide). The other end of
the string was threaded through the hole in the bottom
of the bowl, and hung 2 to 3 inches above the person’s
forehead (see diagram to right).
Below the table was another wide-mouthed bowl
or pan to catch the oil that falls from the head after
being poured. Having a heater under this pan to keep
the oil warm may be useful if it will be reused during
the session.
The bowl is filled with enough warm oil to
continue the flow for an entire session. If this is not
possible, then one stops every so often to replace the
drained oil (oil is reheated if necessary before
reapplying).
1. HANDLE
Fourteen-day treatment: The first session lasts for
1 hour. From the 2nd day to the 7th day of the
treatment, 5 minutes are added to each session, with
a maximum time of 11/2 hours. From the 8th day
through the 14th day, the time is reduced by 5 minutes.
In this way the 14th session lasts for 1 hour again.
Twenty-one-day treatment: The 7th through 14th
Ideally, the client with a severe illness will be
vacationing at the Áyurvedic resort and receive daily
sessions for 7 to 14 days. Weekly sessions are useful
and sometimes more practical.
 day times are kept at 11/2 hours. Then, from he 15th
day on, the session is reduced by 5 additional minutes.
£hiro dhárá is usually never given more than 21 days.
It is believed that the medicated oil flow completely
affects the entire body in 21 days.
     Early morning is the best time for ¤hiro dhárá;
spring and fall are the best seasons for ¤hiro dhárá .
}
}
TRADITIONAL 
ÇHIRO DHÁRÁ
                BOWL
String or chain 
to hang bowl
Quart bowl 
            Oil
Coconut
String (6 inches)
2 - 3 inch oil drip 
               distance
TRADITIONAL ABHYAÑGA TABLE
                   2. HEAD AREA
                     3. HEAD OIL
                   DRAIN HOLE                         4. NECK
          REST
                   5. BODY AREA
6. OIL DRAIN

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
240
£hiro Dhárá:
A 14 - or 21-day series is ideal
Weekly or monthly sessions
are more practical Best
Time: Early morning Best
Seasons: Spring and fall
Procedure
£hiro dhárá is ideally practiced on auspicious
mornings (according to the Indian astrological
almanac—pañchang). It is best not to have eaten for
at least an hour before the therapy. The room should
be clean, quiet, have fresh air, and no drafts. Any
windows should have curtains to prevent sun glare
and to ensure privacy. Soft-colored lights, incense,
or aromas suitable for the client help create a healthy
and calming environment, even before the session
begins. Soft spiritual music, like classical Indian
ragas; can enhance the session. Ragas for each time
of the day exist to further harmonize the relaxation
and healing process.
Before therapy, the practitioners meditate,
preparing themselves to be effective healers. Clients
and practitioners practice mantra meditation during
the session to keep their minds spiritually focused.
Whether clients stay at an Áyurvedic resort for
several days or weeks, or make daily visits for çhiro
dhárá, they are advised to follow their Áyurvedic
lifestyle. Appropriate foods, baths, exercise, spiritual
studies, yoga, etc. are recommended. This further
balances one’s constitution and develops good habits.
Thus, persons feel the maximum healing effects and
find it easier to follow their program once they return
home.
Clients receiving weekly sessions, will find relief
from the stress and strain of their daily work
schedules. This is truly a constructive form of
pampering.
In a traditional session the client sits on the
massage table facing east. Room-temperature oil is
poured through the hair three times. Then, the body
is massaged below the neck (i.e., from the shoulders
down) with slightly warm oil. A cloth is placed or tied
over the eyes to prevent oil from leaking into them during
¤hiro dhárá.
Practitioner and client can meditate
before and during çhiro dhárá to bring
the highest spiritual energy into the
healing session
The client is supine on a massage table with a pillow
under their neck for comfort. Oil is released from the
bowl onto the forehead. Traditionally, oil is circled
on the third eye (just above and between the
eyebrows). Modern experience finds that many people
find this directed application too powerful. Thus, oil
must be moved around the entire forehead and
temples.
When the oil in the bowl (or funnel) runs out, it is
once again placed in the bowl and reused. If the oil is
cool, it can be reheated during the session or just after
the bowl is empty.
After the session is over, the client rests for a
few minutes on the table. The oil in the hair is pressed
into the scalp as its warmth further soothes the client.
Then a towel is placed over the head and the
practitioner helps the client sit up, making sure the
head is covered with the towel to prevent the oil from
dripping. The client is given a few minutes to adjust
to the seated position. Then, they are helped to stand
up. Sometimes they are so relaxed that they feel
disoriented upon standing, so helping up them is
important.
If the weather is cool—to avoid catching a cold—
a warm hat and scarf are worn when leaving the
session. It is best that for the remainder of the day the
client rest, taking light meals, and retire to bed early.
Head-Soaking
Oils £hiro Basti
£hiro basti, like ¤hiro dhárá, is another head oil
application. However, in this method the oil soaks on
the top of the head for some time. £hiro basti is useful
in healing facial paralysis, insomnia, dry mouth or

Section 3: Therapies                            Kerala-Style Abhyañga                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 241
nose; cataracts, headaches, and other head diseases. It
prevents and stops hair loss, balding, and premature
graying. This therapy also strengthens hair roots and makes
the hair soft and glossy, heals eye problems, improves
complexion and sinus disorders. £hiro basti balances the
air and fluid (Váyu and Kapha) in the space between the
brain and skull.
The head oil (dhárá drava) is prepared in differ-
ent ways for different situations. Basic oils listed be-
low are useful for ¤hiro dhárá as well.
Dry hair: Coconut and sesame oils.
Memory: bráhmí, ámalakí, bh^i´garáj oils. Young
Women: Black sesame, bh^i´garáj, ámalakí oils.
Women 40 to 50: Black sesame, wheat germ,
almond oils.
Women 50+: Black sesame, coconut, wheat germ,
sandalwood oils.
Newlyweds: Coconut, jasmine, almond, wheat-
germ oils.
Ear Pain: Mustard oil
Váyu: Sesame, coconut, canola, bráhmí oils
Pitta: Sunflower, coconut, bráhmí oils Kapha:
Canola, mustard oils
All: Sesame, bráhmí, bh^i´garáj, ámalakí oils
Many complicated formulations, such as takra
dhárá, kßhír dhárá, can be prepared. Since these prod-
ucts are scarce outside of India (and also for the sake
of simplicity), plain oil or any of the above-mentioned
medicated oils can be used.
Precaution: In some cases Váyu becomes aggravated
during extended treatments. To counter this, clients
receive a warm oil abhyañga followed by a warm
medicated bath.
Definition: Basti is defined as a bladder or container
that holds medicated herbs and oil. £hiro basti is
somewhat similar to ¤hiro dhárá in that the oil is
placed on the head. The differences are that in ¤hiro
basti, the oil is kept soaking on the head.
The bladder can be made of a flexible plastic, ap-
proximately 3 feet high. The circumference is wide
enough to fit around the head. Whole-grain flour is
mixed with warm water (2:1) and kneaded into dough.
It is used between the head and bladder to prevent
the oil from leaking. The dough is placed in a circle
parallel to ear level. A belt or rope is used to secure
the bladder to the head.
Method: After a person completes the appropriate
pañcha karma therapies, oleation and fomentation
are given. Next, the person sits on a stool or chair
(knee-height). The paste is applied to the head under
the cap to prevent the oil from leaking. The flour,
cap, and belt are placed on the head. The medicated
oil is heated to a lukewarm temperature and is then
placed in the bladder on the head. Oil should be about
six inches above the scalp (one finger width).
It remains on the head for about 2 hours, 45
minutes; 2 hours, 15 minutes; 1 hour, 40 minutes; or
until the mouth and nose begin to expel secretions
and clients feel relief from their symptoms. The length
of time the oil remains on the head varies according
to the doßha causing the disorder (Váyu, Pitta, Kapha
respectively).
For healthy persons who are merely receiving
preventive measures, oil remains on the head only
for approximately 17 minutes. The therapy lasts no
more than 7 days.
(
Oil Funnel
Basti)
Belt or rope
Flour Paste
under basti
ÇHIRO BASTI

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
242
£hiro Basti Duration
The oil is taken out of the cap, the belt is
removed; then the cap and paste are taken off. The
head, neck, shoulders, and back then are rubbed
gently. Afterwards, persons take a lukewarm bath. A
wholesome diet according to one’s constitution is
then taken. £hiro basti is repeated daily for three,
five, or seven days.
Post £hiro Basti:
1. Gently rub head, neck shoulders, back 2.
Lukewarm Bath
£hiro Basti:
Taken daily for 3, 5, or 7 days
Head Oil
Múrdha Taila
The Benefits of head-oil therapies include
preventing and healing hair loss, graying, and hair
matting, cracking of the scalp, Váyu head disorders;
producing sharpness of the senses, improving the
strength of the voice, lower jaw, and the head. Two
other methods of applying oil to the head are worth
mentioning:
1. Pouring oil in a continuous stream
(pariäheka) removes scalp ulceration and boils,
burning sensations, and wounds.
2. Wrapping a cloth over the head and soaking in
oil (picu) prevents hair loss, cracking of the scalp,
and burning sensations.
Ear-Oil
(Karna Púrana)
This procedure involves placing oil into the ears.
Some authorities suggest 1 to 2 drops. Others suggest
filling the entire ear cavity with oil. Ear oil heals
disorders of the sense organs such as earaches or pain,
deafness, ringing in the ear, all ear diseases and
headaches; lockjaw, giddiness, twisted (wry neck),
and diseases of the gums and teeth. Certain nerves
connect the eyes and ears with the feet. Thus, this
treatment also relieves burning sensations in the feet.
Karna púrana is done during the day, before meals.
Karna Púrana
is done before meals
Method: Lukewarm sesame oil or medicated oil is
poured in the ear canals, filling them up. Oil remains
in the ears for 10 to 20 minutes. For preventive care,
oil remains in the ear for about 17 minutes. For ear
pain, the root of ears can be massaged until the pain
subsides.
Ear (and eye) therapies always begin with the right
side. A tissue is kept nearby to wipe up any dripping
oil. Clients first lie on their left side while the oil is
poured into their right ear.
e
s
a
e
si
D
e
m
i
T
u
y
á
V
sr
u
o
h
5
4.2
tu
o
b
a
d
o
ol
B
/atti
P
sr
u
o
h
3.2
tu
o
b
a
a
h
p
a
K
sr
u
o
h
3.1
re
v
o
ts
uj
y
htla
e
H
s
etu
ni
m
7
1

Section 3: Therapies                            Kerala-Style Abhyañga                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 243
After the process is complete, a small bowl or cup
is placed behind the ear to catch the oil as it comes
out. The client slowly turns their head to the right
and the oil pours out of the ear and into the cup. They
may then roll onto their back in order for the
remaining oil to be released. A tissue is placed on the
ear to prevent any excess oil from dripping. The
process is then performed on the left ear.
Eye Therapy
(Áßhcotana - Anjana Vidhi)
(Also discussed in Chapter 19)
Áyurveda employs eye drops and eye salves for
prevention and healing diseases of the eyes, like
bleeding, itching, tearing, burning sensation and
redness.
Eye drops: (Áßhcotana) are warm for Váyu
diseases, lukewarm for Kapha disorders, and cold for
Pitta ailments. The person lies on a bed in a draftless
room. Their eyes are opened with the practitioner’s
left hand, while the liquid is dropped in the eye with
the right hand. Ten to 12 drops are placed in the eye
from a distance of 2 finger widths from the inner angle
of the eye.
A soft, clean cloth is placed over the eyes for a
few minutes (a warm cloth is used for Váyu and
Kapha disorders).
Eye salve: (Anjana) is used after a person has
undergone pañcha karma, and the illness is localized
only in the eyes, when diseases are matured, such as
in edema, severe itching, sliminess, and thick
excretions.
Three types of anjana exist:
1. Scraping (lekhana) using astringent, sour,
salty, and pungent tastes
2. Healing (ropana) with bitter tastes
3. Vision clearing (prasádana) using sweet
tastes
Time: The recommended time for salves is
morning or evening. Application is not recommended
before evening sleep, at noon, and when the sun
irritates the eyes—because it increases the illness and
spreads it elsewhere. For Kapha diseases that require
scraping eye salve, daytime application is acceptable
if it is not too hot a day. During very cold weather,
night application will further aggravate the illness.
Precautions: Anjana is not used on those suffering
from fear, after emesis and purgation, when hungry,
when having the urge to urinate or defecate; when
angry, when feverish, or when the eyes are tired. It is
also not used with a headache, when experiencing
grief and insomnia; when cloudy, after smoking, when
drinking alcohol, or just after washing hair. Anjana
is not suggested with indigestion, when tired due to
excess exposure to fire or sun, just after day naps, or
when thirsty. This therapy may bring up strong
emotional issues.
Post-Application: Eyeballs are gently and briefly
rubbed and slowly rotated up. The eyelids are also
gently massaged. This is to spread the salve
throughout the eye. It is not recommended to open,
close, squeeze, or wash eyelids. When the salve no
longer has an effect, the eyes are washed (water
temperature is according to the disease, doßha and
season). This removes the disease cleansed from the
salve. The left eyelid is lifted and held with a piece of
clean cloth in the fingers of the practitioner’s right
hand, and vice versa. If there is itching or a lack of
results from the salve, a stronger salve or strong smoke
inhalation is used. Persons are strongly advised to
rest in a darkened room for at least one hour before
exposure to light and activity.
Eye-Bath (Netra Basti)
(Also discussed in Chapter 19)
This therapy involves washing the eyes with
medicated oils or ghee. Benefits include relieving
tension in the eye sockets that may lead to loss of
vision, pain, fatigue, glaucoma, cross-eye,
conjunctivitis, night blindness, cornea inflammation,
sunken eyes, and other eye disorders. Further, it
nourishes the nervous system, brain, memory, and

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
244
develops one’s linguistic abilities. It makes the eyes
lustrous, removes wrinkles, improves complexion,
reduces physical tension.
Method: Dough is prepared using flour and water
(2:1). The dough is made into two rings to fit around
the eyes, 11/2 inches in height. One half cup of luke-
warm ghee is kept warm nearby. Oleation and fo-
mentation of the face are done in advance. The lights
are dimmed so as not to disturb the session. Next, the
temperature of the ghee is tested (several drops may
be placed on the wrist, or a finger is swirled in the
ghee). Ghee should be lukewarm. The dough dam is
placed around the eyes, the base pressed onto the face
to prevent oil from leaking. A little ghee is then poured
into the dough-dam (around the eyes) while eyes are
closed. If the temperature is comfortable, the remain-
ing oil is poured into the dam until it covers the eye-
lashes. Eyes are then opened when comfortable (ini-
tially it may take some time adjusting to the liquid).
The eyes may be slowly rotated clockwise, counter-
clockwise or moved in the 8 compass directions.
Dough
Some authorities suggest that the ghee be kept in the
eye for 20 minutes. Others say that for Váyu disorders
it is kept in for 6 minutes. For Pitta disorders and
healthy persons oil remains in the eye for 31/2 minutes
and only for 2 minutes, 45 seconds for Kapha
diseases. Afterwards, persons need to rest for 1 to 2
hours in a dark room. When going outside, if it is
bright sunglasses should be worn.
If netra basti is overdone, one experiences itching
and Kapha disorders. This therapy can cause strong
emotional releases. It is not advised for those with
emotional disorders.
Lower Back Bath
(Katti Basti)
The main benefits of this therapy are for muscle
spasms and lower spin rigidity, and strengthening the
bone tissue of the lower back. The same method of
preparing dough as in the eye bath is used here. Place-
ment of the dough dam is however around the spine
of the lower back.
Chest/Heart Bath
(Uro Basti)
This therapy strengthens the heart and reduces
sternum pain. Again, the dough dam is prepared in
the same manner as the eye bath. The dam is placed
over the heart (left breast)
Body Powder-Rub
(Udgharßhana)
Herbal powders may be applied to the body to
promote healing. They heal itching, Váyu disor-
Dough Dam
Ghee in 
dam &
eyes
Ghee dropped
into dam
n
oiti
d
n
o
C
e
y
E
h
t
a
B
e
y
E
f
o
h
t
g
n
e
L
sre
d
r
o
sid
dile
y
e
s
d
n
o
c
e
s
0
3
s
elcric
tnioj
e
y
e
s
d
n
o
c
e
s
5
9
s
elcric
etih
w
s
etu
ni
m
2/1
3
s
elcric
k
c
alb
s
etu
ni
m
4
sre
d
r
o
sid
e
vitc
arfer
s
etu
ni
m
2/1
4
a
m
o
c
u
alg
s
d
n
o
c
e
s
5
,s
etu
ni
m
5
sre
d
r
o
sid
u
y
á
V
ylia
d
e
n
o
d
sre
d
r
o
sid
atti
P
s
y
a
d
eta
n
retla
s
e
y
e
y
htla
e
h/
a
h
p
a
K
s
y
a
d
o
w
t
y
re
v
e
e
n
o
d

Section 3: Therapies                            Kerala-Style Abhyañga                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 245
ders, hives, and develop a stable, light body. Rub-
bing the skin after water is sprinkled on the body
removes dirt, opens the sweat glands, and activates
the enzymes in the skin. Afterwards, water is again
sprinkled on the body and the skin rubbed to
remove the powder.
Áyurvedic Foot Massage
Pádábhyañga
Abhyañga applied to the feet is a simple, enjoy-
able and healthy thing to do. It prevents dryness,
cracks, and roughness of the skin; numbness, fatigue,
sciatica, cramps; and contraction of ligaments, ves-
sels, and muscles of the feet and legs. It removes Váyu
from the body, promotes sturdy limbs and feet,
strength for walking, and sound sleep. Further, nerves
from all the organs in the head and body terminate in
the feet (also in the hands, ears, and head). Thus, by
rubbing the feet, persons tone the whole body. A close
relationship exists between the feet, eyes, and ears.
Foot abhyañga helps heal and prevent disorders of
hearing and sight. Four important nerves in the soles
are connected to the head. Constant friction and pres-
sure on the nerves in the soles reduce eye sight.
Abhyañga on a daily basis, or at least several times a
week, restores health to these nerves. It is best done
before bedtime, rubbing the soles and tops of the feet
with some warm sesame oil. This also fosters sound
sleep.
General Suggestions
After all abhyañgas, clients are advised to rest for
1 to 2 hours before returning home. It is best if an-
other person drives them home to avoid the stress of
driving. If this is not possible, then when reaching
home, they rest. Light meals and rest are advised for
the remainder of the day. An early bedtime that
evening is strongly suggested. Some people find
abhyañga so relaxing that they sleep through the next
day, releasing deep-seated stresses.
As discussed earlier in this section, persons with
emotional problems may find the abhyañgas too pow-
erful. Therefore, it is advised to achieve mental bal-
ance slowly through herbs, foods, aromas, colors, and,
if needed, professional counseling.
Doßha Beauty Care
Facial Abhyañga
Depending upon one’s doßha different facial
oils are used.
For various skin disorders, essential oils may be
used, see the “Doßha Marma Oil” chart (page 232)
in this chapter, and Chapter 8 on Aromatherapy.
Face Care
Miscellaneous Skin Care
a
h
ß
o
D
sli
O
u
y
á
V
o
d
a
c
o
v
a
,e
m
a
s
e
s
,e
e
h
g
atti
P
,re
w
olffa
s
,tu
n
o
c
o
c
re
w
olf
n
u
s
a
h
p
a
K
e
vilo
,d
n
o
m
la
,alo
n
a
c
cih
ß
o
dir
T
d
n
o
m
la
,a
b
ojoj
,e
m
a
s
e
s
s
n
oiti
d
n
o
C
s
e
r
u
t
xi
M
li
O
lait
n
e
ss
E
s
elk
nir
W
,e
s
o
r
,re
d
n
e
v
al
,le
n
n
ef
ss
er
p
y
c
,e
s
n
e
c
nik
n
arf
e
n
c
A
a
et
,ss
er
p
y
c
,re
pin
uj
,to
m
a
g
re
b
re
d
n
e
v
al
,e
ert
s
n
oiti
d
n
o
C
y
p
a
r
e
h
T
era
c
e
y
E
laja
k
,ála
h
pirt
s
k
ra
m
h
ctert
S
lio
d
n
o
m
la

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
246
Cosmetic Plasters
(Varòya Lepa)
To improve complexion and color, medicated
herbal pastes are applied to the skin. The applied paste
is 1/2 a´guli (1/2 one’s finger width).
Complexion, pigmented patches on face: Red
sandalwood, mañjißhóhá. kußhóa.
Acne: Coriander, vachá, black pepper
Dandruff: Kußhóa, licorice, rock salt, mixed
into a paste with honey.
Facial Hair: Excess Pitta unbalances the hormones.
A mixture of a¤hok, fennel, ¤hatávarí, cardamom,
triphalá, rock candy are taken internally, and
sandalwood and multani methi clay are mixed with
water to form a lepa for the face. The lepa is left on
from 4 hours to overnight (2 times weekly). Hot spices
and steroids aggravate this condition.
Properties of Paste Liquids
Ghee: PV- K (neutral). Unctuous/Cool
Uses: It promotes taste, semen, and ojas, alleviates
burning, develops a soft body, voice, and complexion;
and strengthens the metabolism and digestion. Ghee
improves the voice and complexion, and has a special
property of transporting herbal properties to all the
dhátus (tissues).
Oil:
Uses: Oils promote strength, health, and a stable body.
They improve the skin and cleanse the urogenital tract
(especially for females).
Sesame Oil V- KP+ in excess
It gives strength, intelligence, digestive power, helps
the skin, and has antioxidant properties. When taken
with the appropriate herbs, it heals all disorders.
Castor Oil: Sweet, astringent-hot P+
Castor is a digestive stimulant and a purgative. It helps
with obstructed abdominal diseases, gas, tumors, stiff
lumbar region, colic pain, ulcers, edema, áma,
abscesses, clears vagina and semen.
Coconut Oil: Sweet-cold-sweet VP- K+
This oil is best for Pitta doähas, nourishing and soft-
ening the skin. It is useful for inflammatory skin con-
ditions, psoriasis, eczema, sunburn, burns, rosacea.
[Sample skin oil: coconut oil 100 ml.; almond oil 50
ml.; sandalwood oil 5 ml.]
Milk (Dugdha): VP- K+ Sweet/Cold; unctuous Uses:
(Cow’s) Milk is best when it is organic and raw (if
possible). It gives rejuvenation, strength, intelligence,
and ojas. Milk heals semen and blood diseases, dif-
ficult or painful breathing; consumption, hemor-
rhoids, complexion, and giddiness. It is considered
holy (sattwic).
Goat Milk: Light
This form of milk is better for Kapha doßhas. It is
a digestive stimulant, heals hemorrhoids, diarrhea,
menorrhagia, toxic blood, giddiness, and fever. Some
say it heals all diseases.
Yogurt/Curd (Dadhi): V- PK, Blood+ Astringent/Hot/
Pungent unctuous. Again, organic yogurt is advised.
Uses: This is a digestive stimulant and gives strength.
It heals dysuria, coryza, diarrhea, anorexia,
emaciation, and coldness in the body.
Sweet yogurt reduces Váyu and Pitta. Sour yogurt
increases Pitta, Kapha, and blood toxins. Very sour
yogurt causes bleeding disorders. Sweet and sour
yogurt has mixed effects.
Water: P- Cold
Uses: It is a cardiac tonic, heals poisoning, giddiness,
burning, indigestion, exhaustion, vomiting (cold),
intoxication, fainting, and alcoholism.
Liquid, Paste and Oil Preparation
The general formula for mixing these three
ingredients is,
1 part paste (herb powder)
4 part oil
16 parts liquid (e.g., milk, decoction, herb
juice, water)
For decoctions, paste is 1/6 its quantity.
For plant juice, paste is 1/8 its quantity.
When a recipe calls for 4 or fewer liquids, the
amount of each is 4 times that of the oil.
When there are more than 4 liquids in a recipe,
then each is in equal proportion to the oil.

Section 3: Therapies                            Kerala-Style Abhyañga                     Chapter 7: Pañcha Karma
 247
Preparation: The herbal paste and liquid are mixed
together; then oil is added and the entire mixture is
boiled. As it is cooked, the mixture is constantly stirred
to prevent paste from sticking to the bottom of the
pot.
Áyurvedic Beauty Suggested Reading
Kußhi A, Tawari M. Diet for Natural Beauty.
     New York, NY: Japan Publications; 1991.
Murthy KRS. (transl.) £hár´gadhar Saåhita.
    Varanasi, India: Chaukhambha Orientalia;
     1984 [Section 3; Ch. 11].
Sachs M. Áyurvedic Beauty Care. Twin Lakes,
     WI: Lotus Press; 1994.
Pañcha Karma Suggested Reading
Bhishagratna KL. (transl.) Sußhrut Saåhita. Varanasi,
     India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series; 1991.
Dash B. Abhyañga Therapy in Áyurveda. New Delhi,
     India: Concept Publishing ;1992.
Devaraj TL. The Pañchakarma Treatment of
     Áyurveda. Bangalore, India: Dhanwantari Orien
     tal Publications; 1986.
Institute for Wholistic Education. Marma Point
    Therapy [video]. Twin Lakes, WI: 1989.
Govindan SV. Massage for Health and Healing.
      New Delhi, India: Abhinav Publications; 1996
Gray H. Gray’s Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA:
      Running Press; 1974.
Guyton A. Textbook of Medical Physiology.
     Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Co.; 1981.
Johari H. Ancient Indian Abhyañga. New Delhi,
     India: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers:1988.
Joshi SV. Áyurveda & Pañcha Karma. Twin Lakes,
     WI: Lotus Press; 1997.
Merck Manual. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research
     Laboratories; 1992.
Murthy KRS (transl.) Aßhóáñga H^idayam. Varanasi,
     India: K^ißhòadas Acadamey; 1991.
Murthy KRS. (transl.) £hár´gadhar Saåhita.
     Varanasi, India: Chaukhambha Orientalia; 1984.
Ranade S. Natural Healing Through Áyurveda.
   Salt Lake City, Utah: Passage Press; 1993.
Sharma RK, Dash B. Charak Saåhita. (editors)
  Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit
      Series; 1992.
Singh RH. Pañcha Karma Therapy. Varanasi, India:
      Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series; 1992.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
248

Section 3: Therapeutics
                             Chapter 8: Aromatherapy
 249
As bubbles and foam
are non-existent without water
This world is non-existent
without eternal Divinity (Brahman).
                                             Vedic saying
Chapter 8
Aromatherapy
s mentioned earlier, Áyurveda’s main
therapy is herbal, with a secondary empha-
sis on  good or nutrition. These therapies
work predominantly on the gross or outer physi-
cal level. Aroma therapy, gem therapy, color, and
mantra (or sound) therapies work on a more subtle
level, healing through the mind, the senses, and
the absorption of subtle impressions.
Aromas
     Pure fragrances are used for healing. Aromas
are commonly used in the forms of incense flower
essences, and essential oils. Other methods of
aromatherapy include pure scented candles, soaps,
and sachets. Aromas are most effective when pure
(i.e., not diluted with chemical substances). They
are used externally, and unless mixed with a dilut-
ing or base oil, some oils burn the skin. If taken
internally, the mucus membranes would be harmed.
They should not be placed too close to the eyes or
any bodily orifice. A suggested base oil for each
doßha is provided in the table below.
     A generally accepted ratio of essential oil to
base oil is the following:
25 ml. (12-13) drops: 1 fluid ounce base oil
     It is especially useful to place drops of oil on
various body sites: the crown, third eye, temples
(for headaches), at the root of the nose (for sinus
problems), or at the heart. Oils are more practical
to use while in the company of others who may
not like to breathe any kind of smoke (e.g., at the
office).
Áyurvedic Marma Points
     These are specific sites on the body that bal-
ance the doßhas and their associated health situa-
tions when oils are applied to them. Marmas were
discussed in detail in the last chapter. To summa-
rize, the main marma points for each doßha are
given in the table below.
Steam/Sweat Therapy
     Aromatic oils are used in these therapies as well,
being directed at specific sites (e.g., arthritis in the
hands).
     Aromas balance the three humors and práòa,
ojas, and tejas. Below is a list of commonly used
essential oils:
a
h
ä
o
D
li
O
e
s
a
B
u
y
á
V
e
m
a
s
e
s
atti
P
re
w
olf
n
u
s
r
o
tu
n
o
c
o
c
a
h
p
a
K
d
rats
u
m
r
o
alo
n
a
c
a
h
ä
o
D
n
ia
M
a
m
r
a
M
u
y
á
V
n
e
e
w
te
b
(
e
y
e
d
riht
)s
w
o
r
b
e
y
e
atti
P
)retn
e
c
ts
e
h
c(
ar
k
a
h
c
tra
e
h
a
h
p
a
K
d
n
a
le
v
a
n
e
ht
n
e
e
w
te
b
e
n
o
b
cib
u
p

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
250
Primary Oils
Aromatic oils have the same properties as the herb
and plant.
Basil: (Tulsí) VK- P +
Uses: Cleanses mind, phlegm, colon, purifies air,
reduces fever and viruses, removes Apána Váyu
(downward air), increases devotion and intuition
Camphor: (Karpúr) VK- P+
Uses: Opens the mind, senses, lungs, increases
perception and meditation, alleviates headaches
and arthritis, can be used for púja (devotional
ritual), calms hysteria, neuralgia, and other ner-
vous ailments; insect repellent. External—sprains,
inflammations, rheumatism. Precaution—large
doses are toxic
Cedar: (Devadaru) (Juniper - Hapußha) VK- P+
Uses: Diabetes, arthritis, edema, air cleanser
Eucalyptus: VK- P+
Uses: Opens the mind, senses, lungs, removes
phlegm and alleviates depression, cleanses nega-
tive psychic thoughts
Frankincense: (Kapitthaparni) VK- P+
Uses: Heart, head, blood, and nerve cleanser; pain
reliever, strengthens joints, calms mind, increases
faith, virtue, detachment, and devotion, removes
negative psychic thoughts
Gardenia: P- (VK+ in excess)
Uses: Cleanses the blood, kidneys, heart, fevers,
and infections (including uterine)
Ginger: (Sunta) VK- P+
Uses: Colds, flus, headache, lung congestion, joint
and muscle pain, improves pulse and appetite, en-
hances joy and creativity
Iris: P- VK+
Uses: Cleanses the blood, lymphatic, liver, heals
infections, helps remove jealousy, envy, anger, and
hate
Jasmine: (Mallika) P- K+ (V+ in excess)
Uses: Heals breast and uterine infections, also heals
cancer (especially lymph),  strengthens a woman’s
reproductive system and makes her more attrac-
tive; removes depression (P+ men)
Lavender: (Dharu - H) VPK=
Uses: Calms emotions and nerves (good for hy-
peractive children), PMS
Lily: (Kumuda) VP- (K+ in excess)
Uses: Calms heart, nerves, and emotions (irrita-
bility, anxiety, insomnia), dry cough, tonic for
stomach and lungs, increases faith, devotion, and
virtue
Lotus: (Padma, £hatapatra) VPK=
Uses: Calms mind and heart, effects deep sleep,
increases love, faith, devotion, compassion, builds
ojas (i.e., strengthens the reproductive system and
nerves), is antiallergenic, calms nerves, relieves
spasms. It is the symbol of Self-Realization
Mint: (Peppermint: Paparminta- H;
Spearmint: Pahadi pudina - H) VPK=
Uses: Clears mind, head, and sinuses
Musk: (Kasturi) VK- P+
Uses: Revives those who are comatose or near col-
lapse, strengthens heart and reproductive system,
awakens senses, is the most rajasic oil
Myrrh: (Bola) VK- P+
Uses: Blood cleanser, relieves infections, decreases
tumors, strengthens bones, heart, uterus, and
nerves; reduces excess fat, helps tissue healing
Patchouli: (Pacholi - H) VK- P+
Actions: Stimulant, diaphoretic, expectorant, di-
uretic, carminative
Uses: Cleanses digestive system, stimulates senses,
gives joy (removes depression), is especially good
for Kapha. Externally—insecticide (moths, ants,
gnats, flies, mosquitoes)

Section 3: Therapeutics
                             Chapter 8: Aromatherapy
 251
Rose: (Rudhrapußhpa, Japa) (flower of the
heart) P- VK+
Uses: Eye tonic (as rose water), increases love,
compassion, devotion, acts as female reproductive
tonic, urogenital tract, fevers, cough
Rosemary: PK- V+
Uses: Blood, heart, circulatory system, tonic, helps
headaches and emotional tension, promotes men-
struation
Sandalwood: (Chandan) (best aroma for the
mind) VP- K+ in excess Sattwic
Uses: Heart and lung tonic, cleanses kidneys, re-
duces fever, irritability, and anxiety; promotes
meditation
Áyurvedic Aromatherapy
As mentioned above, essential oils must be mixed
in base oils before application to the skin.
Aches & Pains
Oils: Myrrh, cinnamon, mahánáráyan
Base: Rubbing alcohol, beeswax (mahánáráyan oil
is mixed with sesame oil)
Uses: Headaches, neuralgia, arthritis
Antibacterial
Oils: Sandalwood, myrrh, jasmine, gardenia, iris
Uses: Cools blood, fevers, infections; builds the
immune system, removes thirst and delirium
Congestion
Oils: Eucalyptus, sage, basil, mint
Base: Alcohol
Uses: Near nose, or inhaling as steam
Digestive Aids
Oils: Cardamom, cloves, fennel, ginger
Uses: Promotes agni/digestion
Digestive Stimulants
Oils: Cardamom, cloves, fennel, ginger
Uses: Promotes agni/digestion
Gynecological Disorders
Oils: Rose, rosemary
Uses: Regulates menstruation (apply to problem
site, or soak in an aroma-bath)
Immune Functions
Oils: Myrrh, frankincense, rose, lotus
Uses: Strengthens immune system, build ojas,
(external infections)
Infections
Oils: Eucalyptus, cedar
Uses: Parasites, repel insects/insect bites, cleanses
the skin, air, and aura
Rejuvenatives (Rasáyanás)
Oils & Uses:
frankincense—blood and brain
guggul—brain and bones
myrrh—blood, heart, uterus
rose—heart and uterus
lily—heart and brain
sandalwood—nerves and brain
lotus—heart and reproductive system
gardenia and sandalwood—kidneys
basil—nerves and lungs
gardenia and iris—liver
Soothing
Oils: Sandalwood, rose, lotus, lily, lavender,
frankincense
Uses: Calming, prevent negative dreams, worry
and agitation, insomnia
Aroma Therapy & The Three Doßhas
     Aromas can be derived from essential oils, in-
cense, soaps, or sachets. Some examples follow.
Doßha Oils
Váyu: Mix musk, frankincense, basil, camphor, or
cinnamon with sandalwood or rose
Pitta: Sandalwood, rose, lotus, iris, gardenia, lily,
lavender, honeysuckle

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
252
Kapha: Cinnamon, musk, sage, cedar, frankin-
cense, myrrh
Aromatherapy & Specific Uses
(All oils are diluted as recommended in the previ-
ous section)
Acne: Camphor, eucalyptus, lavender; applied at
night (12 drops cypress to 12 drops lemon in 2 fl
oz. (50 ml.) coconut oil or bráhmí oil)
Air Purification: Camphor, frankincense, basil,
sandalwood, lavender
Athletes Foot: Lavender—2 drops massaged into
feet; tea tree oil also works but has less pleasant
odor. For verruca (wart-like), lavender, eucalyp-
tus, rosemary, or camphor is applied several times
daily
Burns: Lavender
Depression: Ylang-ylang, clary sage, jasmine
Earache: Lavender, 1 drop placed on a cotton ball
and applied to the outer ear
Fainting: Peppermint, rosemary, wafted under
patient’s nose
Feet: Baths: Use 5 drops peppermint oil to one
lukewarm bowl of water
Gums: Sesame oil
Headache: Lavender on muscles at back of neck,
on temples, forehead etc., sick headaches—use of
peppermint oil, sniffed frequently, may help; also
sandalwood, calamus, guggul, lily, frankincense;
sometimes just taking a nap or going to sleep early
helps—a drop of oil may be put on the pillow
Hemorrhoids: Cypress oil: 5 drops in a bowl of
warm water or bath, mix well as ‘sitz’
Hypertension: Lavender, myrrh, frankincense, saf-
fron, rose, sandalwood, lotus, lily
Mouth Ulcers: Myrrh, drop of oil
Nausea: Lavender, rose, geranium: a few drops in
a bowl of hot water
Post Partum: Perineum Healing: (Especially if epi-
siotomy was torn): Sitz bath: 2 drops cypress to 3
drops lavender in large bowl of warm water or shal-
low bath water. Cypress, with its constricting prop-
erties, is an astringent that closes the raw blood
vessels. Lavender heals and gently encourages new
skin growth, while protecting raw areas.
Sore Nipples: Diluted rose oil, but wash off com-
pletely before each feeding so no harm will come
to the baby during breast-feeding; 1 drop rose oil
to 3/4 fluid ounce sweet almond oil (20 ml.).
Post-Natal Depression: It is believed to be a hor-
monal adjustment; jasmine bath; jasmine
drop on the pillow edge; Ylang-ylang or clary sage
are secondary substitutes.
Lactation: Two drops fennel oil in honey water
every 2 hours increases milk flow. (Herbs are also
ingested in this case, including ¤hatávarí, balá, and
fennel.)
Mastitis: (Breast inflammation) compress 1 drop
geranium, 1 drop lavender, 2 drops rose in 11/2
pints (850 ml.) cold water.
Fatigue: Morning: Rosemary baths; naps, oil mas-
sage with rejuvenatives mentioned above.
Sore throat/Laryngitis: Two to three drops in honey
water every few hours
Sunburn: Lavender or peppermint oil bath, or mist
Toothache: Clove, peppermint, prickly ash
Weight loss: Juniper oil in bath once a week, if
depression is the cause of overeating, see above
Pregnancy:
Stretch Marks: Twice daily breast and belly mas-
sage; 20 drops lavender to 2 fl. oz. wheat germ oil
Labor Pain: Hand-hot compress massage to lower
abdomen as needed; 14 drops clary sage; 5 drops
rose; 6 drops ylang ylang in 2 fl oz. sunflower oil
Heartburn: Sandalwood applied to belly or ingest-
ing one drop with a spoon of sunflower oil
Constipation: Twenty drops marjoram; 5 drops
rose; 2 fl oz. sesame oil
Conversions:
1 ml. = 20 drops/5 ml. = 1 teaspoon

Section 3: Therapeutics
                             Chapter 8: Aromatherapy
 253
Suggested Reading on Aromatherapy
Davis P. Aromatherapy A-Z. Essex, England: C.W.
     Daniel Ltd.; 1988.
Frawley D. Áyurveda Certification Course. Santa
     Fe, NM: American Institute of Vedic Studies;
     1995.
Miller L, Miller B. Áyurveda and Aromatherapy.
Aromas and Chakras
Refer to Chapter 7 for doßha-specific aromas and for chakra locations
     Twin Lakes, WI: Lotus Press; 1995.
Nadkarni AK. Indian Materia Medica. Bombay,
     India: Popular Prakashan; 1993.
Tisserand M. Aromatherapy for Women. Roches-
     ter, VT: Healing Arts Press; 1988.
Tisserand R. Aromatherapy to Heal and Tend the
     Body. Santa Fe, NM: Lotus Press; 1988.
a
r
k
a
h
C
li
O
n
w
o
rc
-
7
h
rr
y
m
,e
s
n
e
c
nik
n
arf
,d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
e
y
e
d
riht
-
6
,re
d
n
e
v
al
,lis
a
b
,d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
s
utp
yla
c
u
e
,e
ni
m
s
aj
ta
o
r
ht
-
5
e
ert
a
et
,d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
tra
e
h
-
4
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
,re
d
n
e
v
al
,e
s
o
R
s
u
x
elp
ralo
s
-
3
le
n
n
ef
,re
d
n
e
v
al
,d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
nio
r
g
-
2
ilu
o
h
cta
p
,g
n
aly
g
n
aly
,e
g
a
s
,ra
d
e
C
e
s
a
b
-
1
re
vite
v
,re
g
ni
G

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
254

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 255
Chapter 9
Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
Chapter Overview
Part 1
Haóha Yoga (gentle stretching exercises)...................................p. 257
Part 2
Práòáyáma (breathing exercises) and Náda (inner sound)..........p. 280
Práòáyáma and Kumbhaka (breath retention).............................p. 284
Part 3
Bandhas (energy locks)...............................................................p. 291
Mudrás (hand positions)..............................................................p. 296
Part 4
Yoga for Pregnancy......................................................................p. 298
Part 5
Post-Partum Yoga.........................................................................p. 301
Part 6
Yoga for Children.........................................................................p. 304
Part 7
Yoga for the Office.......................................................................p. 305
Part 8
Yoga for the Elderly and Physically Challenged..........................p. 308
Part 9
Yoga for Digestive Disorders.......................................................p. 309
Part 10
Medical Definitions......................................................................p. 310
Suggested Reading.......................................................................p. 311

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
256

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 257
A plate, cup, and bowl are all made from the same clay.
Like that, all of creation is made from the same eternal Brahman
  Upaniähadic wisdom
Chapter 9
Hatha Yoga, Práòáyama,  Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
rom the ancient Vedic literature, four texts
on yoga ásanas (postures) are the most
respected: Haóha Yoga Pradípiká,
Gorakäha Saåhitá, Gherand Saåhitá, and
Hataratnavali. These scriptures were written between
the 6th century, when haóha yoga and práòáyáma
began to emerge in India, and the 15th century A.D.
This chapter correlates the information in these books
with Áyurvedic physical and spiritual benefits.
Many approaches to yoga ásanas exist. Three well
known methods are haóha, kuòæaliní, and aähóáñga.
This chapter discusses and integrates these three yoga
methods.
Interestingly, haóha yoga was also found in pre-
Colombian culture—not just confined to India. In St.
Augustine, Columbia, ancient stone statues of people
in yoga postures still exist today.
General Information
The underlying ideas to practicing yoga are the
following:
Be gentle, do not force any posture
Forcing is against nature.
Feel complete at whatever stage of the position one
can attain.
Completeness or union is the goal,
not physical perfection of any posture
Yoga ásanas have three purposes. First they can
be used as a means to prepare the student (along with
práòáyáma breathing) for advanced spiritual practices
like mantra sádhaná (meditation). This is especially
true for haóha yoga.
Second, when practicing non-forceful meditation,
ásanas may occur automatically, cleansing and
integrating the mind, body, and spirit. Finally,
Áyurvedic practitioners may recommend these
postures for healing specific diseases.
Haóha yoga has healed diseases—some thought
to be incurable—from ancient eras in India through
modern times. Its healing methods are explained in
its definition. Spiritually, yoga means the union of
the red spirit force at the base of the spine with the
white spirit force at the crown of the head; the union
of the sun-spirit at the navel with the moon-spirit at
the head; and the union of the small self with the
Divine eternal Self.
Physically, yoga means the union of práò (inward
moving air) with apán (downward/outward moving
air); the union in which all the energy currents in the
body flow up the suähumòá or main inner tube of the
spine. On either side of the suähumòá are two
secondary tubes. ‘Ha’ is the solar or right tube
(pi´galá)—Pitta predominant. ‘Óha’ is the lunar or
left channel or náæí, called iæá—Váyu/Kapha
predominant. Thus, haóha yoga means the union of
all physical energy currents into these two channels,
which subsequently flow into the suähumòá.
Each school of yoga emphasizes different things.
Patañjali suggests that ethics (yama and niyama) is
the way to cleanse the mind, body, and spirit; he
emphasizes a more psychological approach to healing
and Self-Realization. The book Haóha Yoga Pradípiká
suggests the body’s organs and systems are to be

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
258
cleansed first through ásanas and práòáyám.
Áyurvedic practitioners allow each client to choose
that healing path for which he or she is best suited.
Yoga ásanas and práòáyám have, along with medi-
tation, become popular in the 1960’s in the west.
However, along with their introduction they have also
become westernized. Postures began to be taught as
ends in themselves, merely to heal an illness, to re-
duce stress, or to look better; the idea that these pos-
tures are a foundation for Self-Realization was gen-
erally ignored. The Haóha Yoga Pradípiká spends the
first chapter reminding the student that Haóha Yoga
is specifically used as the first step in Self-Realiza-
tion; this goal must not be forgotten.
IÆÁ/PI¯GALÁ/SUÄHUMÒÁ
Precautions For Beginners
1. A soft, comfortable mat, blanket, or rug is used
when practicing ásanas.
2. Persons whose backs, spines, or necks are bad or
stiff should practice very gently.
3. Pregnant woman are advised to cease all
strenuous and inverted poses, and not to lie on their
bellies.
4. Inverted postures (e.g., shoulder stands, head
stands) are life threatening to persons with heart
problems, and should not be practiced by anyone with
pressure problems (e.g., ear, nose, head, heart).
5. The yoga room is to be pleasant, clean,
ventilated, and free of drafts.
6. It is always best to learn positions from a
qualified yoga teacher.
7. Yoga is first learned in the spring or fall; starting
a course of yoga during winter or summer may
cause health imbalances.
8. The practice of moderation and healthfulness in
diet prevents health imbalances. Foods that are
difficult to digest, stale, very hot, or cold are not
recommended.
9. Yoga is not to be practiced on a completely empty
stomach, nor on a full stomach. Beginners are advised
to take a little boiled milk and ghee before practicing
práòáyáma.
Part 1
Postures (Ásanas)
Eighty-four million seated ásanas exist, as de-
scribed by Lord Çhiva. Of them 84 are best, and of
these, 32 are useful for mankind.
Gherand Saåhitá: Ch. 2; verse 1
Haóha Yoga Pradípiká: Ch. 1; verse 33
Of these 32, four were chosen as the best;
siddhásana (perfect), padmásana (lotus),
simhásana (lion), bhadrádsana (gracious pose).
Haóha Yoga Pradípiká: Ch. 1; verse 34
[The Çhiva Saåhitá lists siddhásana, padmásana,
paschimottanásana (back stretch), and swastikásana
(auspicious) poses. Gorakäha Satarka says only two
poses are best; siddhásana and padmásana.]
Siddhásana is the most important
of the ásanas. It should always
be practiced as it purifies
the 72,000 náæís.
Haóha Yoga Pradípiká: Ch. 1; verse 38-9
When perfection is attainable
through siddhásana, what is
the use of practicing
many other ásanas?
Haóha Yoga Pradípiká: Ch. 1; verse 41

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 259
This last question relates to ásanas as a prepara-
tion for deeper meditative practice. From the point of
view of Áyurvedic health, the various postures help
heal specific health concerns. To that end this chap-
ter describes some of the most effective ásanas for
healing various diseases.
1. Siddhásana (Perfection Pose)
SIDDHÁSANA (MALE—PALMS UP)
This is the most important of the postures. Men
practice this posture while women follow its coun-
terpart, Siddha Yoni Ásana (see below).
Method:
A) Sit comfortably
B) Place the left heel at the perineum (or anal
aperture).
C) Place the right heel directly over the left heel,
pressing against the root of the generative organ.
(Traditionally the upper heel would press at the
root of the generative organ, at the pubis root).
D) Push the toes and the edge of the right foot
between the left thigh and calf muscles.
E) Sit comfortably, steady, with spine erect.
F) Lower the chin towards the collarbone, relaxing
the head (today some practice with the head
upright and eyes closed).
G) Gaze into the ájñá chakra (third eye). [When the
eyes become tired, close them and gaze at the space
in front of the eyes.]
H) Place the hands in the ‘Jñyán mudrá’. (The tips of
the thumb and index fingers touch, forming a circle
with the fingers. The three remaining fingers remain
outstretched or uncurled—palms face upward.) This
hand position is said to prevent the energy from
flowing out of the body via the fingers. Alternatively,
one practices the ‘Chin Mudrá’. (Place the tips of the
index finger at the root of the thumbs, and place the
palms on the knees.)
1A. Siddha Yoni Ásana
SIDDHA YONI ÁSANA
This method is practiced by women; the pose is
almost identical to siddhásana.
Method:
A) The heels press against the lower and upper
areas of the reproductive organ. B) The toes of both
feet are inserted between the thighs and calf
muscles. C-H) See siddhásana.
Spiritual Benefits of Both Poses:
1. Stimulates the ájñá chakra (develops pure
consciousness).
2. Controls nervous and práòic energies from the
múládhára and swádiähóán chakras.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
260
3. Balances one’s energy level by equalizing mental
and práòic forces.
4. Pressing the heels at the perineum prevents the
kuòæaliní çhakti (life-force) from escaping out of the
múládhára chakra.
5. Pressing the heels at the perineum stimulates the
múládhára where the three major náæís (iæá, pi´gala,
suähumòá) originate.
6. These postures purify the suähumòá.
7. Electrical impulses flow up to the brain, purifying
náæís, and removing all internal blocks.
8. The three bandhas (contractions) automatically
occur (Múla Bandha—contraction of the perineum;
Uææíyána Bandha—contraction of the lower
abdomen; Jálandhara Bandha—contraction of the
neck [chin lock]). These bandhas accumulate greater
práòic energy supply in the body. They are discussed
in detail later in this chapter.
9. The poses lead to Self-Realization.
Organs Helped: Stomach, gall bladder, liver, spleen,
kidneys (i.e., blood purifying organs).
Physical/Mental Benefits: Heals nervous depression,
balances blood pressure, cardiac function, and, in
men, male hormones (testosterone). These postures
maintain inner body temperature and redirect práòic
energy upwards, activating the suähumòá by
balancing the iæá and pi´galá.
Bandha Benefits:
Múla: Removes senility, creates equilibrium of práò
and apán (life fluid and lower fluid).
Uææíyána: Purifies the breath and its channels. (This
can be practiced alone by fully emptying the stomach
and contracting the navel towards the spine.)
Jálandhara: The flow of nectar from the sahasrára
(top or crown chakra) is consumed by the sun (fire)
at the navel chakra. Jálandhara checks the flow so
the fire cannot consume the nectar. This results in
mesmerized sádhaná.
Doähas: All; especially P- (reducing)
Alternatives: With slight variation of the feet and legs,
Siddhásana is also called Vajrásana, Muktásana, and
Guptásana. They are presented here for consideration.
Vajrásana (thunderbolt)—kneel and place the
buttocks between the heels, with the right big toe
overlapping the left one.
Muktásana (liberation)—place the left heel under
the anus and the right heel on top of the left.
Guptásana (secret)—place the feet between the
thigh and calf muscles so that the heels press against
the anus.
2. Padmásana (Lotus Pose)
PADMÁSANA (LOTUS POSE)
This is a more difficult posture. Fortunately it is
not considered as important as Siddhásana.
Method:
A) Place the right foot on the left thigh and the left
foot on the right thigh (soles facing up). B) If possible,
cross hands behind the back and firmly hold the toes.
C) Press the chin against the chest and keep the back
straight.
D) If toes cannot be held from behind the back, place
hands in jñyán, chin, bhairava, or yoni mudrá.
Bhairavi (females)—place fingers of left hand on the
top of fingers of the right hand, with both palms facing
up, and hands placed in the lap. Bhairava (males)—
finger placement is the exact opposite of bhairavi.
Yoni mudrá—the last three fingers are interlaced,
while the index and thumb fingers join at the tips.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 261
Thumbs point upward, while the index fingers point
forward (forming a triangular space between the index
and thumb fingers). See photo below
E) Eyes focus on the tip of the nose (nasakagra
driähti). Alternatively, one can lean forward,
eventually resting the forehead on the ground. F) The
tongue is pressed against the root of the upper teeth.
G) Slowly raise práòa upward.
JÑYAN MUDRÁ
YONI MUDRÁ
Benefits: Padmásan is the destroyer of all diseases,
balancing práòa and mental forces. It also tones sacral
and coccygeal nerves through increased blood flow.
Blood flows to the abdominal region, helping with
mental, emotional, and nervous disorders. Leaning
forward helps constipation, depression, wrinkles,
headaches, and menstrual disorders.
Organs Helped: This pose stimulates acupuncture
meridians of the stomach, gall bladder, spleen,
kidneys, and liver; changes the metabolic structure
and brain patterns, creating balance in the entire
system.
Precautions: Do not practice with sciatica or sacral
infection.
Doähas: All
The yogi who, seated in padmásana,
inhales through the entrance of the náæís and
fills them with práòa, gains liberation;
there is no doubt.
Haóha Yoga Pradípiká
Alternative: Raised Lotus
RAISED LOTUS
Method:
A) Sitting in full lotus, palms are placed on the floor
beside the thighs.
B) Inhale and raise the body off the floor; breathe
naturally.
C) Exhale and return to the floor.
Benefits: This posture strengthens the reproductive
system.
Organs Helped: Reproductive organs
So we see several reasons why Siddhásana is the

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
262
posture preferred over Padmásana. The former re-
quires less work and mental concentration (i.e., the
bandhas occur automatically due to the heel pres-
sure, lower abdomen pressure, and the neck-lock; and
prevents kuòæaliní energy from escaping while auto-
matically increasing práòa). Thus, one can more eas-
ily engage in mantra meditation while sitting in
Siddhásana; Padmásana requires more thought and
practice.
3. Simhásana (Lion’s Pose)
SIMHÁSANA
Method: (Feet and ankles must be very flexible to per-
form this pose)
A) Sit on crossed ankles
B) Press the left heel on the right side of the
perineum—males; right side of the reproductive or-
gan—females.
C) Press the right heel on the opposite side of the
perineum or organ.
D) Place palms on knees and spread fingers apart.
E) Lean the head forward with chin almost touching
the collar bone.
F) Focus the eyes on the tip of the nose.
G) Open the mouth (i.e., as if yawning), extending
the tongue as far out as possible .
The position of the feet induces a natural prac-
tice of múla bandha due to the pressure on the
perineum or generative organ. The bent head stimu-
lates the neck lock (jálandhara). Uææíyána bandha is
induced from bending forward. This pose is best per-
formed 
outside, 
facing 
the 
sunrise.
Benefits: This pose is beneficial for singers and speak-
ers; sore throats, Kapha sinus headaches.
Organs Helped: Ears, nose, throat, and mouth
disorders.
Doähas: All; especially Kapha
Variation:  Seated Simhásana
SEATED SIMHÃSANA
Method:
A) Separate knees and lean on them.
B) Place the right foot under the right buttock and the
left foot under the left buttock.
C) Seat the buttocks between the heels.
D) Hands can rest on the knees or on the ground be-
tween the heels; palms facing down and fingers point-
ing in towards the body. Put pressure on the balls of
the palms.
E) Raise the chin two or three inches and gaze at the
third eye (ájñá chakra)—this is known as Çháåbhaví
Mudrá.
F) Extend the tongue out as far as comfortable.
G) Inhale deeply through the nose. Exhale, making a
roaring sound like a lion (“aaahhhh”).

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 263
H)  Move the tongue from side to side to stimulate
the throat further.
4. Bhadrásana (Gracious Pose)
This posture, though an important pose, will not
be discussed; it is a more difficult, advanced posture.
5. Swastikásana (Auspicious Pose)
SWASTIKÁSANA (PERFECT POSE)
Method:
A) Sit cross-legged and bring feet up between the
thigh and calf muscles. (Beginners—place pillows
under the feet to keep the feet propped to stay inside
the thigh and calf muscles.)
B) Place hands in jñyán or chin mudrá.
C) Sit up straight and comfortable.
Benefits: Náæís (actual acupuncture meridians) in-
side the back of the legs are stimulated. The sciatic
nerve is gently massaged; lumbar region and abdomi-
nal muscles are toned, and the inner body tempera-
ture is balanced. In Vedic culture the swastika is the
symbol of fertility, creativity, and auspiciousness;
therefore, practicing this posture develops these at-
tributes. It dispels miseries and stabilizes the mind
and body. Breath is quickly controlled by this pos-
ture.
Doähas: All; especially Váyu and Pitta
6. Paschimottanásana (Ugrásana)
(Back-stretching Pose)
(PASCHIMOTTANÁSANA (BACK-STRETCHING POSE)
Method:
A) Stretch both legs straight out in front of the body.
B) Inhale and raise hands over head, keeping the back
straight.
C) Exhale and bend forward from the hips, stretching
the hands out towards the toes (if toes can be
comfortably touched or held, do so. Otherwise, feel
a sense of completeness regardless of how far you
can stretch—e.g., holding knees, calf muscles, etc.).
The spinal cord should feel stretched. The back should
be straight—not curved or hunched. One may use a
towel or rope around the toes to begin to sit properly.
D) Place the forehead on the knees if comfortably
reached. Keep the knees on the floor.
E) Breathe normally, concentrating on the navel or
on a mantra.
F) Inhale and gently raise the arms up over the head
while sitting upright. G) Exhale and bring the hands
to the knees.
Benefits: Increases digestive power, physical lassitude
vanishes; the breath is soon controlled and miseries
are dispelled, diabetes. Práòa enters the suähumòá
(the western or inner path).
Precautions: Practice other postures first to loosen
the back’s muscles and nerves; and the hamstrings
and spine.
Doähas: All; also for Kapha sinus headaches.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
264
Alternative 1:
Mahá Mudrá (Great Sealing Pose)
MAHÃ MUDRÃ (GREAT SEALING POSE)
Method:
A) The left heel is pressed against the anus; the sole
is pressed against the right inner thigh (or vice versa).
B) Inhale, raising the hands over the head. The spine
is erect.
C) Exhale and lean forward, hands grasping the knees,
calves, or feet of the outstretched leg. Beginners may
use a towel or belt for help.
D) The forehead should be close to the outstretched
knee; touching it if possible.
E) Inhale, raising the hands over the head and sitting
up straight.
F) Exhale, lowering the hands to the knees.
Benefits: Bindú (semen or ovum) is kept from mov-
ing downward; physical lassitude is removed, physi-
cal ailments are healed; digestion is increased. The
body becomes charming, symptoms of aging are dis-
pelled, senses become controlled. Wasting diseases,
skin diseases, hemorrhoids, indigestion, tumors, and
abscesses are healed.
Alternative 2:
Mahá Bandha (Great Lock Pose)
MAHÃ BANDHA (GREAT LOCK POSE)
Method:
A) One leg is extended (as in Mahá mudrá); the other
leg is placed on the extended thigh.
B) The stomach is filled with air, while in Jálandhara
pose, and the breath is held.
C) Air is slowly exhaled when air can no longer be
comfortably retained.
Benefits: The life breath enters the suähumòá. The
body becomes robust. Bones and ribs are strength-
ened.
Doähas: VP-; Best for Váyu
Alternative 3: Mahá Bheda
Method:
A) While in the Mahábandha pose, hold the breath
and practice uææíyána bandha (contraction of ab-
dominal muscles).
B) The hands gently strike into the lower armpit
area.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 265
MAHÁ BHEDA
Benefits: The life breath enters the suähumòá,
leaving the iæá and pi´galá náæís. The three knots
are penetrated and kuòdaliní çhakti proceeds to the
sahasrára (crown chakra) uninterrupted. Breath is
controlled and old age weaknesses are removed.
7. Vírásana (Hero’s Pose)
VÍRÁSANA (HERO’S POSE)
Method:
A) Sit on the left heel. Bend the right knee, placing
the right foot by the left knee.
B) Place the right elbow on the right knee and the
palm against the right cheek.
C) Place the left palm on the left knee.
D) Close eyes and concentrate on the breath.
Benefits: This posture develops the heroic power of
Hanuman (monkey god; Mahavír). It increases will
power and strengthens the body. The pose is also ex-
cellent for immune disorders like AIDS, MS, Epstein
Barr, etc.
Organs Helped: The pose stabilizes the energy flow
to the reproductive organs and controls sexual en-
ergy; it also stimulates the reproductive organs and
their associated brain centers (this is achieved by ac-
tivating the náæís found in the legs and connected to
the reproductive glands).
Doähas: VP-
8. Visásana (Alternative to Vírásana)
VISÁSANA
Method:
A) Sit on the left heel, while the right foot rests on
top of the left thigh. Knees are spread wide apart.
Optional—place the big toe under the buttock.
B) Optional—keep hands in the jñyán or chin mudrá.
Benefits: This pose heals rheumatism, hemorrhoids,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
266
and other diseases of the anus.
9. Bhuja´gásana (Serpent Pose)
BHUJA¯GÁSANA (SERPENT POSE)
Method:
A) Lie on the stomach with hands parallel to the shoul-
ders and palms placed on the floor.
B) Inhale, gently raising the head and upper torso up
(lifting with the back muscles, not the hands). The
lower torso and legs remain on the ground (navel to
toes). The head is upright and the back is curved.
C) Exhale, gently lowering the body to the floor.
Benefits: Kuòæaliní is raised, digestion is increased,
diseases are healed. Asthma, gastrointestinal disor-
ders, hypertension, menstrual disorders, and insom-
nia are relieved.
Doähas: VPK=
10. £halabhásana (Locust Pose)
ÇHALABHÁSANA (LOCUST POSE)
Method:
A) Both arms are placed on the ground (palms facing
up) while the head is placed on them. (Some
practitioners place the hands beside the shoulders under
the chest (palms down).
B) Inhale, raising legs off the ground. Contract the
buttocks muscles and stretch the thigh muscles. The
back and stomach muscles are doing the lifting, not
the hands and head.
C) Breathe naturally; if the body begins to tremble,
the posture is being held too long.
D) Exhale, gently lowering the legs to the ground.
Benefits: This pose improves digestion and heals
physical weaknesses. The sun-fire at the navel that
draws the nectar flow from the crown is blocked. This
removes the effects of old age; thus retaining a
youthful appearance. The posture is good for
malabsorption, the gastrointestinal system, and sore
throats.
Doähas: VK-
11. Vajrolí Mudrá (Thunderbolt Pose)
VAJROLÍ MUDRÁ (THUNDERBOLT POSE)
Method:
A) Begin in Çhalabhásana, then place the palms on
the ground beside the shoulders or under the thighs.
B) Lift the head and upper torso into the air by press-
ing the hands to the ground. Feel a gentle pressure in
the small of the back, urinary tract, and reproductive
organs.
 C) The legs are also lifted as in Çhalabhásana.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 267
Benefits: Semen/ovum (bindú) is prevented from
being discharged; the power to retain this fluid is
developed, enhancing long life. The Gherand
Saåhitá says this pose is one of the best because it
develops liberation.
Organs Helped: Urinary tract, reproductive organs.
Doähas: All
12. Dhanurásana (Bow Pose)
This is similar to Vajrolí , but the hands are kept
off the ground.
Method:
Beginner: Half Bow
DHANURÁSANA (BEGINNER’S HALF BOW)
A) Lie on the stomach, forehead resting on the ground
and arms straight overhead.
B) Inhale, raising the arms and legs straight up, using
the lower back and buttocks muscles. Breathe nor-
mally.
C) Exhale, slowly lowering limbs to the ground. Note
that a slow release tones muscle groups that would
not normally be toned if one were just to drop the
limbs.
Intermediate: Bow
DHANURÁSANA (INTERMEDIATE BOW)
A) Lie flat on the stomach, forehead on the ground,
and arms by your sides.
B) Inhale, bending knees; then grasp both ankles.
C) Separate the knees and exhale.
D) If the body begins rocking, it is all right.
E) Exhale, slowly while lowering the body and limbs
to the ground.
Advanced: Bow—same as above only
DHANURÁSANA (ADVANCED BOW)
D) Inhale, slightly raising the knees, head, and chest
simultaneously, while pulling the feet away and up
from the hands (the whole body should be moving
together at one time). Breathe naturally. Concentrate
on the back of the neck (viähuddha chakra), on the
abdominal area (manipúra chakra), or on the mid-
point where the back is bent.
Benefits: This pose alleviates diabetes and chest ail-
ments; it produces cortisone in the adrenal glands (for
inflammatory, allergic, or excess tissue or tumor
growth); adjusts the vertebrae, and straightens
hunched back and drooping shoulders. The posture
regulates the menstrual cycle and corrects infertility
(if not due to deformed reproductive organs—i.e., if
not hormonally caused); helps Kapha—asthma,
Pitta—hemorrhoids, colitis, hypertension (half bow),
rheumatism; Váyu—arthritis. This is one of the best
postures for all digestive disorders. All the náæís run
through the navel. The navel becomes uncentered if
a person lifts heavy items with only one arm. This
creates a disturbance in the flow

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
268
of the náæís, and causes digestive troubles. Three
minutes of practicing the bow pose (along with two
other poses discussed on page 310) realigns the navel
within three days. Signs of proper digestion will be
noticed immediately thereafter. [See page 309: how
to test for navel displacement].
Organs Helped: This pose stimulates the solar plexus,
digestive, elimination, and reproductive organs;
massages the heart, liver, and pancreas; stimulates
the kidneys and tones the alimentary canal. It regulates
the endocrine glands (especially the thyroid and
adrenals).
Doähas: All
13. Matsyendrásana (Spinal Twist Pose)
MATSYENDRÁSANA (SPINAL TWIST POSE)
Method: Beginner
A) Fully extend the right foot. Cross the left foot over
the right knee, placing it on the ground next to the
knee.
B) The right arm rests against the outer left leg. The
hand is placed on the right knee or on the floor by the
left side of the body.
C) The left arm is wrapped around the back, or the
palm is placed on the floor behind the left buttock.
D) Inhale, gently and slowly rotating the spine and
head as far to the left as comfortable. The position is
held with the hands or with the stomach and back
muscles. Breathe naturally.
E) Exhale, gently and slowly releasing the pose, and
return to the starting position.
F) Repeat in the reverse position.
Precautions: It is very important not to strain the spine
or neck in this pose; especially for those with bad
backs or necks. Remember, once hurt from a yoga
pose, healing takes a very long time.
Alternate: Páähásana (Chord Pose)
PÁÄHÁSANA (CHORD POSE)
Method: Beginner
A) Squat on the floor (keeping the soles and heels
flatly on the ground). Knees and feet are close
together. Achieve a balanced squat.
B) Twist the trunk until the right arm reaches around
the outside of the left knee. The right shoulder touches
the left outer knee or thigh.
C) With hands or fingers on the floor, exhale; gently
continue the twist as far as the arms will reach. Hold
this position while breathing naturally.
D) Release the posture, exhaling and slowly
untwisting to the starting position. E) Repeat the pose,
twisting in the opposite direction.
Benefits: This poses strengthens the ankles, making
them more elastic; it helps to release gas, to tone, and
to help people who stand on their feet all day.
Both poses improve spine agility, strengthen the

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 269
shoulders, reduce abdominal fat, massage abdominal
organs, expand the chest; help diabetes, and improve
digestion.
Organs Helped: Liver, spleen, pancreas sluggishness.
Doähas: All
Intermediate: Ardha Matsyendrásana
ARDHA MATSYENDRÁSANA
Method:
A) Bend the right foot by the side of the left buttock
(i.e., left leg is crossed over the right knee). The right
foot is in front of the left knee; the left knee is raised
near the chest.
B) With the right hand grab the toes of the left foot,
ankle, knee, or floor. Place the left hand around the
back; or place the palm on the floor by the left side.
C) Inhale; gently and slowly rotate the spine and head
to the left as far as is comfortable. The hands can
hold the position, or the position can be held with the
stomach and back muscles. Breathe naturally.
D) Exhale, gently and slowly untwisting the torso to
its original position.
E) Repeat the pose in the reverse direction.
Benefits: This pose channels práòa (kuòæaliní), awak-
ening the chakras and the suähumòá náæí. The pos-
ture also stimulates the navel or manipúra chakra.
This maintains the body, harmonizes underactive or
overactive functions, and removes sluggishness and
diseases arising from this condition. The pose
strengthens the digestive fire (agni) and improves nu-
trient absorption. It prevents the crown-moon nectar
(neurohormones of the pituitary and pineal glands that
activate the endocrine glands) from being burnt up by
the navel-sun heat. Thus, diseases of old age and death
are prevented or slowed. This nectar is associated with
the bindú (semen/ovum). The navel or manipúra
chakra is powered by Samána Váyu. This is respon-
sible for nutrient and práòa absorption from food and
air. This absorbs Práòa Váyu as well. Through this
pose Apána Váyu and Práòa Váyu are made to meet
at the manipúra chakra. They are combined, ener-
gized, and then moved into the suähumòá náæí. The
lower (animal) energies and the higher spiritual ener-
gies are united, and kuòæaliní is awakened.
This ásana relieves diabetes, constipation,
indigestion, urinary problems, nerve and nervous
conditions; lumbago, rheumatism, slipped discs.
Organs Helped: Pancreas, liver, spleen, stomach,
ascending and descending colon; the pose tones nerve
roots, adjusts and realigns the vertebral column; back
muscles are pulled and stretched.
Doähas: All

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
270
14. Gomukhásana (Cow’s Face Pose)
GOMUKHÁSANA (COW’S FACE POSE)
All the ancient texts agree on this posture—except
the final arm position.
Method:
A) While seated, bend the legs so that the right heel
touches the left buttock and the left heel touches the
right buttock (the left leg is crossed over the right leg
and the left knee is over the right knee).
B) Bring the left arm up behind the head and back.
The right arm wraps around the side and back. The
left elbow points straight up (towards the sky), and
the right elbow points towards the ground. Clasp the
hands behind the back.
C) Breathe naturally and hold the posture. The eyes
can be open or closed, or practicing ¤haåbhaví mudrá
(staring at the third eye).
D) Release and repeat, reversing the leg and arm po-
sitions.
Method: Beginner
A) After legs are positioned as above, palms may be
placed on the upper knee, one hand on top of the
other.
B) Some people press the hands on the knees to stretch
the leg’s muscles. Optionally, one can lean forward,
the forehead, if possible, resting on the floor.
BEGINNER GOMUKHÁSANA (COW’S FACE POSE)
Benefits: This pose tones the shoulder muscles,
nerves, and cardiac plexus (blood and lymphatic ves-
sels in the heart region). Náæís in the legs stimulate
the reproductive organs and glands, and regulate hor-
mone secretion. The vajra náæí is stimulated, pre-
venting the outward flow of práòa. Thus, práòa ac-
cumulates at the múládhára (first) chakra. The
interlinking of the fingers prevents the práòa from
escaping through the hands. This causes energy to
flow through the spinal region. Persons will notice
the arms forming an infinity sign that balances the
higher and lower (positive and negative) práòa.
Organs Helped: Reproductive organs and glands,
heart.
Doähas: All
15. Kúrmásana (Tortoise
Pose)
Method:
A) Cross the legs and sit
on the ankles, pressing
them firmly on the anus.
Keep the knees as close
together as comfortable.
Toes point outward to-
wards the sides.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 271
B) Sit up straight; palms rest on their respective knees.
C) The body is balanced; weight is on the ankles,
heels, and sides of feet.
Benefits: This pose straightens the curvature of the
spine. The ankles or heels press the anus, closing the
vajra náæí, preventing kuòæaliní energy from escap-
ing. This pose is useful for both celibates and family
members. It channels sexual energy to the higher
chakras; it also regulates the sex glands, as well as
the reproductive and excretory organs.
Organs Helped: Reproductive, excretory, visceral
organs (náæís in the side of the feet are stimulated—
i.e., thorax, abdomen, heart, liver, intestines, and kid-
neys).
Doähas: All
16. Kukkutásana (Cockerel Pose)
KUKKUTÁSANA (COCKEREL POSE)
Method:
A) Sit in Padmásana (lotus pose) and insert hands
between the thighs and knees (right hand between
the right thigh and calf; left hand between the left
thigh and calf).
B) Place the palms on the ground, fingers pointing
forward.
C) Inhale, shifting the body weight to the hands and
raising the body off the ground.
D) Hold the position and breathe normally. Focus
the eyes on a fixed point in front of you.
E) Exhale, slowly returning to the ground.
Benefits: The pose awakens kuòæaliní, strengthens
the wrists, arms, shoulder muscles, and abdominal
walls.
Doähas: All
17. Back Bends
Various styles of back bends exist. Beginning poses
are discussed below.
Kapotásana (Pigeon Pose)
KAPOTÁSANA (PIGEON POSE)
Method: Beginner-Advanced Beginner
A) Place both hands and knees on the floor (i.e., like
a cat).
B) Lift the hands and stand upright from the knees.
Place the right big toe over the left big toe.
C) Move the arms behind the back, extended between
the right thigh and calf; left hand between the left
thigh and calf toward the heels).
D) Exhale, leaning the body backward until the palms

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
272
reach the heels. Then grab the heels (or touch them
with the fingers).
E) Breathe normally and hold the posture.
F) Exhale, returning the torso to the upright position.
Precaution: Do not hurt the knees or spine.
Alternative:
A) Sit on the knees. Exhale, slowly lean backwards
while resting on the elbows. Eventually you can rest
your back on the floor.
KAPOTÁSANA (PIGEON POSE) ALTERNATIVE
Benefits: These poses tone the spinal region, circulate
blood around the spine, and stretch the pelvic region
and lower back. The heart is massaged and healed;
the diaphragm is lifted, and the chest is expanded.
Kapha—diabetes, bronchitis; Váyu—insomnia,
rheumatoid arthritis, varicose veins, sciatica,
reproductive organs, constipation, asthma, backache.
Organs Helped: Reproductive, diaphragm, heart.
Doähas: All; especially VK-
Standing Bow
Method:
A) Stand erect,
arms at sides;
breathe easily.
B) Bend elbows,
bringing 
the
palms together at
the chest in prayer
p o s i t i o n .
           STANDING BOW
C) Slowly raise the hands up over the head (the arms
cover the ears). Notice the rhythm of your breathing.
D) Inhale, slowly bending from the lower back;
leaning backwards as far as is comfortable. Keep
hands and arms in the same position at the head.
E) Exhale, slowly bringing the upper torso upright.
F) Slowly lower the “prayer hands” to the chest; then
return the hands to the sides.
Precaution: Extreme care is required; especially if
persons have a bad back or neck.
Benefits: This pose stretches the lower back and
kidney area
Doähas: All
Úrdhva Dhanurásana (Upward Bow)
ÚRDHVA DHANURÃSANA (UPWARD BOW)
Method: Advanced Beginner
A) Lie on the back, bend knees. Soles of the feet are
on the floor, and knees are together.
B) Arms are raised over the head with elbows facing
the sky. The palms are on the ground, fingers facing
the shoulders (hands are shoulder-width distance
apart).
C) Exhale, raising the trunk and crown of the head
off the floor.
D) Rest and breathe in this position.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 273
E) Exhale, lifting the trunk and head further, arching
the back so the weight is completely on the palms
and soles (never put pressure on the head and neck).
Breathe naturally.
F) Stretch the arms from the shoulders and the legs
from the thighs.
G) Eventually the elbows are straight and the thighs
are stretched.
H) Exhale and stretch some more, pulling the thigh
muscles by lifting the heels off the floor.
I) Extend the chest, stretching up the sacral region of
the spine until the abdomen is taut; then lower the
heels to the floor again. Hold the pose for some time.
J) Exhale, gently lowering the body to the floor again.
Benefits: This pose stretches and tones the spine,
making the body alert and supple; strengthens the
back, arms, and wrists; soothes the head, and pro-
motes vitality, lightness, and energy.
Doähas: All
Setu Bandha Sarvá´gásana (Bridge Pose)
SETU BANDHA (BRIDGE POSE)
Method: Setu means bridge
A) Lie on the back with knees bent and the soles of
the feet on the floor.
B) Exhale, raising the buttocks off the floor.
C) With elbows resting on the ground, place the palms
on the small of the back, supporting the weight of the
body. (A stretch should be felt in the small of the
back.)
D) Optional—legs may then be extended straight
out for further back-bending benefits.
E) Breathe easily while holding the position.
F) Inhale, lifting the buttocks. Remove the hands,
exhale and gently lower the body to the ground.
Benefits: The spine flexes backwards and neck strain
is removed. The result is a healthy, flexible spine and
nervous system.
Doähas: All
18. Sálamba Sarvá´gásana (Shoulder Stand)
SÁLAMBHA SARVÁ¯GÁSANA (SHOULDER STAND) FIGURE 1
SÁLAMBHA SARVÁ¯GÁSANA (SHOULDER STAND) FIGURE 2

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
274
Method:
A) Lie flat on the back, legs completely extended,
knees together, hands at the sides, palms down.
B) Relax, take a few deep breaths; then inhale, raising
the knees to the thighs.
C) Exhale, raising the hips from the floor. Brace the
buttocks with your hands, while your elbows remain
on the floor, supporting the buttocks. (Alternatively,
cross legs and grab toes; then pull legs up to the head.
This is an easy way to elevate the lower trunk. Then
place the palms on the buttocks.)
D) Exhale, raising the lower trunk to a 45 angle with
palms supporting the buttocks; or to a 90 degree angle
(perpendicular) to the floor by walking the palms to
the lower back.
E) Exhale, raising the legs and keeping them aligned
with the trunk of the body; toes pointing to the sky.
F) The chin is locked into the chest.
G) Breathe naturally in this position.
H) Exhale, sliding the hands to the buttocks as the
body begins to lower. Slowly return the body to the
starting position.
Precaution: This pose must not be practiced by
anybody with a heart problem, high blood pressure,
or any other pressure (e.g., sinus, ear).
Immediately after this pose, practice the fish pose
(Matsyásana), or the serpent or cobra pose
(Bhuja´gásana).
Always eat enough food daily, as this pose
increases the digestive fire (agni); but do not eat for
at least one hour before ásanas.
Elderly persons are advised not to perform this pose
unless they have practiced it throughout adulthood.
Benefits: This pose bathes all the organs and brain in
blood; increases absorption of nutrients, secretes
hormones for balancing body and brain; heals anemia,
asthma, breathlessness, palpitations, emphysema,
bronchitis, throat problems, headaches, colds, sinuses,
congestion, nasal disturbances, irritation, constipation,
urinary disorders, uterine displacement, menstrual
troubles, hemorrhoids, hernia, arteriosclerosis, sexual
debility, varicose veins, ulcers (stomach and
intestinal), colitis, abdominal organ protrusion or pain;
senility, dementia, epilepsy, anger, hate, irritability,
short temper, insomnia; soothes nerves, frees the
system of toxins, restores energy, hides gray hair and
wrinkles after six months; develops vitality,
happiness, confidence, joy, strengthens digestion,
increases appetite, for convalescing.
Organs Helped: Endocrine organs or ductless glands,
thyroid, parathyroid, pituitary, pineal... all organs of
the brain and body.
Doähas: All
19. Halásana (Plough)
HALÁSANA (PLOUGH)—BEGINNERS
This is an advanced variation of the shoulder stand,
but beginners can do a preparatory version of this
pose.
Method: Beginner
A) Lie on the back, exhale, and bring knees to the
chest.
B) Cross the ankles and grab toes with the opposite
hands.
C) Exhale, pulling the feet over the head, taking care
not to harm the spine.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 275
D) Exhale, bringing the feet over the head, touching
the ground (chin locked in the chest) if possible.
E) Hold this pose or fully extend the legs. One leg at
a time may be extended to begin to stretch the back
and leg muscles. Palms are pressed against the middle
or upper back. Breathe naturally.
F) Inhale, slowly letting the hands and feet return to
the original position.
Method: Advanced
HALÁSANA (PLOUGH)—ADVANCED
A) From the shoulder stand, release the chin lock
and gently lower the trunk slightly.
B) Move the arms and legs over the head (either with
bent knees or straightened legs (most advanced).
C) Rest the toes on the floor. Breathe naturally.
D) Tighten the knees by pulling the hamstring muscles
at the back of the thighs and raise the trunk.
E) Place palms in the middle of the back. Press the
trunk to keep it perpendicular to the floor.
F) Extend the hands behind the back (opposite the
leg position), palms on the ground.
G) Hook the thumbs and stretch the arms and legs.
H) Interlock the fingers and turn the wrists so the
thumbs rest on the floor.
I) Stretch the palms and fingers, tighten the arms at
the elbows, and pull them from the shoulders.
(Stretching the arms in the opposite directions fully
stretches the spine).
J) Change the thumb that touches the ground from
time to time; stretching the arms for an equal amount
of time in each position. This develops harmonious
elasticity of the shoulders.
K) After a comfortable amount of time, release the
hands, raise the legs back to the shoulder stand, and
gently slide the legs back to the floor.
Benefits: Same as the shoulder stand. Also, abdominal
organs are rejuvenated, the spine receives extra blood
to heal backache, hand cramps, stiff shoulders and
elbows; arthritis, and lumbago. This pose creates
lightness and mobility.
Váyu—asthma, depression, sciatica, sexual
debility, wrinkles, rheumatoid arthritis, headache,
menstrual disorders, abdominal pain, and gas.
Doähas: All; especially V-
20. Matsyásana (Fish Pose)
MATSYÁSANA (FISH POSE)
Method: Beginner
A) Lie on the back; inhale, raising the upper torso
from the elbows (hands facing the feet, palms down).
B) Arch the back and lean the head backwards, but
keep it off the floor.
C) Breathe easily and hold the posture, focusing on
the lower back.
D) Exhale, gently lowering the head and torso to the
ground.
Precaution: If the head is resting on the ground, the
neck and spine can become strained.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
276
 Method: Advanced: Lotus-Fish
MATSYÁSANA (LOTUS-FISH POSE)
Start in lotus pose and lean on the elbows. Then
arch the back and head.
Or, in the lotus position, grasp toes and roll onto
the back and elbows. Then, lower the feet, lifting the
torso, using the elbows, and arching the back and
head.
Benefits: The chest is expanded, making breathing
fuller and easier; stretches pelvic joints. Pitta—ab-
sorption of nutrients, liver, thyroid, migraine.
Kapha—sinus congestion and headaches; gastrointes-
tinal disorders, asthma.
Organs Helped: Liver, head, sinuses, lungs, gas-
trointestinal tract, thyroid.
Doähas: PK-
21. Jathara Parivartanásana (Belly Roll)
JATHARA PARIVARTANÃSANA (BELLY ROLL)
Jathara means belly, and parivartana means roll or
turn.
Method: Beginner
A) Lie flat on the back with arms stretched sideways
(parallel to the shoulders, resembling a cross).
B) Inhale, lifting the left leg while keeping it straight,
until it reaches 45 or 90 degrees above the floor.
Breathe normally.
C) Exhale, slowly crossing and lowering the left leg
over the right side, trying to touch the floor. Keep the
leg straight. Also, try to keep the back and shoulder
flat on the floor. Breathe normally.
D) Inhale, slowly lifting the leg back into the air. Hold,
then exhale and slowly return to position A. Rest un-
til breathing becomes normal again.
E) Repeat with the right leg.
Advanced
A) Start in the
same position as
the beginners pose,
only exhale and lift
both legs to 45 or
90 degrees above
the floor.
B) Follow the same
instructions as in
the beginner’s
pose.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 277
Benefits: Reduces excess fat, tones liver, spleen, pan-
creas, and removes sluggishness; heals gastritis and
strengthens the intestines, trims all the abdominal
organs, relieves sprains, and loosens the hip and lower
back region.
Doähas: PK-
22. Súryásana (Sun Pose)
The sun pose is a combination of poses designed
to heal, tone, and rejuvenate all aspects of the mind,
body, and spirit. It originally was practiced at sun-
rise, but can be done anytime of the day or night. It is
a general pose that can be done by anyone.
Method:
Step 1
A) Stand erect, arms at sides; breathe easily.
B) Inhale, bending the elbows and bringing the palms
together at the chest in prayer position.
C) Slowly raise hands over the head. The arms are
covering the ears (notice a natural breath occurring
in the lungs). Slowly bend from the lower back,
leaning backwards as far as is comfortable. Keep
hands and arms in the same position around the head.
[Fig. 1]
D) Exhale, slowly bringing the upper torso upright.
Slowly bring the hands back to the chest in the prayer
pose; then return the hands to the sides. Slowly bend
forward, letting the arms and head hang with the
weight of gravity. Keep knees and legs straight (do
not bend knees). If the fingers or hands touch the
ground, fine, otherwise, allow the body to hang and
relax. Breathe naturally. Feel gravity pulling the arms,
hands, and face muscles; it releases all the tension
from the face, shoulders, neck, arms, and hands. One
may stay in this position as long as desirable. [Fig. 2]
Step 2
E) Exhale, bending the knees and squatting. Palms
are placed outside the feet. One may hold this position
as well.
F) Inhale, sliding the right foot backward and extend-
ing the leg until the knee is straight. The toes are bent
and the heel is off the floor. The other foot is flat on
the floor. The knee is parallel with the hands and the
head directly over the bent knee, looking straight
ahead. Arch the back with the chest closer to the
ground. Hold this position and breathe naturally, feel-
ing the stretch throughout the body, especially in the
legs, back, and shoulders. [Fig. 3]
G) Inhale, sliding the left foot back, beside the right
foot. Set both heels on the floor, raising the buttocks
and feeling a greater stretch in the legs, feet, and
Achilles tendons. One may remain in this position
and breathe easily. [Fig. 4]
H) Inhale, bending the knees until they rest on the
floor; then rest the chest on the ground. The shoulders
are parallel to the fingers (for beginners).
I) Inhale, gently pushing the upper torso off the ground
(cobra position). [Fig. 6]
Advanced option—inhale, lowering the head until it
is parallel with the hands. Only the hands and feet
touch the ground. Then arch the back. The chest is
closer to the ground, the buttocks are in the air (a sort
of ess shape) [Fig. 5]. Like a snake, slither or pull the
head and body forward past the hands, winding up in
the cobra position (the upper torso is almost
perpendicular to the floor. The head looks forward).
J) Inhale, pushing the buttocks back into the air. The
heels return to the floor as in position G.
Step 3
K) Inhale, sliding the right foot up to the chest. The
toes are parallel with the fingers and the head faces
forward. This is the reverse position from F, while
the left heel comes off the floor. Arch the back (chest
closer to the ground). Remain in this position and
breath normally. [Fig. 7] L) Inhale, sliding the left
foot next to the right foot (returning to the squatting
position). Remain in this position and breathe
naturally. M) Inhale, extending and raising the legs

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
278
and buttocks until the legs are straight. Simultaneously
keep the upper torso bent forward (holding the feet
and palms on the floor; or simply hanging, as
mentioned before). Rest, breath, and let gravity pull
the stress from the mind, face, and body. [Fig. 8]
N) Bring the palms together in prayer position. In-
hale, extending the arms straight out and raising them.
This pulls the upper torso back into the upright posi-
tion.
O) Continue this motion, replicating the position of
the arms and hands over the head (arms covering the
ears), then leaning backwards again. [Fig. 9]
P) Exhale, slowly bringing the arms and torso up-
right again. Gently lower arms to the chest while the
hands are still in prayer position. Release the hands
and lower them to the sides of the body.
Benefits: All the benefits of each individual posture
mentioned earlier are incorporated in this pose.
Doßhas: All
SÚRYÁSANA
(SUN POSE)—FIG. 1
SÚRYÁSANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 2
SÚRYÁSANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 3
SÚRYÁSANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 4

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 279
SÚRYÁSANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 5
SÚRYÁSANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 6
SÚRYÁSANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 7
SÚRYÁSANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 8
SÚRYÁSANA (SUN POSE)—FIG. 9
23. £havásana (Corpse Pose)
£HAVÁSANA (CORPSE POSE)
Method:
A) Lie on the back with hands at the sides (palms
facing up). Feet are stretched out and are slightly sepa-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
280
rated. The body should be aligned.
B) Slowly inhale through the nose. Feel the cool air
entering the múládhára chakra (base of spine). As it
rises through the body, feel the air healing and sweep-
ing away the toxins.
C) Slowly exhale and feel the air going out the crown
of the head, releasing toxins and tensions from the
face, head, mind, neck, and shoulders. Repeat this
process several times.
Option
D) Slowly inhale as above; then during exhalation,
chant the mantra, ‘aum’. Feel the voice vibrating
through the entire body. Repeat several times, as the
vibration creates a deeper relaxation.
E) Rest for 1 or more minutes, noticing your breath.
Then let your mind drift where it may, or practice
sádhaná (meditation).
Precaution: Although this seems like a simple pose,
it is said to take 15 years to master the relaxation
derived from it. Ending all yoga routines with this
pose is imperative; otherwise, strain may occur while
the body is adjusting to its new, healthier structure.
Benefits: This posture is to be practiced by everyone
as the last pose of the routine. Yoga ásanas purify,
heal, tone, and perform acupuncture on the body. Now
the body must rest, restructure, and reorient itself to
its new self. When this pose is completed, one will
have developed a new mind, body, and spirit. The
entire system is revitalized.
The pose develops physical awareness and
pratyáhára (withdrawal and liberation of the mind
from the senses and objects—5th stage of yoga). This
posture also develops dháraòá (concentration or
visualization of one’s deity—6th stage of meditation),
and dhyána (holding or meditation on that image—
7th stage of meditation).
£havásana is also useful when practiced between
ásanas, and after a stressful day. This helps blood
pressure, peptic ulcers, anxiety, hysteria, cancer,
psychosomatic diseases, neuroses, realization of
subconscious thoughts.
Váyu—asthma, depression, varicose veins,
insomnia. Pitta—anger or hatred.
Doähas: All
Part 2
Práòáyáma & Náda
As discussed earlier, the life-breath (práò or soul)
saves the mind from the anxiety, nervousness, worry,
fear, anger, impatience, hot temper, lethargy, agitation,
and dullness. It improves concentration and memory,
mental peace, and the delight of a silent, clear mind.
The development of peace is synonymous with higher
mental spiritual development.
This is because thoughts are a vibration of the life-
breath. If the vibration is stopped, the mind is saved.
As the mind becomes free from thought, it remains
centered in the higher Self of eternity or Divine peace
and bliss. One may wonder, if there are no thoughts,
does one becomes a robot or brainwashed?
Brainwashing is a state of imposing a certain
philosophy on the mind and locking it in place. This
keeps the mind locked into a ‘specific-state’ activity;
not a state of freedom and peace. In this state of mental
silence one feels clear-headed enough to make
responsible decisions, while maintaining a peaceful
mind.
Mental peace occurs when the life-breath ceases
to flow in the iæá and pi´galá, and begins to flow in
the sußhumòá, resulting in stillness. The Vedic texts
or scriptures suggest that the best way for this to occur
is through the practice of meditation, as instructed
by a true guru. Four initial stages of mental
development exist. The mind,
1) Is stuck in dullness, greed, and violence
(tamas).
2) Seeks excess chatter or activity, or it seeks empty

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 281
fame and fortune (tamas and rajas).
3) Becomes conscientious, and wants knowledge, pi-
ety, and prosperity; realizing there is more to life
than material possessions (rajas).
4) Becomes pure, kind, compassionate, clear, and
happy. No trace of rajas exists (only sattwa ex-
ists). This fourth or sattwic state is the first stage
of samádhi or peace. The quiet mind is now ready
to hear the inner eternal calling. This eternal ex-
perience is even more alluring than happiness
gained sensory pleasure. Then, the mind under-
goes two more stages of the development of higher
consciousness. The mind,
5) Becomes drawn towards the inner Divine attrac-
tion and becomes absorbed in eternal bliss. No
       awareness of thoughts of the outer world exist
      (second stage of samádhi).
5a) After this second stage of samádhi, one’s aware-
ness returns (i.e., getting up from meditation), but
some of that inner peacefulness remains. This
peace develops as one continues to meditate.
6) Full Self-Realization. This occurs when the sec-
ond stage of samádhi remains, even when one is
out of meditation. In this final stage of samádhi
one sees the inner Self as Divine and eternal, and
all people and things in life as that same Divine
Self. One feels full compassion, peace, and eter-
nal bliss. Activities and objects of the outer world
no longer affect this eternal peace. One becomes
the peace. Everything has become the peace. Thus,
there is nothing that is ‘non-peace’. The relative
workings of the mind are fully stopped, and the
life-breath flows permanently and quietly through
the entire sußhumòá.
Práòáyáma means stilling of the breath. Inhala-
tion, exhalation, and breath retention, condition the
breath to be still. Stillness of breath stills the mind.
Práòáyáma cleanses the channels (náæís) and energy
centers (chakras), just as a broom or vacuum clears
the dirt from a house. Speaking in modern scientific
terms, the breathing process is intimately linked to
the brain and central nervous system. It is also re-
lated to the hypothalamus, which involves the emo-
tions, body temperature, memory, and perceptions.
Erratic thinking of the hypothalamus also leads to
erratic breathing and eventually to asthma. So, a quiet
breath keeps the body healthy and the mind at peace.
Práòáyáma is related to the in and out breaths of
the nose. Certain areas of the nose’s mucus mem-
brane are connected to the visceral organs (i.e., tho-
rax, abdomen, heart, lungs, kidneys, and intestines).
According to yogic thinking, when this nasal breath-
ing becomes irregular, the visceral organs connected
to the coccygeal plexus also become irregular. In turn,
they send sporadic messages to the brain, causing
further irregularities. When the breath is held, it al-
lows for a longer assimilation time of the práòa. The
result is the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
in the cells. Thus, the breath is intimately linked to
physical and mental health.
Throughout yogic literature it is written that those
who use fewer breaths will live longer. So, learning
how to make the breath automatically stop, helps fos-
ter longevity. Spiritually, this stoppage of breath (i.e.,
the stopping of one’s mind), allows one to delve more
deeply into one’s inner Self of peace, alertness, and
harmony.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
282
Five aspects of breath exist:
5 Breaths of Práòáyáma
According to some yogis, samán is the most
important Váyu sub-doäha because it is related to the
sußhumòá channel or náæí. Through yoga, práò and
apán are united in the location of samán, and life-
breath is suspended.
The práòa (life-breath, which is different from
Práòa Váyu) is made to flow through the náæís
(channels). Práòa cleanses the náæís of impurities
acquired from bad habits (e.g., junk food, fatigue,
drugs, chemicals, radiation, pollution, etc.). Práò
naturally develops during sádhaná (meditation); and
also cleanses karmic impurities (i.e., past life bad
habits). The various Vedic scriptures say 72,000 to
350,000 náæís exist in the human body.
The práòa that flows through the náæís is stored
in the energy centers (chakras) situated along the
sußhumòá (tube) inside the spinal column. These
centers, located in the subtle body, affect the physical
body’s nerve plexus. Chakras influence both the
physical and causal bodies.
Six main chakras are generally recognized as
having their own specific correlation to physical
functioning (see table on next page).
h
t
a
e
r
B
n
oitc
n
u
F
n
oitc
e
ri
D
s
n
a
g
r
O
ò
á
r
P
u
y
á
V
n
oitp
r
o
s
b
a
tu
o
,tra
e
h
,d
a
e
h
s
g
n
ul
n
á
d
U
u
y
á
V
-a
cin
u
m
m
o
c
lli
w
,n
oit
p
u
&
ta
o
r
ht
laic
af
n
oiss
er
p
x
e
n
á
m
a
S
u
y
á
V
n
oitali
m
iss
a
-rid
-in
m
o
n
oitc
e
lla
m
s
s
e
nits
etni
n
á
y
V
u
y
á
V
n
oitalu
cric
tn
ereffid
s
n
oitc
erid
e
ht
g
nid
a
v
re
p
y
d
o
b
elo
h
w
n
á
p
A
u
y
á
V
n
oita
ni
m
ile
n
w
o
d
,y
ra
nir
u
,y
r
oterc
x
e
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
er
Chakras
Suähumòá
Iæá
Pi´galá
(center tube in spine)

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 283
a
r
k
a
h
C
n
oit
a
c
o
L
s
n
a
g
r
O
e
s
n
e
S
.1
a
r
á
h
d
álú
M
m
u
e
nire
p
&
s
d
n
alg
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
er/y
r
oterc
x
e/y
ra
nir
u
s
e
n
o
m
r
o
h
lle
m
s/e
s
o
n
.2
a
n
á
hóh
ßih
d
á
w
S
sre
g
nif
o
w
t
m
u
e
nire
p
e
v
o
b
a
&
s
d
n
alg
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
er/y
ra
nir
u
:s
u
x
elp
larc
a
s
s
n
a
g
r
o
ets
at/e
u
g
n
ot
.3
a
r
ú
pin
a
M
le
v
a
n
n
oitp
r
o
s
b
a/e
vits
e
gid
th
gis/s
e
y
e
.4
atá
h
a
n
A
tra
e
h
s
u
m
y
ht
,s
g
n
ul
,tra
e
h
,n
oitarip
s
er
h
c
u
ot/s
d
n
a
h
.5
a
h
d
d
u
h
¤iV
ta
o
r
ht
dio
r
y
ht
,y
d
o
b
d
n
a
d
ni
m
s
eifir
u
p
d
n
u
o
s/sra
e
.6
á
ñj
Á
e
y
e
d
riht
d
n
alg
la
e
nip
,ata
g
n
olb
o
allu
d
e
m
n
oitiutni
CHAKRAS, ORGANS AND SENSES THEY CONTROL

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
284
The first five chakras have náæís that extend to the
various organs of sense and action. The sixth chakra
relates to higher mental or spiritual activity. Beyond
the sixth chakra one enters the realm of the “non-
describable” and begins to merely “be” in the state of
unbounded eternity or Brahman. This is the goal of
life—Brahman or Self-Realization. It is for this reason
that the Vedic sages do not put much emphasis even
on the celestial experiences experienced through the
sixth chakra.
The next chapter discusses the effects of mantras
on the chakras and their corresponding health
concerns. The chart below shows how the chakras
relate to the various aspects of human personality.
So we see that práòa cleanses the náæís, and in
turn the chakras. As they are cleansed, one’s spiritual
life-force is allowed to flow higher, developing or
utilizing the benefits of the higher chakras. As one is
able to live with their higher chakras opened, life
becomes more peaceful, graceful, and Divine.
Yet, the náæís and chakras must be cleansed gently
and naturally; so that the sudden—and possibly
harmful life-force—will not flow through the
channels before they are ready. A clay pot must be
baked in an oven to hold water properly; if it is not
properly prepared, it will quickly disintegrate. Like
the clay pot, the náæís and chakras must be prepared
to accept the flow of the life-force or they too will
disintegrate. Medically speaking, práòáyám strengthens
the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and the central
nervous systems to accept the charge of life energy.
So, práòa is valuable from both the medical and
spiritual viewpoints. Two ways of inducing
práòáyáma exist: automatic or manual. The Rig Veda
Bhasyabhumika, an ancient Vedic scripture, says that
through proper sádhaná (meditation), práòáyáma
occurs on its own, cleansing what is needed—when
it is needed. The Vedic scriptures caution persons from
trying to open their chakras on their own, for such an
opening can cause great damage physically,
psychologically, and spiritually.
Práòáyáma/Kumbhaka
Through práòáyám breathing exercises, one
manually stimulates the práòa flow. Not only can
this be dangerous without proper instruction, but it
can also be considered unnecessary if one practices
proper sádhaná. Then, should one care to do manual
práòáyám, it is an option rather than a necessity.
Below are listed some of the more useful
breathing exercises one may manually practice for
the healing of specific diseases. They are also
discussed to inform those who have these experiences
occurring automatically in meditation, but who
neither realize such experiences are normal nor
understand their value.
Precautions: Do not hold the breath if suffering
from high blood pressure. Inhaling, exhaling, and
holding of breath should be gentle, slow, and
comfortable at all times. Straining can cause harm.
Note:
1st Stage of practicing práòáyám: one may notice
perspiration or warming sensation during the practice.
This is due to increased sympathetic nervous system
activity.
s
a
r
k
a
h
C
s
citsir
etc
a
r
a
h
C
n
a
m
u
H
.1
a
r
á
h
d
álú
M
stc
nits
ni
la
m
in
a
.2
a
n
á
hóh
ßih
d
á
v
S
o
g
e
h
sifle
s
.3
a
r
ú
pin
a
M
,d
e
er
g
,ytila
u
s
n
e
s
n
oitib
m
a
.4
atá
h
a
n
A
s
n
oito
m
e
.5
a
h
d
d
u
h
¤iV
s’efil
g
nitp
e
c
c
a
latn
e
m
,s
eitisre
v
d
a
ytivitis
n
e
s
,e
c
n
ala
b
.6
á
ñj
Á
-fle
S
ot
y
a
w
eta
g
n
oita
zila
e
R

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 285
 Rub the body with this perspiration. It promotes
steadiness and firmness (balancing and toning the
nerves, muscles, and the entire system).
2nd Stage there may be quivering, trembling, or
sensations in the spine; also twitching of the hands,
face, or other muscles. This is normal as stresses are
released; the mind and body reorient themselves to
function in a more coordinated and efficient manner.
3rd Stage the mind becomes steady; the breath stops
moving.
It is recommended to have milk and ghee added
to one’s diet when first beginning práòáyám practice.
Persons should not eat at all for at least 1 hour before
this practice. Foods should be based on one’s
Áyurvedic constitution.
General Benefits: Besides those benefits discussed
earlier, práòáyám also removes hiccups, cough,
headache (and migraine), eye and ear pains,
respiratory and digestive problems (i.e., asthma,
wheezing, indigestion, hyperacidity), mucus, fat,
obesity. It helps with all diseases caused by the three
doähas.
Discussed in the Vedic scripture, the Yoga¤hiká
Upaniähad, is a four-stage process of Yoga or Self-
Realization: Mantra, Haóha (and práòáyáma), Laya,
and Raja. All stages develop or refine the breathing
process until it ceases to flow. This is the goal of
breathing exercises.
After one begins a natural form of mantra
sádhaná (meditation), haóha yoga begins
automatically. Práòáyáma is related to haóha. Haóha
means the unification of the upper and lower vital
breaths of the body. By uniting the breath that flows
through the thousands of channels, the breaths merge
into the sußhumòá, or spiritual tube (inside the spine).
As previously discussed, the result of this
unification is the stilling of the breath. The ceasing
of inhalation and exhalation occurs spontaneously
during the Laya stage of yoga. Here one is absorbed
in their inner eternal, Divine Self. The senses do not
perceive any outside objects or thoughts. This creates
a great peace in the spirit that, healthwise, brings much
mental and physical healing, alertness and calm.
Eventually this stillness of breath becomes
permanent. This is called the final stage, or Raja Yoga,
when a person remains permanently centered inside
themselves. Their vital breath is ever still—
unaffected—even when involved in activity.
So we see how spontaneously práòáyám is
cultured through a natural process of sádhaná or
meditation. It may now be understood more clearly
why the Vedic scriptures say that práòáyáma (that
uses fingers to control the breath) are elementary
methods of yoga. Still, when disease exists, práòáyám
is recommended by the Áyurvedic practitioner for
healing.
1. £hítalí Kumbhaka (Cooling Breath)
£hítala means cool. Kumbhaka means breath.
Method:
A) Sit in Siddhásana Siddha Yoni Ásana; ex tend and
curl the tongue with its sides facing up. B) Slowly
inhale through the middle of the tongue making a
slight hissing sound.
C) Options: After inhalation, the chin may rest o the
collar bone (Jálandhara Bandha); hold the breath if
comfortable.
D) Slowly exhale through the nose.
Options: one may make a humming sound during
exhalation. This is 1 round. E) Repeat for 5 to 10
minutes.
Alternative Slowly inhale through nose to accomplish
the same effect.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
286
Alternative Curl tongue towards the back of the throat
and slowly inhale.
Precautions: Do not use ¤hítalí with high blood
pressure. Also, quick inhalation brings oxygen into
the system and will increase heat; slow inhalation
only allows nitrogen to enter the system.
Benefits: £hítalí cools the entire system; soothes the
eyes and ears, reduces fevers, bile, burning, heat
sensations, indigestion, thirst, and removes phlegm.
Organs Helped: Liver, spleen, and all Pitta organs.
Doähas: PK-
2. Náæí £hodhana Práòáyáma
Method:
A) Sit in Siddhásana or Siddha Yoni Ásana.
B) The right thumb closes the right nostril. The index
and middle fingers rest on the third eye. The ring finger
rests beside the left nostril.
C) Slowly inhale through the left nostril, breathing
into the belly (the belly rises) until lungs are
comfortably filled. Focus on the cooling, healing ‘in
breath’.
D) Close the left nostril with the ring finger. Remove
the thumb from the right nostril and slowly exhale
through the right nostril. Focus on the release of stress
and tension with the ‘out breath’.
E) Inhale through the right nostril; then exhale through
the left nostril. This is 1 round. Repeat from step B
for 9 more rounds.
Precaution: Those who do not have heart problems or
high blood pressure, and who have practiced this
method for some time, may begin to comfortably hold
the breath before exhaling. Never strain to hold the
breath—it may cause harm.
Benefits: This practice cleanses the solar and lunar
channels (pi´galá and iæá), helping keep excess
Kapha out of the body. This practice makes the mind
silent and alert.
Doähas: VPK-
3. Súryabheda Práòáyáma (Solar Breathing)
Method: (see previous photo)
A) Sit in Siddhásana/Siddha Yoni Ásana. The right
thumb is beside the right nostril. The index and middle
finger rest on the third eye, and the ring finger is on
the left nostril.
B) Slowly inhale through the right nostril, breathing
into an expanding belly, until the lungs are
comfortably full. Focus on the cooling, healing ‘in-
breath’.
C) Close the right nostril with the thumb. Open the
left nostril and slowly exhale, focusing on the release
of stress and tension. This is 1 round.
D) Close the right nostril and open the left nostril,
and begin again with step B. Practice initially for 10
times. Later one can increase the time from 1 to 2
minutes.
Benefits: This improves energy, left brain, and
sympathetic nervous system activity; it decreases
parasympathetic functioning, and balances or
promotes harmony between the two hemispheres of
the brain. It balances Pitta and Kapha, removing
dullness from the mind, reverses the aging process,
and promotes longevity. Benefits result from the
increased hormonal secretions of the

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 287
pituitary gland and endocrine system (that cause
aging). Some say this also removes excess Váyu.
Doähas: VK-; this method increases the solar heat in
the body. Breathing in the right nostril brings air
through the pi´galá or solar channel. Súrya means
sun. Some say not used by Pittas.
4. Chandrabheda Práòáyáma
(Lunar Breathing)
This is the reverse process of Súryabheda (i.e.,
breathing through the left or iæá nostril and exhaling
through the right or pi´galá nostril). Some say this is
not recommended; however, when practiced by Pitta
doßhas, it can cool the system. Alternatively, a Pitta
doßha may practice ¤hítalí to cool the system instead.
5. Bhastra Kumbhaka (Bellows Breath)
This method gently forces the air in and out of the
lungs with equal lung movement. The inhalation
should be gentle enough so as not to cause the nos-
trils to be sucked closed. Air should only flow through
the nose; not the throat. The body, shoulders, and chest
remain unmoved throughout the practice. The lungs,
diaphragm, and abdomen will move. Upon exhala-
tion, the belly is to be pulled in; during inhalation
release the belly muscles so the belly expands again.
Method:
A) Sit in lotus or Siddhásana/Siddha Yoni Ásana. The
body is aligned with hands on the knees.
B) Slowly and deeply inhale.
C) Breathe out quickly and forcefully through the
nose (but without straining).
D) Immediately after the exhalation— just as
forcefully—breathe in.
E) This can be practiced continually and rhythmically
for 10 times (one round).
F) Rest and wait for breathing to return to normal;
then practice again. Rest and repeat for three rounds).
As one acclimates oneself to this practice, speed will
increase as rhythm is maintained.
Benefits: Awakens the life-force, removes excess
mucus, pierces the psychic knots (granthis), stimu-
lates the lungs, heart, and blood circulation; oxygen-
ates the blood, and increases the sympathetic nerves
in the respiratory center to release carbon dioxide. It
improves oxygen absorption and visceral organs; the
entire body is massaged, nasal and sinus passages
are cleansed. It builds resistance to colds and respira-
tory diseases (e.g., asthma, sinusitis, bronchitis), helps
arthritis, TB, constipation, sciatica, rheumatism, can-
cer, physical and mental tension. Bhastra improves
clarity, sluggishness, increases appetite, vitality, and
immune system functioning. It removes emotional
insecurity, sexual tension, bile, obesity; and improves
intuition. Kuòæaliní is stirred.
Doßhas: All
6. Kapálbháti Kumbhaka
(Frontal Brain Cleanse)
Kapal means forehead, and bhati means light,
splendor, or knowledge. Thus, this form of práòáyám
invigorates the whole brain, awakening the dormant
centers of subtle perception. Breathing should be like
the pumping of a bellows. The exercise compresses
the brain (slightly) and the fluid around it during in-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
288
halation. The brain and cerebrospinal fluid are decom-
pressed during exhalation. Thus, the brain is massaged.
Method:
A) Sit comfortably and erect in Siddhásan/Siddha
Yoni Ásana; close the eyes and relax. Place hands in
the Jñyán or Chin Mudrá.
B) Inhale deeply, then do 50 fast (shorter) inhale/ex-
hales, with more emphasis on the exhalation and
shorter inhales. Chin lock may be employed.
C) After the last exhalation, inhale deeply through
the nose and exhale quickly through pursed lips.
D) Release the chin lock, raise the head slowly, and
inhale slowly through the nose (1 round).
E) Practice 2 more rounds.
F) End by closing eyes and concentrating on the space
between the eyebrows.
Precaution: Do not practice with bad lungs, eyes, ears,
or high/low blood pressure. If dizziness or nosebleeds
are experienced, breathing is too forceful. Stop and
sit quietly until dizziness disappears, then try again
less forcefully. If the nose bleeds, stop the practice
for a few days.
Benefits: This method expels carbon dioxide and
other waste gases from the cells and lungs; sinuses
are drained, eyes are cooled. It invigorates the liver,
spleen, pancreas, and abdominal muscles (thereby
improving digestion); it also gives a sense of total
exhilaration. This kumbhaka reverses the aging pro-
cess, relaxes facial muscles and nerves, rejuvenates
tired cells and nerves, and keeps the face young, shin-
ing and free from wrinkles.
Alternative Follow the same process, only breathe in
one nostril, out the other, then in the latter and out the
first.
Doähas: All
7. Bhramarí Kumbhaka
(Humming Bee Breath)
It is best practiced in the early morning or late at
night, when it is quiet, and one is better able to hear
inner sounds. It is practiced after ásanas and active
práòáyáma, and before meditation or sleep (on an
empty stomach).
Method:
A) Sit in Siddhásana/Siddha Yoni Ásana and relax.
Eye remain closed and the body i erect. Do the chin
lock.
B) Slowly and deeply inhale through the nose, lis-
tening to the sound of the breath.
C) Close the ears with the index or middle fingers by
pressing the outer part of the ear ligament into the
ear hole.
D) Keeping the ears closed, exhale, making a soft,
low pitched humming sound. Concentrate on the
sound.
E) After fully exhaling, bring hands to the knees and
breath slowly and naturally.
F) Practice this for 10 to 20 rounds.
G) When finished, keep eyes closed and listen for
any subtle sounds.
Alternative: (See above photo) Close ears with
thumbs, the eyes with the index fingers, the nostrils
with the middle fingers, and the mouth with the ring
and pinky fingers.
Hold the breathe and this position for as long as is
comfortable, then exhale while keeping fingers in
place. Be aware of any subtle sound vibrations or
images that may appear while in this position.
Benefits: It awakens intuition and subtle or psychic
sensitivity, relieves mental tension, anger,

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 289
anxiety, and insomnia.
Doähas: All
8. £hítkarí Kumbhaka (Hissing Breath)
The hissing sound, produced from inhaling
through clenched teeth, makes a noise like the sound,
‘seet’. Karí means produce. Thus, ¤hítkarí produces
the sound of ‘seet’. During hot weather, one can
practice up to 10 minutes.
Method:
A) Sit comfortably in Siddhásana/Siddha Yoni Ásana.
Eyes are closed and the body is erect. Hands are on
the knees in the Jñyán Mudrá. Do the chin lock.
B) Bring the teeth together (upper and lower) and
separate the lips.
C) Slowly and deeply, inhale through the gaps in the
teeth, listening to the sound it makes.
D) After inhaling, close the mouth and exhale through
the nose.
E) Repeat 20 times.
Precaution: Practice only in the warm months as this
exercise cools the body. Do not practice with chronic
constipation. Some say not to practice when suffering
from high blood pressure.
Benefits: One develops qualities of Divine love. It
lowers blood pressure, cools the tongue, lungs, the
entire body; and mind; it also harmonizes the
endocrine system, and it regulates reproductive
hormone secretion. It also creates charisma and
develops purity.
Doähas: PK-
9. Ujjáyí Kumbhaka (Conquering Breath)
Ujjáyí means “to conquer.” In this practice, the lungs
swell up like one proud of victory.
Method:
A) Sit comfortably in Siddhásana/Siddha Yoni Ásana,
or lie in the corpse pose, and watch the breath.
B) Slightly contract the back of the throat (as when
swallowing).
C) Inhale deeply and slowly through the nose. The
contraction will cause a slight snoring sound, but do
not use force. The sound will come from the throat,
not the nose. Concentrate on the sound. Then exhale
through the nostrils.
D) Practice for 1 to 5 minutes.
Alternative Curl the tip of the tongue to the back of
the throat during the above practice.
Precaution: Do not practice with low blood pressure.
Those with high blood pressure should practice while
in the corpse pose.
Benefits: Dispels phlegm from the throat, increases
digestion, cleanses náæís; heals dropsy, insomnia,
mental tension; aerates the lungs, soothes and tones
the nerves and the entire body.
Doähas: All
10. Múrchha Kumbhaka (Swooning Breath)
Múrchha means to swoon or faint. This process
develops the conscious experience of the unconscious.
Method:
A) Sit comfortably in Siddhásana/Siddha Yoni Ásana,
with chin lock. Palms are on the knees and eyes are
closed.
B) Slowly and deeply inhale through the nose. Hold
the breath.
C) Slightly release the chin lock and exhale slowly.
D) Wait for the breath to return to normal (1 to 2
minutes), then repeat.
E) Concentrate on the void sensation.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
290
Precautions: Do not practice with high blood pressure,
vertigo, or heart disease.
Náda (Sound)
Benefits: Heart rate and pressure are adjusted, mind
is silenced; anxiety, tension, anger, and lethargy are
reduced.
Doähas: VK-
11. Bahya Kumbhaka
(Outer Breath Retention)
Method:
A) Sit comfortably in siddhásana/siddha yoni ásana,
with eyes closed and palms on the knees.
B) Slowly inhale through the nose; slowly and com-
pletely exhale.
C) The chin lock may now be used. Hold the breath
without inhaling.
D) Release the chin lock and slowly inhale.
E) Rest and wait for the breath to return to normal (1
to 2 minutes), then repeat.
Precautions: Do not perform this exercise if suffer-
ing from high blood pressure.
Benefits: The life-breath is stabilized, absorption in
samádhi (divine peace). Kuòæaliní penetrates the
chakras as it rises up the sußhumòá and reaches the
crown.
12. Kayvala Kumbhaka
(Automatic Still Breath)
This breathing is superior to all other forms of
kumbhaka. This frequently takes place, when through
the guru’s grace, the kuòæaliní enters the sußhumòá.
This is the automatic stabilization of breath, of its
own accord. It produces indescribable comfort.
As with ásanas, práòáyáma/kumbhaka,
mudrás, and bandhas—overlaps exist. Náda is also
briefly discussed at the end of part 3. Náda occurs
naturally during proper, natural sádhaná (meditation).
Again, for those who may be naturally hearing these
sounds, they should be secure in the knowledge that
these are confirmations of spiritual development; they
are not signs of trouble.
The practical benefits of developing náda are that
one’s intuition and higher mental faculties are
developed, along with more peace, concentration,
clarity, and improved memory. It also improves
hearing.
This is the value of sound or music therapy. Much
insight can be gained from the expression, ‘music
soothes the savage beast’. In India, classical musicians
know that certain scales, melodies, etc., produce
certain moods and evoke various feelings. A whole
science exists that prescribes certain forms of music
for the various hours of the day, and for each season.
Listening to the appropriate music at the right times
balances the individual with time and nature.
Mantra therapy is also a part of sound. Kuòæaliní
life-force is the essence of all mantras and all sounds.
Traditionally, the guru enlivens the mantra, the life-
force begins to awaken and rise up the sußhumòá,
bringing peace and union to the individual. As the
life-force rises it stills the mind. This is the value of
mantra and all sound therapy. Through sádhaná, Yoni
Mudrá, and Brahmarí Kumbhaka, náda are
developed.
Anaháta (unstruck sound) is the inner sound of
‘chin-chin’ heard in the distance, along with various
other sounds. They are frictionless, so they are called
unstruck. The Vedic scripture, Ha´sopanishad, says
there are 10 different forms of Aanaháta Náda. These
are the unstruck sounds of the eternal, Divine.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 291
Through tracing them back to their source (the eternal),
one begins to see the unification of all aspects of life,
self, and environment as one integrated whole or eternal
reality. That is, all sounds are subtler or grosser
vibrations of eternity. The Vedic text,
Yoga¤hikhopanishad, says there is nothing (i.e., no
mantra or incantation) that is superior to náda,
through which some obtain full Self-Realization.
In the book Yoga Vani, four stages of náda are dis-
cussed:
1. Pará: Náda evolves out of the kuòæaliní life-force
at the múládhára (first chakra), like a seed or a dot.
2. Pa¤hyanti: Only the most highly advanced spiritual
adepts (yogis) can hear náda at this stage. When one
neither hears sounds nor feels with their ears, but hears
sounds intuitively.
3. Madhyama: When náda rises to the heart, it sounds
like the rumbling of thunder. It is felt by the ears, but
not heard; this is called madhyama.
4. Baikhari: When sound rises to the throat it produces
voice or sound. Náda heard by the ears is called
baikhari.
All language comes from náda. Thus, all sounds
and language are grosser expressions of the life-force.
Náda, in turn is a subtle expression of the eternal,
Divine. When one hears the unstruck sound, they are
hearing the eternal itself.
Here was discussed náda as it is developed
through mantras guided by gurus. When a guru is
not available one can use mantras for specific
therapies; these are detailed in Chapter 10.
Part 3
Mudrás & Bandhas
Mudrás are specific body and hand positions that
channel the energy created by ásanas and práòáyám
into the chakras and sußhumòá; they stimulate higher
mental functioning. Some mudrás are done with the
ásanas and práòáyám, while others are done after
these first two practices. As said earlier, merely by
practicing sádhaná (meditation) instructed by a true
guru, ásana, práòáyám, and mudrá occur
spontaneously. However, for those who are interested,
the specific exercises may be practiced separately.
Various mudrás can be seen in performances by
traditional Indian dancers.
Note that practicing these exercises can create
problems if not taught or performed properly. Those
who awaken their kuòæaliní without a guru can lose
their direction in life. Without the knowledge of
harmonizing or using these energies, they can become
confused or mentally imbalanced. If the kuòæaliní
rises through the iæá or pi´galá, instead of the
sußhumòá, or if chakras are opened in an isolated
manner, more harm than good can arise. Thus, yoga
(haóha, kuòæaliní, and tantra) need to be taught in a
holistic or integrated manner.
Some mudrás and bandhas have briefly been
discussed in part 1. Here, these same positions will
be discussed without ásanas. Twenty-five major
mudrás (and bandhas) are discussed in Gheranda
Saåhitá, and 10 in Haóha Yoga Pradípiká. These
create longevity and reverse the aging process. Nine
methods are outlined below.
Preparatory Bandhas
One first needs to learn three locks that are
included in the mudrá positions. These have been
discussed as automatic occurrences in various ásanas
in section 1 of this chapter. Bandhas, or locks, cause
the life-force to unite and rise towards the sußhumòá
or inner spiritual tube of the spine. Some bandhas
cause the life-force to rise through the sußhumòá.
Uææíyána Bandha is one such lock. By locking, or
binding, the opposite poles of energy or ¤hakti are
united.
1. Uææíyána Bandha (Abdominal
Retraction Lock)
Uææíyána means to rise up. Thus, the contrac-
tions of the abdominal organs, which pull up,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
292
create a natural upward flow of energy. This is known
as a stomach lift. Here, the Apán (downward moving
air) is united with the Práò (outward moving air) and
the Samán (equal moving air) at the navel center. It
requires practice to accomplish this event, along with
performing other ásanas, práòáyám, mudrás,
bandhas, and sádhaná.
Uææíyána bandha involves the sucking in of the
abdomen and stomach, and pulling it up (i.e., the belly
is pulled towards the spine and upward). It may be
done sitting, standing, or lying flat on the back.
It may be practiced with ásanas, práòáyáma, or
afterwards. Practicing is easier after an inverted ásana
(e.g., after a shoulder stand). Always practice the chin
lock with this posture.
Precaution: Practice on an empty stomach.
Stool and urine should be evacuated first.
First learn the posture in the standing position.
Do not practice with stomach or intestinal ulcers,
hernia, high blood pressure, heart disease, glaucoma,
or raised intracranial pressure.
This position should be taught by a qualified
teacher. This is an advanced practice; beginners may
harm their bodies or minds. Simultaneously practicing
the Vajrolí mudrá (contraction of reproductive organs
and lower urinary system) is even better.
Of all the bandhas, Uææíyána is the best Haóha
Yoga Pradípiká Ch 3; v 60
Method: Uææíyána Bandha
A) Stand with the feet separated, about two feet apart.
B) Bend the knees slightly, resting the palms on the
knees. The thumbs face each other; fingers face
outward.
C) Spine is straight, head is upright, eyes look forward.
D) Inhale deeply through the nose, then quickly exhale
through slightly pursed lips (but do not force) until
all air is expelled..
E) Engage the chin lock (to the chest) and raise
shoulders.
F) Pull in the abdomen and stomach towards the spine,
and then pull upward.
G) Hold for a few seconds (without discomfort).
Concentrate on the throat or navel center. Inhale,
relaxing the stomach and abdomen.
H) Release the chin lock, rest, and wait for breath to
return to normal (1 to 2 minutes). This is 1 round.
I) Repeat another 2 rounds.
Alternate (Sitting)
The instructions are the same, except one may sit in
Bhadrásana, Padmásana, or Siddhásana/Siddhi Yoni
Ásana. (If seated in siddhásana/siddhi yoni ásana,
sit on a cushion to raise the buttocks.)
Benefits: This slows and reverses the aging process;
it also develops vitality, tones heart region, muscles,
nerves, and glands. It increases blood circulation and
absorption of nutrients. The heart is gently massaged.
Strength is developed in the autonomic nerves in the
solar plexus, alimentary canal, diaphragm, and
respiratory system. It removes gas and carbon dioxide;
and increases oxygen absorption in the brain; raises
the life-force into the sußhumòá.
Organs Helped: All
Doähas: All

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 293
2. Jálandhara Bandha (Throat Lock)
‘Jal’ means throat, ‘jalam’ means water, and
‘Dhárá’ means supporting tube. Thus Jálandhara
Bandha is that which helps prevent the bindú (nectar)
fluid from flowing down the throat and being
consumed by the navel/sun. It is a very easy bandha
to practice, but also very important. (Also discussed
in part 1 on page 260).
This pose can be done sitting or standing, and can
be used with Uææíyána Bandha. It is also done with
práòáyáma and other kriyás involving breath
retention.
Precaution: Do not practice with high blood pressure
or heart disease. Do not practice without learning from
a qualified teacher; the nerves in the path flowing to
the brain may be impaired if performed improperly.
Method:
A) Sitting in Siddhásana/Siddha Yoni Ásana,
Padmásan, £hukhásan, or Vajrásana, place the palms
on the knees and relax the whole body.
B) Inhale slowly and deeply through the nose and
hold the breath.
C) Lower the chin as close to the collar bone as is
comfortable; straighten the elbows and raise the
shoulders. Hold the breath for as long as comfortable.
D) Slowly raise the chin and relax the shoulders.
E) Slowly exhale and rest until the breathing returns
to normal (1 to 2 minutes). This is round
F) Repeat for another 5 rounds.
G) Then do 5 rounds while holding the breath out-
side the body (i.e., holding the breath after exhaling
all the air from the body).
Physical/Mental Benefits: Alleviates throat disorders
(i.e., inflammation, stuttering, excess mucus in the
throat, tonsillitis, etc.). It improves voice quality and
the life-force in the thoracic region. Higher brain func-
tioning is stimulated. The metabolism is balanced
from the flow of pituitary hormonal secretions to the
endocrine glands. This improves one’s response to
stress and develops instinctual abilities. Youthful vigor
is maintained and restored. The throat mediates be-
tween the brain and digestive/assimilation processes.
This gland secretes the hormone thyroxine (T4) that
is responsible for the tissue metabolism rate, or tis-
sue aging. The parathyroid glands properly regulate
calcium metabolism and body density. Diseases of
old age are reduced due to the enzymatic and oxida-
tion of the cells. Mental clarity is improved.
Spiritual Benefits: Kuòæaliní ceases to flow in the
iæá and pi´galá, and between the head and body. Thus
the life-force is directed to flow through the sußhumòá.
Organs Helped: Pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, brain,
endocrine glands.
Doähas: All
3. Múla Bandha
(Perineum/Cervix Retraction Lock)
When the muscles of the perineum are contracted,
the whole pelvic region is pulled up. Contraction does
not include the anus (A¤hwiní Mudrá). During initial
practice, a tendency exists to contract this anal region
as well, but it is not to be practiced here. Múla Bandha
occurs in the center of the body—not the front or
back. In this way, the first chakra is directly
stimulated, producing heat in the subtle body and
awakening potential kuòæaliní (also see part 1).
This bandha is first to be perfected by itself, but
then it may be used with práòáyám, breath retention
(kumbhaka) chin lock (Jálandhara), and abdominal
(Uææíyána) bandhas. [See page 260, 291-293]
Method: Step 1—Preparatory
A) Sit in any comfortable pose (preferably
Siddhásana/Siddha Yoni Ásana because it
automatically contracts the múládhára (1st) chakra.
B) Keep palms on the knees in jñyán or chin mudrá;
and eyes closed.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
294
C) Keep the spine erect and the body relaxed.
D) Males need to contract just inside the perineum;
so they need to concentrate on this area for a few
minutes. Females should concentrate on the cervix
because the cervix and vaginal muscles need to be
contracted.
E) After concentration, gradually begin to contract
and release the muscles of the perineum/cervix.
(Contract for a few seconds and breathe normally.)
Contract up to 20 times.
Method: Step 2
F) Follow step 1.
G) Contract the perineal/cervix muscles and hold for
as long as possible, breathing naturally. Practice up
to 20 times.
Method: Step 3
H) Contract gently and partially, and hold the
contraction.
I) Contract a little more and hold. Continue, gradually
increasing the tension 10 times until full contraction
is achieved.
J) Hold the full contraction for as long as possible,
attempting normal breathing.
Alternative: Múla and jálandhara bandha; and
internal and external breath retention.
A) Sit straight; inhale deeply through the nose.
B) Practice the above step 3.
C) Before exhaling, release múla, then Jálandhara
bandhas. When the head is straight, exhale.
D) Practice 5 rounds of internal breath retention with
step 2; then 5 rounds of external breath retention with
step 3.
E) Practice 5 rounds with Uææíyána Bandha, using
step 2; then 5 rounds of step 3.
It takes many months to become comfortable with
Múla Bandha, and many years to perfect it. Do not
be discouraged if you cannot perfect it immediately.
Like all processes of yoga and Self-Realization, it is
a life process.
Physical Benefits: Pituitary hormone balance
(testosterone and estrogen/progesterone) regulates the
system and slows and reduces the aging process.
Improved nutrient absorption, digestion, nervous
system, blood circulation, mental functions (e.g.,
memory, concentration, alertness, less sleep, etc.).
Spiritual Benefits: Práò/Apán and bindú/náda are
united. Práò and Apán were discussed earlier. Bindú
is the semen/ovum that has two parts: at the first and
last chakra, these are united. Unification awakens the
first chakra, and begins the spiritual awakening of
the student. This transformation of bindú becomes
náda, or eternal, blissful seed-sound, that emanates
within the brain.
By contracting the perineum, performing
Uææíyána and locking iæá and pi´galá through
Jálandhara, the sußhumòá becomes active.
Through this...old age and sickness are reversed.
Haóha Yoga Pradípiká Ch 3 v74-75
4. Mahá Mudrá (Great Position)
This is to be performed after ásanas and
práòáyáma, and before sádhaná (meditation). This
mudrá is similar to the Kriyá Yoga practice.
Method: [photo & alternate method—page 264]
A) Press the left heel into the perineum (males) or
cervix (female). The right leg is extended forward,
and the back is straight.
B) The hands extend outward and reach the knee,
calf, or big toe (keeping the back straight). Keep the
eyes closed and relax.
C) Curl the tongue back towards the throat; slowly
inhale, tilting the head slightly backwards (Khecharí
Mudrá). Focus the eyes at the third eye (middle of
the eyebrows—£háåbhaví Mudrá).
D) Hold the breath for as long as is comfortable and
contract the perineum or cervix (múla bandha).

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 295
E) With breath held, rotate the awareness from the
third eye—to the throat—to the base of the spine.
Mentally repeat the corresponding words, Ajñyá (third
eye), Vi¤huddha (throat), Múládhára (spine base) [or;
£háåbhaví, Khecharí, Múla]. Repeat for as long as
possible, comfortably holding the breath. Do not strain
breathing!
 F) Close eyes, release the perineum/cervix lock, bring
the head upright, and exhale slowly.
Practice three times with the left leg folded, then
3 times with the right leg folded. Then keep both legs
stretched in front and perform this method 3 more
times.
Precaution: To prevent harm hold the breath only so
long as it is comfortable. This mudrá should be taught
and observed by a competent teacher.
Method 2: This method may be practiced in
Siddhásana or Siddha Yoni Ásana if it is more
comfortable. Keep hands on the knees in jñyán or
chin mudrá (finger position methods discussed on
page 261). Sit upright.
Benefits: This method purifies all the bodily channels,
balances the iæá and pi´galá, purifies rasa dhátu and
rasavaha srota (plasma tissue and channels)—the
basis of the entire body. It stimulates the flow of the
sußhumòá, increases vitality, digestion, absorption of
nutrients, abdominal disorders, constipation, skin
diseases, and harmonizes all bodily functions. Mahá
Mudrá improves clarity of thinking, removes
depression, and stills the mind, preparing it for
sádhaná. It creates a dynamic práòic and psychic
vitality.
Doähas: All
5. Mahá Bandha (Great Lock)
This bandha is done between bellow-breath
práòáyámas. Each posture helps the breath retention
of the other (see photo on page 264).
Method: Inner breath retention (Antar Kumbhaka)
A) Press the left heel against the perineum (or female
reproductive organ); place the right foot in half lotus
(on the left thigh).
B) Inhale through the left nostril and hold the breath.
Perform the chin lock (jálandhara bandha). Squeeze
the perineum or cervix (múla bandha), and eyes
gazing at third eye (¤háåbhaví mudrá). Eyes may
remain closed.
C) Hold the breath for so long as it is comfortable.
Then, release the bandhas and mudrá, slowly exhaling
through the right nostril.
D) Repeat B and C; only inhale through the right
nostril and exhale through the left nostril.
E) Rest for 1 or 2 minutes, concentrating on the natural
inhalation and exhalation of the breath. This
completes 1 round.
F) Repeat for 2 more rounds.
Precautions: Do not practice if suffering from high
or low blood pressure, hernia, stomach, or intestinal
ulcer or heart ailments. Good health is necessary for
this pose.
Alternative External breath retention
A) Sit in siddhásana or siddha yoni ásana, with hands
on the knees (in chin or jñyán mudrá). The spine is
erect, the head is straight, the eyes are closed. Relax.
B) Slowly inhale through both nostrils. Then exhale
forcefully and completely through pursed lips
(drawing in the gut helps the expulsion of air). Retain
the breath outside.
 C) Do the bandhas and múla as in the above method,
keeping the breath outside for so long as it is
comfortable.
D) Rotate the awareness from the spine base
(múládhára) to the navel (manipúra) to the throat
(viähuddha); mentally repeat the names of these
chakras while concentrating on each of them.
E) When holding the breath is no longer comfortable,
release the bandhas and múla and slowly exhale.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
296
F) Keep eyes closed and relax for 1 to 2 minutes. This
is 1 round.
G) Repeat for 2 more rounds.
Precautions: Do not practice with high or low blood
pressure, hernia, stomach or intestinal ulcer, or heart
ailments. Good health is necessary for this pose.
Physical/Mental Benefits: Hormonal secretion is pro-
duced and regulated, halting the degeneration of the
aging process.
Spiritual Benefits: One develops the spontaneous and
natural ability of stopping the breath. It unites the
náæís in the Ájñá chakra, enabling higher meditation
abilities. One experiences the silent witness. The in-
dividual merges with the universal.
Organs Helped: Pineal gland, endocrine system.
6. Mahá Bheda Mudrá
(Great Piercing Position)
The previous two exercises, Mahá Mudrá and
Mahá Bandha begin to awaken the kuòæaliní ¤hakti
(life-energy). This present mudrá releases and directs
the ¤hakti. But doing the first two exercises without
Mahá Bheda Mudrá is like purchasing a car without
gasoline: you are prepared to travel but have no means
to move. This position directs the kuòæaliní into the
sußhumòá (inner central tube of the spine)—up to
the ájñá chakra—by gently bouncing the buttocks
on the floor.
This is not the same as the Kriyá Yoga practice,
Mahá Bheda Mudrá, but it is similar. The Kriyá prac-
tice known as Tadan Kriyá is the same as this pres-
ently described position.
Method: (Only for those who can sit in full lotus)
A) Sit in full lotus, relax the body, keep the eyes
closed. Place palms on the floor beside the thighs.
B) Slowly and deeply inhale through the nose. Hold
the breath and do the chin lock (to the chest).
C) Raise the body off the floor by transferring the
weight to the hands and gently bounce the buttocks
against the floor from 3 to 7 times. Maintain
awareness at the base of the spine (múládhára chakra).
[Buttocks and thighs should be touching the floor
during the gentle bouncing, and the spine should be
kept erect.]
D) Exhale slowly and deeply; then rest. Concentrate
on the base of the spine, and wait for the breathing to
return to normal (1 to 2 minutes). This is round 1.
E) Repeat for another 2 rounds.
[In the Tadan Kriyá, the breath is slowly inhaled
through the mouth. The eyes are focused at the third
eye (the chin lock is not done). Also, one bounces the
buttocks gently on the floor. Then, one visualizes in-
haling through a long thin pipe and exhales, visualiz-
ing the breath diffusing in all directions from the base
of the spine. This is a more complex practice.]
Benefits: Restores youthfulness (slows the aging
process), removes wrinkles, gray hair, and trembling
of old age. Hormonal secretions are produced and
balanced.
Organs Helped: Pineal and pituitary glands.
Doähas: All
6. Yoni Mudrá

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 297
Close the ears, eyes, nose and mouth. A clear
distinct sound is heard in the purified sußhumòá.
    Haóha Yoga Pradípiká Ch. 4 v 68
H) When holding the breath is no longer comfort-
able, release the yoni mudrá; then slowly exhale.
This is 1 round. Practice 5 to 10 rounds.
This technique is discussed under the topic of men-
tal peace, or samádhi, in Haóha Yoga Pradípiká. In
Gherand Saåhitá it is mentioned in the mudrá sec-
tion.
We spoke earlier of the development from man-
tra yoga to spontaneous haóha (and práòáyáma), laya,
and then to raja. After raja yoga, one attains Self-
Realization or complete mental peace. This pose is
related more to laya yoga than haóha yoga, and di-
rectly awakens raja yoga. The awakening occurs
through developing an awareness of inner sound
(náda).
Just as with all spiritual experiences that are out
of the norm of supposed societal acceptance, the hear-
ing of inner sounds or voices (náda) has generally
been associated with mental illness. Spiritual coun-
seling reassures a person that their experiences and
feelings are spiritual—not abnormal. Understanding
náda helps persons feel comfortable when hearing
any inner sounds. As previously mentioned, all spiri-
tual experiences are merely signs that progress is
being made. One doesn’t want to attempt to develop
any particular experiences because, no matter how
divine or blissful, they remain in the temporal field
of relativity. One who goes beyond the limits of ex-
perience attains the limitless, eternal state of Self-
Realization.
Method:
A) Sit in Siddhásana or Siddha Yoni Ásana. Inial
slowly and deeply, and hold the breath.
B) Plug the ears with the thumbs.
C) Plug the eyes with the index fingers.
D) Close the nostrils with the middle fingers.
E) Cover the upper lip with the ring fingers.
F) Cover the lower lip with the pinkies.
G) Concentrate on any perceivable subtle sounds. If
a sound is heard, listen to it. If many sounds exist,
listen to those in the right ear. The first sound heard is
to be followed. Then, the next sound heard is also to
be followed.
Precautions: Be gentle with the fingers. Do not pen-
etrate the ear too deeply or press too hard on the eyes.
Benefits: The mind is instantly silenced, mental bliss
occurs, and spiritual ‘unstruck’ sound is heard. The
Self-luminous soul is perceived; thus one becomes
stainless from this sight.
Doßhas: All
8. Nabho Mudrá
Method: Extend the head forward slightly, mouth
open, and inhale into the esophagus.
Benefits: Reverses the aging process and destroys all
diseases.
9. Bhujangini Mudrá
Method: The tongue is curled up inside the mouth
and the breath is held. Do this all the time (whenever
you think of it [Gherand Saåhitá]). Benefits: Re-
moves stomach diseases and improves digestion.
10. Kaki Mudrá/£hítalí
Method: Lips are pursed like a crow’s beak; air is
drawn in.
Benefits: Long life, purifies all Pitta concerns (e.g.,
fever, blood, spleen), tumors.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
298
Final Note
Haóha Yoga Ãsanas, Bandhas and Mudrás
Rounds: All positions that require 3 rounds may
After the fourth month, practice only sitting
slowly—over time, be increased to 10 rounds.
Part 4
Yoga for Pregnancy
     Practicing ásanas while
pregnant can be a safe and
very effective method to stay
fit, and can ease pregnancy.
Back, shoulder, and neck
pain occur from carrying
extra weight; abdominal
muscles become stretched
and unused, and leg muscles
stiffen and swell. Ásanas
help tone the body and keep
it in shape and make the car-
rying time, labor, and recov-
ery easier.
Although many ásanas
are not recommended for the pregnant woman, vari-
ous simple positions can help counteract the adverse
physical effects of carrying a baby. Gentle yoga is
often as important as strenuous yoga. The cervix
should remain tight, and those with histories of mis-
carriages or cervical insufficiencies should take ex-
tra care when practicing ásanas. For nausea, fatigue,
or dizziness, Áyurvedic herbs are available to bal-
ance these conditions (see Section 3, Chapter 23).
Practice can last from 10 to 20 minutes daily, with
rest after each posture.
This section is laid out in two parts, ásanas that
can be done throughout the pregnancy; and ásanas
that can be done after delivery. The poses are arranged
in an easily followed order.
Precautions: Do not perform any postures that chair
and kneel on require lying on the stomach, that overly
stretch pillow. Lift the right the abdominal muscles,
or that only twist from the rib cage up. Always bend
from the hips (not the back). Keep the pelvis upright
and the spine straight.
     After the fourth month, practice only sitting and
lying-on-the-side postures. As with all practices, al-
ways listen to your body. Do not hold any postures
that cannot be practiced comfortably.
[Note: See Chapter 23 for conception, delivery and
post-partum herbs, abhyañga, mantras; for more
deails on Áyurvedic childbirth.]
1. Correct Posture
Method:
A) Stand erect, feet
slightly apart—parallel
with each other and di
rectly under the shoulders.
B) Tighten the front thigh
muscles to straighten the
legs fully relaxed
C) Set the shoulders back
and the chest out (shoul-
ders should relax and
hang). Arms and hands are
relaxed.
D) Extend the neck and
look straight ahead.
E) Lower the tailbone to
the floor and push the hip
bones forward and up.
Benefits: Relieves lower back strain, aligns the ver-
tebrae, improves breathing.
2. Thigh Stretch
Method:
A) Place the chair (with its back) against the wall.
Face the chair and kneel on  a pillow. Lift the right
knee, placing the right foot on the floor with the shin
and thigh forming a right angle; toes under the chair.
The back is straight.
B) Touch the right knee to the front of the chair. Place
fingers on the top front of the chair.
 C) Press the hands down and lift the chest to lengthen
the spine; simultaneously push the tailbone down and

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 299
lift the front hip
bones up. The
left knee is
slightly back.
Feel a gentle
stretch in the
center of the
thigh muscles.
D) Repeat with
the legs in the re-
verse position.
Then rest by sit-
ting comfortably
on the floor in
Siddha Yoni Ásana (just cross the legs; do not lift the
right leg up).
Benefits: Pelvic tilting stretches the spine, and the
groin and thigh muscles.
3. Chest & Shoulder Stretch
Method:
A) With the chair in the same position, sit on a mat or
folded towel. One’s back faces the front of the chair.
Legs are extended straight forward and slightly apart.
B) Place the arms behind the back, resting them on
the seat; interlace the fingers. (If this is difficult, put
more blankets or pillows under the buttocks to raise
the body higher, and/or hold the sides of the seat).
C) Tighten the thighs; slowly inhale and press the
back of the legs and buttocks to the floor.
D) Slowly exhale, lifting the chest and rolling the
shoulders back; breathe normally.
E) Remove arms from the seat, release hands, and sit
comfortably.
Benefits: This pose stretches the chest and shoulder
muscles, and relieves a rounded back and shoulders.
4. Wall Squatting Pose
Method:
A) Stand with the
back against the
wall. Separate the
feet, bend the
knees, and squat
(while resting the
back against the
wall). Alternate—
lean on a sturdy
chair to achieve
the squat.
B) Spread the
knees, turn the
toes outward, and
place the elbows
inside the knees; press palms together.
C) Slowly inhale, pressing the knees apart with the
elbows.
D) Exhale, pressing your back against the wall to
stretch the spine, and moving the tailbone down.
Relax the lower back muscles. Hold this position for
1 to 3 minutes.
E) Relax and sit on the floor. Lean the back against
the wall and keep the feet straight out.
Benefits: Removes lower back pain; stretches the
lower back, calf, and inner thigh muscles.
5. 
Bound
Angle Pose
Method:
A) Sit on a
small pillow
or 
folded
b l a n k e t .
Keep 
the
back against
the wall o
away from
the wall.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
300
Bend the knees to the side and bring the soles of the
feet together in front, holding the ankles.
B) Bring heels as close to the body as possible, then
place palms on the floor.
C) Slowly inhale, gently lifting the spine.
E) Exhale and relax.
F) Place the palms on the inner thighs. Slowly inhale,
then slowly exhale and gently press thighs to the floor.
G) If comfortable, gently lean forward from the hips
and extend hands forward to the floor to straighten
the spine and stretch the shoulders.
H) Relax, sit up, and extend both legs forward.
Benefits: This pose creates flexible hips and stretches
the inner thigh muscles.
6. Wall—Single Leg Stretch
Method:
A) Sit on a
rug or mat,
with the back
against the
wall; extend
the feet for-
ward.
B) Bend the
right knee,
placing the
sole against
the inner left
thigh 
or
knee.
C) With palms on the ground, push the tailbone so
that it touches the wall, then straighten the left leg.
Place a towel or belt around the ball of the left foot,
and hold the strap ends with both hands.
D) Slowly inhale, lift the chest, and press the entire
back against the wall.
E) Slowly exhale, gently pulling the strap to tighten
the front thigh muscle and flex the foot. The spine
should remain against the wall while the back of the
left leg is being stretched.
F) Repeat with the other leg.
Benefits: Stretches the hamstring and calf muscles.
7. Wide Leg Spine Twist
Method:
A) Sit on a rug or mat with legs spread and heels
extended. Tighten the front thigh muscles; press the
backs of the knees to the floor. Place the palms on
the floor beside the hips.
B) Slowly inhale, pressing down to lift and lengthen
the spine.
C) Gently twist or rotate to the right, placing the left
hand in line with the navel and the right hand behind
the right hip.
D) Slowly exhale. Gently lift the chest and twist to
the right.
E) Bring both hands beside the hips, turn to face for-
ward again and rest.
F) Bring the right hand in line with the navel. (The
hand is on the floor.)
G) Exhale and gently twist to the left.
H) Repeat step F, gently bring legs together and rest.
Benefits: This pose
stretches the spine and
inner thigh muscles.
8. Hero’s Pose
Method:
A) Kneel on a mat or
blanket. Separate the
feet and place hands
on the floor for sup-
port. Gently lower the
buttocks between the
heels and sit on a
folded blanket or small

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 301
pillow. (Adjust the height for comfort; place a blanket
on the ankles for comfort). The stretch should be in
the thighs—not the knees.
B) Squeeze the knees together, pressing on the floor
with the fingertips; and stretch the spin upward.
C) Place the palms on the knees, lifting and expanding
the chest with each inhalation.
D) Interlace fingers and lift the chest. Slowly inhale,
then slowly exhale—stretching the arms over the
head, with palms facing the ceiling. Extend the arms
up from the shoulder blades. Keep the spine straight
and lift from the lower back.
E) Lower arms to the sides and widen the knees. Sit
on the heels, bend forward from the hips and rest the
head on the floor or pillow (do not press the belly on
the floor). Arms are alongside the body.
E) Release and extend the legs; sit with the legs
extended and rest.
Benefits: This pose may prevent varicose veins.
Stretches the front of the thighs and the insteps.
Relieves leg fatigue and indigestion.
9. Corpse Pose
Method: Lie on back, arms at the side, palms up.
Breathe normally and feel the mind and body relax.
Benefits: Body adjusts to its new tone, strength, and
less stressful position.
Important: Always end all ásana routines with the
corpse pose (£havásan).
Part 5
Postpartum Ásanas
Once 
the
baby is born, all
postures are again
safe to do. Those listed below are useful for strength-
ening abdominal muscles to help reduce stretches
caused during pregnancy. Twisting poses re-shrink
the uterus; relaxation poses help in recovering from
fatigue. If there is no time to practice yoga with new-
born babies around, postures may include them as
part of the practice.
Immediately after birth it is prudent to avoid
strenuous exercises to flatten the abdomen. With pa-
tience, the ásanas, along with other Áyurvedic herbs
and abhyañga oils, help restore the belly to its origi-
nal tone. Perform postures carefully and gently, as
with all yogic practices. Do not practice yoga if a
hernia or rupture occurs after birth (i.e., a small bulge
in the abdomen).
To protect the spine, all abdominal tightening ex-
ercises should be done while lying on the back. For
cesarean births, wait 6 to 8 weeks before beginning
ásanas. Do not do shoulder stands until after post-
partum discharge is completed.
1. Seated Wall-Leg Stretch Adaptation
Method:
A) Sit and press the entire upper and lower back
against the wall.
B) With blankets on the thighs, bend forward from
the hips.
C) Slowly inhale, then slowly exhale, resting the fore-
head and chest on the blankets (use more blankets to
achieve a more comfortable height).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
302
Benefits: Stretches calves and hamstrings, relieves
back tension, massages the uterus and shoulder to
the floor, turning the head to the left returns it to its
normal size.
2. Seated Twist
Method:
A) Sit on the front half
of a seat or step, feet and
knees together.
B) Place the back of the
upper left elbow on the
outer right thigh, and the
right hand on the right
side of the chair back, up
per step, or wall.
C) Slowly inhale,
squeezing knees to-
gether, lifting the chest
D) Slowly exhale, press-
ing the left elbow into the
right outer thigh and twist the torso to the right.
E) Reverse the hands and repeat in the opposite di-
rection.
Benefits: This pose (and the forward bends) massages
the uterus to return to its normal size; it also strength-
ens the oblique abdominal muscles.
3. Reclining Twist
Method:
A) Lie on the back on a thick rug or mat, legs ex-
tended.
B) Bend the left knee and rest the left foot on the
floor (crossed over the right leg). Place the right palm
on the left outer knee.
C) Slowly inhale; expand the chest.
D) Slowly exhale; twist the hips, spine, and shoul-
ders to the right; press the knee to the floor.
E) Place the left arm on the rug and roll the left shoul-
der to the floor, turning the head to the left.
Breathe normally.
F) Reverse the position and repeat in the opposite
direction.
Benefits: This pose stretches the outer hip, back, and
shoulder muscles. It counteracts soreness from
nursing and carrying the baby.
4. Wall Relaxation Pose
Method:
A) Place a few
folded blan-
kets on the
floor against
the wall. Sit
sideways on
the blankets
with the right
hip against the
wall.
B) Bring the
legs up against
the wall as the
back is lowered
to a rug or mat. Slide the buttocks against or close to
the wall, hips and lower back on the blankets.
C) Breathe normally and feel the entire body relax-
ing. The baby may rest on the abdomen or can be
held in the air over the chest.
D) Contract and relax the sphincter muscles around
the generative organ.
Benefits: This pose relaxes the legs, relieves back fa-
tigue, and shoulder tension caused by nursing. The
contraction increases circulation, healing; restores lost
sensation, tightens organ muscles, strengthens the pel-
vic floor muscles.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 303
5. Wall-Boat
Method:
A) Lie on the back, with knees bent and the soles of
the feet placed against the wall (shins parallel to the
floor).
B) Slowly inhale and exhale while pressing the lower
back firmly against the floor.
C) Contract and relax the sphincter muscles around
the generative organ. Breathe normally.
D) Slowly exhale and slightly curl the head, shoul-
ders and upper back off the floor.
E) Slowly inhale and roll the spine back to the rug
(or mat). Repeat the entire process from 2 to 10 times
(as strength returns).
Benefits: This pose tones and strengthens the abdomi-
nal muscles; it also removes lower back pain. The
contraction increases circulation and healing, restores
lost sensation, tightens organ muscles, and strength-
ens the pelvic floor muscles.
6. Knee-To-Chest
Method:
A) Lie on the mat or rug and bring the knees to the
chest; wrap arms or hands around the knees.
B) Slowly inhale, expanding the chest. Slowly ex-
hale and press the lower back to the rug, pulling the
knees closer to the chest.
C) Bring the forehead towards the knees.
D) Muscles around the spine may be massaged by
gently rolling from side to side. Breathe normally.
E) Contract and relax the sphincter muscles around
the generative organ.
Benefits: This pose eases lower and upper back
tension. The contraction increases circulation, healing,
restores lost sensation, tightens organ muscles, and
strengthens the pelvic floor muscles.
7. Easy Bridge Pose
Method:
A) Lie on the back, knees bent, soles flat on the floor,
arms by the side. Feet are 6 to 8 inches apart.
B) Contract and relax the sphincter muscles around
the generative organ.
C) Slowly inhale and relax the back. Then slowly
exhale and flatten the lower back to the floor.
D) While exhaling, lift the hips off the floor. The
tailbone is curled upward (lift the pelvis higher than
the abdomen) and squeeze the knees together
(buttocks may also be squeezed).
E) Slowly inhale, relaxing and lowering the buttocks
to the floor.
F) Repeat this pose again.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
304
Benefits: This pose strengthens the knees, buttocks,
and abdominal muscles. The contraction increases
circulation, healing, restores lost sensation, tightens
organ muscles, and strengthens the pelvic floor
muscles.
9. Corpse Pose
Method: Lie on back, with arms at the side and palms
facing up. Breathe normally and feel the mind and
body relax.
Benefits: Body adjusts to its new tone, strength, and
less stressful position.
Important: Always end all ásana routines with the
corpse pose.
Part 6
Yoga for Children
     Children are
naturally flexible,
and generally have
an innate sense of
balance. Beginning
ásanas during child-
hood will help main-
tain health and flex-
ibility during adult
and later years. The
open spiritedness of
children makes them
naturally curious to try ásanas. Often they will want
to follow along as parents practice their ásanas. With
a little encouragement and education of physical,
mental, and spiritual health, children will quickly take
to the postures. Explain the benefits of ásana in terms
they can understand, according to their age (teenag-
ers can be told of the reduction of acne, improved
concentration, and memory, etc.). Parents can help
their youngsters attain these postures, making sure
they do not strain or hurt themselves.
To make the child’s ásana time more fun, parents
can do two things. First, keep the sessions short,
allowing for the child’s attention span. Second,
suggest that they pretend to be different animals, and
give them the animal names of the ásanas (e.g., lion,
snake, cat, etc.). They can also pretend to be objects—
e.g., the bridge.
Práòáyama breathing exercises are also good for
children to learn. As they learn to breathe during the
ásanas, they will see how to take breaths from the
lower abdominal cavity, rather than the chest.
Various forms of meditation can be introduced as
well. Children can begin to understand that meditation
means anything that makes the mind quiet and
relaxed. Sunrises and sunsets, nature walks, and
thinking of God are all helpful. If children understand
the importance of setting aside a quiet time each day
and making this a daily habit, they will retain this
habit throughout their teenage and adult years.
Ethics and virtue are important principles that
ensure sound health and longevity. If parents inculcate
and exemplify these principles in daily life, children
will better understand them and see these ideals in
action.
Lastly, proper Áyurvedic diet, using herbs and
incorporating aroma and color therapies, will round
out the healing and balancing of the five senses. So
ásanas, práòáyám, meditation, ethics, and Áyurvedic
life habits are the keys to a healthy childhood, and
the foundations of a healthy and balanced adulthood.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 305
Part 7
Yoga for the Office
Unless a company
has an exercise
room, 
finding
adequate space and
acceptance 
for
practicing yoga
ásanas at work is
unlikely. Yet, when
stress 
becomes
problematic, some
stretching can be
done surreptitiously.
     To increase the sense of relaxation, aromatherapy
can also be used. Place essential oils on the third eye
or under the nose, or put a drop of oil on a light bulb
to let the aroma mildly permeate the room (e.g.,
sandalwood for stress, frankincense for alertness).
Aromas or fragrant flowers balance one’s Áyurvedic
mental constitution. The office can also host negative
ion-producing herbs and plants (e.g., basil, corn
plants, etc.). They promote clarity and freshen the
air. Color therapy may also be used. Colors also
balance one’s emotional constitution. Paintings, rugs,
flowers, wall paint, or other small items harmonize
one’s emotions.
Below are eight modified ásanas that can be
practiced—without being noticed—in the office.
Correct posture is always helpful. There are some
general guidelines for preventing excess stress. Sit
up straight in your chair. Get up and walk around
from time to time to keep the blood circulating and
the body loose. Open the window for fresh air. Breathe
properly: slow inhalations and exhalations can help
calm the mind and body, and make it more alert, and
can be done without calling attention to yourself.
Rubbing the neck, shoulders, back, legs, and face will
also invigorate the mind and body; increase
circulation, and remove muscle tension and mental
stress. One can invent stretches as well. Lastly, persons
can practice two mudrás: staring at the third eye, and
a modified lion pose:
1) Staring at the third eye with the chin lock
improves concentration and keeps the brain nectar
from diminishing. The mind, neck, and upper back
will release tension.
2) Sticking out the tongue (if it does not cause a
scene), and/or making a yawning motion and facial
contortions, will remove facial tension and keep
wrinkles away.
Those who can remove the left shoe in the office
may consider a modified Siddhásana/ Siddha Yoni
Ásana. Sit in your chair and place the left heel against
the perineum or female generative organ. This will
close the first chakra and keep your life-force from
escaping. This will bring about increased energy,
balance, and concentration.
1. Head/Neck Stretches
Method:
A) Lower the chin to the chest and rest for a few
seconds, gently raise it, then gently lean it backwards.
Hold for a few seconds and gently raise it upright.
B) Turn the face to the left shoulder and gently lower
the chin. Hold it for a few seconds, lift the chin, turn
to look at the right shoulder and lower the chin again.
Hold for a few seconds, slowly lift the chin and face
forward.
A-1

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
306
A-2
A-3
A-4
C) Face halfway between the front and left shoulder
position, gently lower the chin and hold this posi-
tion. Slowly raise the chin and then lean the head
back in the opposite direction (midway between the
back and the right shoulder). Hold and then return
the head upright. Repeat in the opposite direction.
D) Repeat A.
Benefits: Removes neck and brain tension.
2. Chest Expansion (Modified Fish Pose)
Method:
A) Sit on the edge of a
desk or the arm of a
couch with the arms be-
hind the back and palms
on the desk or the chair’s
arm.
B) Lean backwards and
arch your chest outward,
slowly breathing into
the chest.
Benefits: This stretch
increases oxygen needed for concentration and for
the removal of stress from the upper torso, arms, and
neck.
3. Spinal Twist
Method: Sit in a
chair, 
with
hands on the
chair arms. Gen-
tly twist to one
side, and then
the other.
Benefits: Re-
leases 
stress
from bad pos-
ture, tones and
loosens 
the
spine, increases
the flow of
blood to the sys-
tem; all this re-
sults in improved clarity and concentration.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 307
4. Lower Back
Stretch
Method: Sit up
straight in a chair
with hands on the
knees. Press the
palms against the
knees, arching
and stretching the
lower back. Con-
centrate on the
lower back. (The
chin lock can be
also done.)
Benefits: This
eases lower back
pain and prevents
the life energy from flowing out of the body. The
result is more energy and flexibility, improved con-
centration and clarity.
5.  Leg Stretches
Method:
A) Stand up straight.
Bend one leg until the
ankle can be grabbed
from behind. Gently pull
the ankle close to the
buttocks. Inhale and feel
the stretch. Repeat with
the other leg.
B) Sitting in a chair, ex-
tend one leg forward, parallel to the floor. Flex the
toes up towards the ceiling and then downwards.
Slowly inhale and feel the stretch in the calves. Re-
peat with other foot.
C) Slowly bend forward so long as you are
comfortable, letting head and hands hang freely. Feel
the release of stress from the face, arms, back, and
shoulders. Also feel the stretch in the back of the
thighs.
Benefits: Leg stretching increases flexibility and
circulation in the legs, reducing stress caused by sitting
and work-related tension.
6. ABC Stretch (Arm, Back, Chest)
Method: Interlace fin-
gers behind the back,
slowly inhale while
straightening arms and
lifting them up to the
ceiling and expanding
the chest (i.e., arching
the back). Hold and
breathe normally.
Benefits: Releases
stress from the arms,
shoulders, neck, and
chest, caused by sit-
ting, writing, poor pos-
ture, and work-related
stress.
7.  Isometrics

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
308
Hands: Place the left palm across the inside of the
right-hand fingers (palm to palm). Inhale and gently
pull the left palm towards the body, stretching the
fingers, hand, and wrist. Reverse the hand positions
and repeat.
Benefits: This releases stress from writing, typing,
and clenching of hands.
Arms: Interlace fingers and clasp hands together in
front of the body. Push them together for several sec-
onds, pull them apart (hands remain clasped). Try to
lift one hand, then the other. Try to lower one hand,
then the other. Stretch the arms outward and arch the
back (caving in the chest) to stretch the pectorals and
upper back. This can feel as though the body were
yawning. (One may also keep the heel on the first
chakra or, at least, contract the muscles in this area
to prevent energy loss.)
Benefits: Releases stress, tones muscles.
Legs:
A) Cross the
left ankle
over 
the
right. Try to
lift the right
foot up, as
the left foot
holds it in
place. Try to
pull the feet
apart while
keeping the
a n k l e s
crossed. Try
to push the
left foot to-
ward 
the
body while the right foot stops the movement. Re-
verse the feet and repeat.
B) Place feet beside one another and press the feet
and knees together.
Benefits: This stretch releases tension caused by sitting,
improves flexibility, and ease. Isometrics are also very
helpful on long plane flights to relieve stiffness.
Foot massage rollers are available at many health
food stores. A few seconds of rolling the feet on the
wood will provide passive whole-body exercise, a
release of stress, and help alleviate all digestive prob-
lems.
Part 8
Yoga for the Elderly & Handicapped
Those who have been practicing ásanas since child-
hood, teen years, or during
their adulthood, will find it
easier to continue their prac-
tice into their later years. They
can better  gauge the need
to take the postures more
gently. When people over
60 begin ásanas for the first time, they need to start
slowly and gently. They need to do modified, less
strenuous postures.
When people live for 60 or 70 years without us-
ing stress-reducing methods, their bodies become stiff
and brittle. This is certainly not a description of the
‘golden years.’ Yet, with even a little ásana practice,
symptoms of old age begin to disappear. The body
has amazing healing powers, and ásanas quickly
begin to improve flexibility and to increase the vital-
ity of physical and mental powers. People also have
an increased interest in their spiritual lives.

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 309
When first beginning the postures, the body feels
very stiff. Massaging the body with oils and taking a
warm bath with Epsom salt will loosen the muscles.
Alternatively, one may want to practice the ásanas in
the afternoon when the muscles are already loosened
from the mornings activities.
Most of the postures discussed earlier will
remove symptoms of old age. Should they seem too
strenuous, ásanas can be modified for practice while
sitting on a sturdy chair, leaning against a wall or on
a sturdy table. People who have physical disabilities
may work the parts of the body that are mobile, and
even practice from a wheelchair. For muscles that
may have become limited or even paralyzed, massage
provides a passive form of exercise. The main rule
for elders and physically challenged people is to be
gentle; do not force any pose beyond comfort.
Práòáyáma is also useful for improving the body
and lungs, and mental and spiritual peace (memory,
concentration, and clarity). One’s Áyurvedic life
habits (e.g., nutrition, herbs, color and aromatherapy,
etc.) will further remove the limiting experiences of
old age while helping develop longevity. Particularly,
oil applications (abhyañgas) help strengthen muscles
and bones, improve circulation and heart strength,
remove arthritis and other pains and diseases usually
associated with old age, and regenerate the nerves
and mental faculties.
Traditionally in India, age 60 was when people
completed their responsibilities of raising a family
and making a contribution to society. Then they were
given the time to explore their inner spiritual life. By
age 70, they would naturally begin to realize the
illusory nature of life and wholeheartedly seek God
as the only true and eternal experience worth having.
So, meditation for persons over 60 will have a most
profound experience. Retiring from a job may mean
an end of one career, but by no means does it mean
that life is over. Another phase of life, rich in spiritual
development, is in the offing. Along with this is the
ability for elder people to be counselors to the younger
generations who need life-experience guidance.
Herbs that help slow and reverse the aging process
include a¤hwagandhá, ¤ha´ka pußhpí, bráhmí,
jaóámáñ¤hí, etc. These herbs increase memory,
concentration, mind-body coordination, build brain
and nerve cells and tissues, and prevent senility.
Ghee, sesame oil, ¤hatávarí, etc., build and
strengthen the ojas (life sap), immune system; nourish
and moisten bones, preventing brittleness. Abhyañga,
¤hiro dhárá, ¤hiro basti, and body massage with
sesame oil provide passive exercise, increases
circulation, and help remove arthritis and other pains
and stiffness.
By beginning or continuing ásanas, práòáyám,
Áyurvedic life habits, and sádhaná (meditation)
during later years one will continue to heal, to avoid
illness, to reduce the symptoms of old age, and to
develop spirituality. Thus, Áyurveda helps make these
years truly ‘golden’.
Part 9
Yoga for Digestive Disorders
As discussed under the bow pose (p. 268), if the
navel becomes displaced it creates all types of
digestive disorders. To determine if the navel is
displaced, one lies on their back with their legs
extended straight out. Another person takes a string
and measures from one big toe to the navel of the
person lying down. Then, they measure from the other
big toe to the navel. If the string differs in length then
the navel is out of balance and can be helped by these
specific ásanas.
Here, 3 postures are discussed that will properly
center the navel. By practicing these three postures
for 3 to 5 minutes daily, for 3 days, the navel will be
returned to its normal position. Proper digestion will
be noticed thereafter.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
310
Bow
BEGINNER POSE
INTERMEDIATE POSE
ADVANCED POSE
The bow was discussed earlier. Parents can  help
babies and young children with the beginner’s bow.
Method: For babies
A) The child is placed on their belly with arms
stretched over their head and legs straight out.
B) Their wrists are gently pulled forward and upward
so the upper torso is slightly off the ground (i.e., the
navel is still on the ground). This position is held for
3 minutes—or until the child begins to feel
uncomfortable.
Method:
A) Lay on back with legs fully extended.
B) Bend one knee and place the foot across the upper
thigh of the extended leg.
C) Gently press the bent knee to the ground and hold
it for 3 to 5 minutes.
D) Release and extend the leg; repeat with the other
leg.
Boat
This is perhaps the most difficult of the three pos-
tures; therefore, this pose is held only so long as it is
comfortable. Make sure to breathe during the pose.
Method:
A) Lay on back with arms by the sides. Legs are fully
extended and together.
B) Inhale, then exhale, slowly raising the head and
upper chest off the ground. Simultaneously, lift the
legs slightly off the floor (also keeping them together).
C) Exhale, slowly returning to the prone position
again.
Part 10
Medical Definitions
     Throughout this section
on yoga ásanas, physiologi-
cal effects of the postures
were explained. The more
important systems and or-
gans are further defined be-
low in modern medical ter-
minology.
Reticular Activating System: Controls the overall de-
gree of central nervous system (CNS) activity. This
relates to waking, sleeping, and clarity (alertness).
This system influences the thalamus and hypothala-
mus.
Thalamus: Relays senses and connects with many
brain areas including the cerebral cortex, basal gan-
glia, hypothalamus and brain stem. It also senses pain,
and is related to emotions and memory.
Hypothalamus:
Affects behavior—emotions, the subconscious, sen-
sory-motor skills, intrinsic feelings of pleasure and
pain, rage, fear. Affects physical functions—body tem-

Section 3: Therapeutics                             Chapter 9: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyama, Náda, Mudrá, Bandha
 311
perature, weight, blood pressure, water metabolism,
the cardiac system, urinary output, kidneys, hunger,
sodium, negative ions, thirst, communicates with the
cerebral cortex, pupil dilation, shivering, GI tract
stimulation, thirst, satiety, sexual drive, alertness, body
temperature, uterine contraction, and breast milk ejec-
tion.
Thyroid: Secretes the two main hormones that regu-
late the metabolic rate and secretes a hormone for
calcium metabolism. It affects proteins, cellular en-
zymes, growth, cholesterol, triglycerides, phospho-
lipids, arteriosclerosis, muscles, sleep, sexual func-
tions, blood flow, cardiac output, and body weight. It
also affects liver/fat deposits, metabolic rate, respira-
tion, carbohydrates, vitamin metabolism, gastrointes-
tinal functions, and the CNS .
Autonomic Nervous System: Partially or wholly af-
fects—psychosomatic conditions, visceral organs,
blood pressure, urinary bladder, GI tract, sweat, body
temperature, bronchi, and kidneys. It also affects skel-
etal motor nerves, blood, mind, nose, eyes, lungs,
small intestine, colon, liver, gall bladder, and the pi-
tuitary gland.
Parasympathetic Nervous System: This system af-
fects the iris/eyes, nose, lungs, liver, gall bladder, and
the male generative organ.
Endocrine Glands: The glands secrete hormones that
affect growth, thyroid, pancreas, ovaries, testes, par-
athyroid, placenta, RNA, gonads, antidiuretic, and the
pituitary.
Pituitary Gland: This gland is connected to the hypo-
thalamus. Most pituitary secretions are controlled by
hormonal or nervous signals from the hypothalamus.
Other secretions come from within the gland and re-
lease or inhibit secretions. It affects amino acids, car-
bohydrates, hair, gonads, breast milk, metabolism,
milk, antidiuretic, thyroid, growth, proteins, mam-
mary glands, glucose, insulin diabetes, water metabo-
lism, and kidneys.
Suggested Reading
Gray H. Gray’s Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA:
Running Press; 1974
Guyton A. Textbook of Medical Physiology.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Press; 1981. Jor-
dan S. Yoga For Pregnancy. New York,
NY: St. Martin’s Press; 1987.
Iyengar BKS. Light On Yoga. New York, NY:
Shocken Books; 1976.
Saraswati Swami Múkíebodhándana, trans.
Haóha Yoga Pradípiká. Bihar, India: Bihar
School of Yoga; 1985.
Shivananda Yoga Center. Shivananda Companion To
Yoga. New York, NY: Fireside/Simon
& Schuster; 1983.
Tirtha Swami Shankar Purushottam. Yoga Vani.
Bayville, NY: Áyurveda Holistic Center
Press; 1990.
Vasu RBSC. (trans.) Gheranda Saåhitá. New
Delhi, India: Oriental Books Reprint Corp.;
1980

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
312

Section 3: Therapeutics                    Chapter 10: Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music
 313
Like salt that is tasted in water
though we cannot see it,
so too, merging into Brahman
we are everywhere, but we cannot see it.
                                   Vedic saying
Chapter 10
Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music
n the last chapter, we briefly discussed
sound (náda). In the present chapter we in-
vestigate the entire realm of sound as a heal-
ing therapy for physical, mental, and spiritual disor-
ders.
All of life is vibration: color, matter, energy par-
ticles; even love has a vibration or feeling. The Vedas
state that creation arises from the first sound of the
universe, the primordial sound Aum. The definition
of mantra varies because there are so many types of
mantras: Áyurvedic, astrological, deities, seed (bíja)
mantras, and the like. Many books about mantras
exist as well. A special group of mantras are Guru
mantras. These are words enlivened by the spiritual
teacher to awaken our inner kuòæaliní ¤hakti and de-
velop our spiritual growth of Self-Realization. Dif-
ferent Gurus use different mantras; some use mean-
ingless sounds, some use musical sounds, some use
the mantra aum, aum namaà £ivaya, ha´g saà; and
others use name-symbol or deity mantras. It is be-
lieved that any words the Guru speaks to a person are
mantras or awakeners of kuòæaliní. If the Guru says,
“eat an apple,” that would be a mantra for that mo-
ment. Some gurus use only the playing of music to
realize the Divine. Some meditate on the Divine as
unmanifest, formless.
Sound itself belongs to the element of ether, the
origin of all the other elements. By calming and awak-
ening the inner self through sound, a person can calm,
harmonize, and balance all the elements that are in
his or her life.
C (“AUM”, THE 1ST SOUND OF THE UNIVERSE)
Guru Mantras
Mantra is that which saves us from the work-
ings of the mind. Thought or meditation vanishes
with the stopping of mental activities. With the stop-
ping of mental activities, yoga is
attained, which is nothing but self
concentration or self centeredness.
Yoga Vani (Discourse 3)
Life-breath—or Soul (Kuòæaliní £hakti)—is the
mantra, the savior of the mind, because mind is a
vibration of life-breath. When the life-breath flows
through the sußhumòá (a mystical tube within the
spine) to the crown of the head, the mind becomes
fixed in the Brahmarandhra, within the crown chakra
(Sahasrárara), and it disappears, becoming calm,
peaceful, or inactive. Thus, the mantra is nothing but
the breath of life.
This life-breath, when exhaled, makes the sound
‘Hang,’ and when inhaled, makes the sound ‘Sah’.
This mantra occurs in all creatures 21,600 times daily
over the entire 24 hour period. Those of keen yogic
awareness can actually hear this sound. This Gáyatrí
or mantra is known as ajapa, and is the giver of
salvation to Yogis. Gáyatrí originates at the
múládhára—or base chakra, has a dot-like
appearance, and sustains the Self. Náda—or sound—
evolves from this imperceptible kuòæaliní sprout.
Yogis perceive this sound as a sprout from an invisible
seed. As it moves to the navel, it can yogically be
perceived as visible rumbling, as if from the clouds.
It then moves up to the heart as unstruck sound, and
is finally heard in the throat so as to produce

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
314
all sounds, alphabets, words, sentences, mantras,
scriptures, etc. So all mantras emanate from náda—
or sound, originating at the first chakra.
Mantras, to be successful, must be enlivened or
animated; this occurs by waking the kuòæaliní ¤hakti.
Generally, it is believed that one needs a Guru to
enliven the word or mantra. Otherwise, everyone
could refer to a book or go to a religious service and
feel the awakening of life within. Some rare
individuals, who have developed much spiritual
sincerity and earnestness, can enliven mantras for
themselves, but this is rare.
In the book Yoga Vani there is a discussion of the
benefits of name-symbol mantras. The importance
of the mantra is the deity established by it. Mantra is
the attribute and deity is the goal. Just as the term
“sun” and its effulgence have a relationship, so the
mantra and its deity have a connection. Mantra and
its deity meditation, bring concentration through
meditation, and the result is that the deity is revealed
in the Soul.
Awakening Kuòæaliní
Like a double-tongued snake, kuòæaliní (the
essential life force) has two mouths: internal and
external. One mouth is stuck in the internal sußhumòá
(a spiritual tube, running up the spine) that leads to
Self-Realization. The other mouth is open to the
external passage. This is why we are aware of the
world and why we breathe; and this is why we see
the diversity of life. When, through the grace of a
Guru, the kuòæaliní is awakened, it may appear as a
flash of lightning. Once awakened, the kuòæaliní
gradually rises up the sußhumòá. It cleanses karmic
sludge out of the spine and the chakras, just as a hot
iron rod cleanses the dirt from a hookah pipe tube.
Persons may have experienced quivering, shaking
movements of the body, or suspension of breath
during meditation. This is the experience of the
kuòæaliní ¤hakti cleansing the inner tube and chakras.
Áyurvedic Healing Mantras
Healing sounds balance both the mind and body,
as well as the spirit. Practitioners find that imparting
Áyurvedic mantras helps heal their clients. Mantras
also help balance práòa, tejas, and ojas. They help
harmonize nerve tissue, and they clear subtle
impurities from the nerves and náæís (subtle
channels). These mantras also aid one’s concentration
and creative thinking.
Both practitioner and client use the mantras during
a session. They empower all actions on a subtle level,
infusing the cosmic life force into the healing process.
Generally, Váyu doßhas mentally repeat mantras,
while Pitta and Kapha doßhas may also chant them.
Kaphas do particularly well with chanting; it is
suggested that they do so on a daily basis.
Aum: (long “ahh”, then ‘um’ as in home) Most
important, for it represents the Divine word, serving
to energize or empower all things and processes. This
is why all mantras begin and end with aum. Best for
males.
Uses: It clears the mind, opens náæís, and increases
ojas. It awakens one’s práòa—or positivity—needed
for healing to occur.
Ram: (“a” sounds like the “a” in “calm”)
Uses: Brings Divine protection (light and grace),
giving strength, calm, rest, peace; good for mental
disorders and high Váyu (e.g., insomnia, bad dreams,
nervousness, anxiety, excessive fear, and fright); it
strengthens ojas and builds the immune system.
Hoom:
Uses: It wards off negative influences, which are
manifested as diseases, negative emotions, or black
magic. Hoom awakens agni and promotes digestive
fire. It burns up áma and clears channels; it increases
tejas and mental perception, and it is sacred to £hivá
as the sound of Divine wrath.
Aym:
Uses: Improves mental concentration, thinking,
rational powers, and speech; awakens and increases
intelligence, mental and nervous disorders; restores

Section 3: Therapeutics                    Chapter 10: Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music
 315
speech, communication, control of senses and mind;
is the sacred sound of Saraswati, the Goddess of
Wisdom.
£hrím:
Uses: Promotes general health, beauty, creativity,
prosperity, strengthens rasa (plasma) and ¤hukra (re-
productive fluids), and overall health and harmony.
Hrím:
Uses: Cleanses and purifies, giving energy, joy, and
ecstasy. Although it initially causes atonement; it also
aids detoxification.
Krím:
Uses: Gives capacity for work and action; adds power
and efficacy, good for chanting while making prepa-
rations.
Klím: K+
Uses: Gives strength, sexual vitality, control of emo-
tions, increases ¤hukra and ojas.
£ham: Mantra of peace (or ‘Aum ¤hanti, ¤hanti,
¤hanti’)
Uses: Creates calmness, detachment, contentment;
alleviates mental and nervous disorders, stress, anxi-
ety, disturbed emotions, tremors, shaking, palpita-
tions, and chronic degenerative nervous system dis-
orders.
£hum: (pronounced like “shoe” but with a shorter
vowel sound)
Uses: Increases vitality, energy, fertility, sexual vigor,
mantra for increasing ¤hukra.
Som: (as in home)
Uses: Increases energy, vitality, joy, delight, creativ-
ity, ojas; it strengthens mind, heart, nerves, and is
good for rejuvenation and tonification therapies.
Mantras for the 5 Elements
One can strengthen the five elements through their
mantras: Lam—Earth, Vam—Water, Ram—Fire,
Yam—Air, Ham—Ether (“a” is a short sound, like
the “e” in “the”) and will strengthen the systems they
govern.
Lam: Root chakra, excretory system, stabilizes
Apána Váyu, grounds, stabilizes, calms, brings joy,
happiness, and contentment.
Vam: Sex chakra and urogenital system; helps
balance water metabolism, gives creativity, fertility,
and imagination.
Ram: (pronounced like “but”) navel chakra and solar
plexus; increases agni, will, perception, energy, and
motivation.
Yam: Heart chakra and circulatory system; gives
energy and enthusiasm.
Ham: Throat chakra and respiratory system; gives
breath and práòa.
Kßham: Third eye (ajña) and mind; gives
concentration, peace, stability, and calm to the mind.
Aum: Head center, awakens deeper consciousness,
giving full expansion of consciousness.
Doßha Mantras
Váyu: Mantras need to be soft, warm, soothing,
calming. They should not be chanted aloud or for too
long, as this may deplete their energy. Chanting may
be done for a few minutes, then continued mentally.
Precaution: Aum chanted in excess increases Váyu
(air and ether).
Best: Ram, Hoom
Pitta: Mantras must be cool, soothing, and calming.
Best: Aum, Aim, £hrím, £ham

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
316
Kapha: Does best with chanting or singing; needing
warm, stimulating, and activating ones. Best: Hoom,
Aum, Aym
Mantra Applications
For Practitioners:
1. During the session, purify healing room using
Aum and Hoom .
2. Bring Divine light into room using Aum and
Ram.
3. Chant mentally over the client to clear their
psychic level using Aum.
4. Energize the healing power of herbs or
medicines using Krím or £hrím.
For Clients:
They can make use of these mantras at home to
increase healing.
Mental or nervous disorders:
£ham—relieves pain and fever. Hoom—restores
nerve function and counters paralysis.
Som—rebuilds cerebrospinal fluid
Round and round the circle
Completing the charm So
the knot be unknotted The
crossed be uncrossed
The crooked be made straight And the curse be
ended
T.S. Elliot
Part 2
The Life-Breath & Chakras
Life-breath is the main energy in the physical body.
All 14 sense organ energies are manifestations (i.e.,
eye, ear, nose, etc.) of the life-breath. The life-breath
has different names when doing different functions,
just as one person can be an employee, a parent, or a
child. For example, when the life-breath flows through
the optic nerves in the eye, it has the function (en-
ergy) of vision. If the flow of life-breath is blocked,
sight is impaired. Thus, the various sense organs are
infused by the one life-breath.
When the life-breath, which is drawn in different
directions through the different channels, is directed
by yoga or union (devotional Sádhaná) to flow
through the sußhumòá—or spiritual tube within the
spine, Pure Knowledge is developed and one gains
Self-Realization. All the other channels are for en-
joyment. Deep inside the sußhumòá lie the chakras
(energy centers). They are visible only through the
spiritual eye.
Some say there are 350,000 channels, some say
72,000 channels. There are 15 main channels; the 3
most important of which are discussed here: the
sußhumòá, iæá, and pi´galá.
Sußhumòá is the most important channel, resting in
the spine at the back of the body. It is experienced as
brilliantly as the sun, moon, and fire; possessing
sattwa, rajas, and tamas. It begins at the chakra at
the base of the spine, the múládhára, and extends to
the sahasrára— thousand-petaled lotus at the crown
of the head. Inside the sußhumòá is a finer náæí—or
channel—called bajra. Bajra is seen like a blazing
flame that enters from the swádhißóhán lotus or sexual
organ. Inside the bajra náæí is yet a finer náæí (chan-
nel) called chitrini. Chitrini is said to be as fine as a
spider’s web. Along this náæí run the six lotuses or
chakras, extending from the base of the spine
(múládhára) to a little beyond the spiritual eye—or
ájñá chakra. Devotees or yogis are said to be the only
ones who see this náæí. Within the chitrini náæí is
still another náæí, the white colored Brahmanáæí. It
is resplendent, running from múládhára base chakra
to the crown chakra, sahasrára. This náæí is seen as
a flash of lightning and is the fountain of pure knowl-
edge and eternal delight.
The iæá náæí (sometimes called the moon chan-
nel) begins from the múládhára lotus. It is found on
the left side of the spine and encircles the chakras. It
ends above the ájñá or spiritual lotus, to the extrem-
ity of the left nostril. Pi´galá

Section 3: Therapeutics                    Chapter 10: Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music
 317
(sometimes called sun channel) begins similarly on
the right side. It goes on and ends similarly to the iæá,
ending above the extreme right nostril. Breath
generally flows through the right or left channels;
rajas or tamas prevail respectively. Through
devotional sádhaná, life-breath flows through the
sußhumòá (sattwic predominance), the mind becomes
concentrated, and real meditation begins.
The remaining 12 major channels begin ostly
at the navel:
Two channels go to the eyes.
Two channels go to the ears.
One channel goes to the extremity of the nose.
One channel goes to the stomach to digest four
     kinds of food (masticated, sucked, licked,
drunk).
One (Saraswati) goes to the tip of tongue, resulting
in perception of taste and expression of words.
One channel produces sneezing.
One channel moves from the throat, taking the
essence of food to the brain. (From the navel,
3 channels go downwards as well).
One channels goes to the anus to purge.
Two channels go to the genitals to excrete urine
and one to discharge semen.
Below is a discussion of the experiences of the
chakras according to Swámí £ha´kar Purußhottam
Tírtha, from his book, Yoga Bani (Instructions for
the Attainment of Siddhayoga).
1st or Múládhára Chakra: Experience of this
chakra brings fulfillment of all desires, reveals the
whole universe, makes one versed in the £hastras
(texts of wisdom), makes one pure and hale, and is
considered great among people. It is seen as fresh
lightning. It is found at the base of the spine, between
the anus and genitals.
2nd or Swádhißhóhána Chakra: Opening of this
chakra annihilates passions such as pride. It is found
at the root of the genitals.
3rd or Manipúra Chakra: Located at the root of
the navel. Opening of this chakra gives one the
ability to create, preserve, and destroy; speech
never fails this person. Concentration on this
chakra increases digestive power. It eases difficult
breathing. Excess Kapha is removed from the body.
One also can hear inner sound (náda) by concen-
trating here.
4th or Anaháta Chakra: At the heart, when opened,
grief and fear vanish through the grace of the Holy
Preceptor. One also can hear the Ha´gsaà mantra,
and the heart’s desires are fulfilled. One gains
command over speech, controls all senses and
passions, can enter other bodies, and can create,
preserve, and destroy this world.
5th or Vißhuddha Chakra: Located in the throat,
once opened, if the yogi is angered, the three worlds
are shaken. One becomes a poet, a wise person,
peaceful in mind, is free from disease and sorrow,
and is long lived.
6th or Lalaná Chakra: Located in the palate, if
concentration on this chakra occurs, fever, Pitta
insanity, and the like are cured.
7th or Ájñá Chakra: Located in the middle of the
brow, once opened, annihilation of desires occurs.
One becomes equal to Brahmá, Vißhòu, and £hiva.
Food is taken in smaller quantities, and one passes
less stool and urine. This chakra is also called the
heart. Above the ájñá is the confluence of iæá, pi´galá,
and sußhumòá (discussed above).
8th or Manas Chakra: Found a little above the ájñá.
Here is the inner Soul, as knowledge and the
knowable. One can see the letter aum.
9th or Soma Chakra: Located a little above manas,
when open, a person gains patience, grieflessness,
stability, gravity, concentration, and other similar
mental strengths.
Just above this chakra is the region of no sup-
port. Here air becomes stable without breathing or
holding breath. Here all sense of physical

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
318
tir
k
s
n
a
S
h
silg
n
E
tir
k
s
n
a
S
h
silg
n
E
a
S
C
a
M
#
F
ir
#
C
a
P
G
i
R
D
a
h
d
#
G
a
g
#
D
a
h
D
A
a
G
E
in
#
A
a
m
F
i
N
B
existence vanishes. Perception of the eternal Self as
most beautiful, pure and serene is then experienced.
Everything is the Self and the Self is everything.
Sahasrára Chakra: Beyond all chakras, the place
of supreme perception, the site of Self-ab-sorption
(Nirbikalpa Samádhi), persons experience the
stopping of all sensory functioning. The devotee is
united with the One Universal Soul or Brahmá.
Lassitude, decrepitude, and other diseases disappear,
and one feels supreme delight. One experiences
Nirvana £hakti, mother of the three worlds. In utmost
intimacy, She is thus experienced. No words can
describe this experience. One experiences only vital
force in various forms. Only new knowledge occurs,
no physical attributes are noticed.
C
C
C
Our sages developed music from time immemorial
for the mind to take shelter in that pure Being,
which stands apart as one’s true Self.
Real music is not for wealth, not for honors,
or not even for the joys of the mind -
it is one kind of yoga,
a path for realization and salvation,
to purify your mind and heart
and give you longevity
Ali Akbar Khan
Part 3
Music 
Therapy
     From the earliest
days in India, music
was another form of
attaining spiritual
union, practiced by
musicians without any
thought of worldly
gains. Music was
found in the temples,
sung as bhajans (devotional songs) in áßhrams, and
used by saints as a means of expression. Yet it was
also found in the theater and the army tents. In short,
music was a path for the musically inclined to reach
God. The music teacher was the guru. By following
the guru’s musical instruction, the student or disciple
also learned a spiritual lesson. The musical path to-
wards Self-Realization was one lacking intellectual
analysis or discussion. Merely by playing music, one
would gradually merge with the eternal Divinity. The
basic learning precept was, “¤hikßha, díkßha,
paríkßha”: learning, dedicated practice, evaluation.
Below is a discussion of classical North Indian mu-
sic.
     The traditional learning method was to live near
the guru’s home and spend each day in theory, vocal
music classes, and so forth. Like all forms of Vedic
learning, originally the teaching of music was an oral
tradition, passed on from teacher to student. The
teacher was always there to correct the student’s per-
formance or understanding of the music (rags—a
melody base or form over which the musician may
improvise). Students practiced small sections of the
music until they gradually learned the entire song.
     Today, unless one lives in India, finding such a
teacher with whom to study is difficult. In the United
States, although there are teachers with whom per-
sons may study (usually for hourly classes), it is more
likely that the aspiring musician will resort to books,
audio tapes, and video cassettes that are available for
self-instruction. An extremely devoted musician can
study with some of the great Indian virtuosos who
live in or visit the US.
The Indian music scale has certain similarities to
Western music.

Section 3: Therapeutics                    Chapter 10: Sound Therapy: Mantras, Chakras, & Music
 319
Classical Indian music (rags) has a great depth
of healing and mind-balancing abilities. Each rag has
its own mood, its own time of day, and its own sea-
son in which to be played.
Music is rhythm; in tune,
it gives you food for your soul
Ali Akbar Khan
About 75,000 rags exist, grouped under 10 parent
scales, but each musician will have their own
interpretation of the songs. The original treatises of
classical Indian music are Nátyaßhtástra,
Náradakßhiksa, Dattilam, Bridahhesi, and
Sangítaratnákara.
Each rag has a time of day or season associated
with it. Rags are usually based on 3-hour intervals
(prahars or watches).
Midnight - 3:00 a.m. Noon - 3:00 p.m. 3:00 a.m.
- 6:00 a.m. 3:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. 6:00 a.m. -
9:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m. 9:00 a.m. - Noon
9:00 p.m. - Midnight
Rag times are also adjusted for seasonal changes.
Some rags are very specific. Some are played when
the first ray of the sun is seen (i.e., rag Ahir Bhairav).
Others are played when the sky first reddens in the
late afternoon (i.e., rag Purvi). Still others are
performed when the first candles are lit in the evening
(i.e., rag Bhimpalashri). Some rags are played at
different times of the day (during the morning,
afternoon, evening, and night).
Rags emote many moods and effects; joy and
love, pathos, compassion, or sadness. Other emotions
include heroism, courage or valor, merriment and
laughter, wonder or surprise, anger or rage, disgust,
fear.
Today, many Indian and American musicians are
blending the classical Indian music with jazz or new-
age music, and developing unique new sounds. The
serious musician should read The Classical Music of
North India, by Ali Akbar Khan. Another source of
Indian music training is the out-of-print collection of
audio lessons, Learning Indian Music, by Ravi
£hankar.
Audiotapes and CD’s of these classical rags are
available through Indian grocery stores and through
the Ali Akbar College in San Francisco, California.
Rags are useful in helping attune oneself to the natural
rhythms of the day and season, and enhance
meditation and peace of mind.
Once King Akbar asked his court musician
‘Tansen’ to bring his teacher, Swami Haridass’, to
sing for him. The musician said that Akbar would
have to visit the forest because Swámijí did not visit
anyone. Further, Akbar had to disguise himself as a
servant. In the presence of the Swami, the musician
intentionally sang a rag incorrectly, and the Swami
sang it to show him his error. The musician then turned
to the king and said, “I sing for men, but Swámijí
sings only for God.”
Sample of Classical Indian Instruments
Dholak
Dhapli

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
320
Flute
Duff
Shahnai
Sitar
Tablas
Mridangam

321
    Section 3: Therapeutics                                                         Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies
People are bound by rites and freed by knowledge,
thus the sages have known this truth
do not perform rites.
                              Upanißhadic wisdom
Chapter 11
Color & Gem Therapies
erbs and food bring balance through the sense
of taste. Abhyañga achieves balance through
the sense of touch.
Aromatherapy heals through the sense of smell. Color
therapy balances the doßhas (mentally or psychically)
through the sense of sight. Colors are absorbed pri-
marily through the eyes or Alochak Pitta (and sec-
ondarily through the skin or Bhrajak Pitta). It is a
crucial part of subtle mental and práòic life-force
nutrition as it energizes the nerves (which stimulate
the mind). Besides absorbing colors, the mind and
body produce them as well, adding the powers of
digestion.
Tejas: Mental fire, or tejas, is the major realm that
color therapy affects most. Bright colors increase
tejas, and dark colors diminish it. However, if colors
are too bright, tejas becomes burnt out (psychedelic
drugs have this affect also), and disharmonious or
clashing colors derange tejas. So tejas can be bal-
anced by the right use of colors. To increase tejas,
one meditates on a ghee flame or golden light. White
or deep blue color reduces excess tejas, and green
balances it.
Just as the choice of foods either balances or de-
ranges the body’s health, one’s choice of colors acts
similarly. Colors provide emotional strength and cre-
ativity. If misused, colors can cause a disturbance or
depression (i.e., bright colors stimulate emotions and
energy, dark colors suppress emotions and reduce
energy—although they can also calm certain indi-
viduals). Healing psychological diseases is greatly
assisted through color therapy.
Physically, color stimulates digestion, circulation,
improves vitality, increases overall physical activity,
and most of all, energizes blood
(Ranjak Pitta). However, if colors inappropriate for
the constitution are used, they weaken the circula-
tion, depress the appetite, increase toxins in the blood,
or cause mental hyperactivity. Colors act like gems;
they strengthen the aura and astral body. This is the
realm of pure color, and is suitable for subtle or spiri-
tual healing.
Applied Color Therapy
The use of colors in one’s daily life adds psycho-
logical harmony and peace of mind. Below are vari-
ous methods of how color therapy is used.
Since color is so important,
-Use colored lamps, either by placing colored
glass over light bulbs or by buying colored
bulbs.
-Use soft lights instead of fluorescent or neon.
-Use full-spectrum lights in the winter (when
there is less sunlight) to alleviate depression.
-Use mild and harmonious shades.
-Bathe the whole body or specific parts with
  various colored lights. For example, use dark
 blue light for inflammation, infection, or
  rheumatoid arthritis on the hands (use smaller bulbs
  for application on specific sites).
-Choose the colors of your surroundings—
 clothes, home furnishings, car, office, bed-
 room—with care.
-Note exposure to colors in nature: sky blue,
ocean blue/green/ turquoise, white snow or
moonlight, plush green trees, shrubs and grass;

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
322
colorful flowers; meditate on colorful flowers
such as a white lily, red rose or hibiscus, yellow
    chrysanthemum, or sunflower, blue iris.
-Meditate on stained glass, art, mandalas.
-Visualize colors in your mind.
Nature’s own colors are the most beneficial,
nourishing and strengthening
The Use of Colors
Color therapy affects the mind more than it affects
the body. Thus, there is greater consideration of the
sattwic, rajasic, and tamasic effects of colors, even
more than their effect on the physical constitution.
Sattwa: All colors have shades that are sattwic,
rajasic, or tamasic, so it is important to use only the
sattwic shades—those shades that bring joy, harmony,
and serenity. The best colors are white, gold, violet,
and blue.
Rajas: Colors—bright, loud, flashy, artificial
(i.e., neon signs), and rajasic shades—bright, metallic,
penetrating, are sometimes useful when there is low
or inert energy. Combinations of opposite colors can
also be too stimulating and irritating (i.e., blue/yellow,
red/green). Rajasic colors are yellow, orange, red,
purple.
Tamas: Colors are dull, dark, turbid, and muddy
(i.e., stagnant green). They cause the mind and senses
to become heavy, inert, and congested. Tamasic colors
are brown, black, and
gray.
White and black are not really considered colors,
but the polar opposites of light and dark, from which
color is produced. Below is a list of colors. When
healing, one should use primary colors in their most
characteristic shades.
Color Therapy, Spirituality and Astrology
Vedic scriptures state that what is in the heavens
and on the earth is also in humans. Furthermore, since
humans, mother earth, and the universe are
interrelated, they are linked together like strands of a
web. Thus, it is natural to find a connection between
colors, the heavens, and their effects on humankind.
In the Vedic texts on astrology (Jyotißh) and
architecture (Vástu £hástra), the colors are another
name for different deities. The 7 colors of the spectrum
(red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet) are
said to be the 7 rays, or deities, of the sun (Súrya),
only in the reverse order.
According to Vástu £hástra, through proper
positioning of one’s house and building materials,
the seen and unseen solar rays (i.e., colors) positively
affect the dweller’s health. It is a fascinating field of
study in itself (see Chapter 27).

323
    Section 3: Therapeutics                                                         Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies
y
a
r
G
n
oita
s
n
e
s
d
n
a
n
oito
m
e
s
e
c
u
d
er
,ytilartu
e
n
,ytivitc
ejb
o
s
e
vi
G
:s
e
s
U
g
nizilativ
e
d
r
o
g
niss
er
p
e
d
e
b
n
a
C
:s
n
oitu
a
c
er
P
:
n
w
o
r
B
y
h
tr
a
E
s
e
zilartu
e
n
,s
e
zilib
ats
,s
d
n
u
o
r
G
:s
e
s
U
re
sra
o
c
ytila
n
o
sre
p
s'e
n
o
e
k
a
m
y
a
M
:s
n
oitu
a
c
er
P
d
e
R
+
V
-
K
)ss
e
c
x
e
n
i(
-/i
n
g
A
/a
tti
P
+
s
a
je
T
y
g
re
n
e
,lli
w
,n
oitalu
cric
,d
o
olb
,tra
e
h
e
ht
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
,ht
m
ra
w
,y
g
re
n
e-s
e
d
a
h
s
m
ra
W
:s
e
s
U
s
eta
erc
,k
c
alb
hti
w
d
e
s
u
,)sr
olo
c
lla
f
o
ts
e
g
n
o
rts
e
ht(
,e
c
n
eloiv
,re
g
n
a
,ytilits
o
h
s
eto
m
o
r
P
:s
n
oitu
a
c
er
P
stc
effe
cis
a
m
at
d
n
a
cis
ajar
:e
g
n
a
r
O
P
-
K
V
s
p
m
arc
la
u
rts
n
e
m
,dio
r
y
ht
,sis
ylara
p
,n
oita
ni
m
ulli
,e
c
n
e
gilletni
,g
nizig
re
n
E
:s
e
s
U
ar
k
a
h
c
x
e
s
r
o
d
n
o
c
e
s
e
ht
eta
v
ar
g
g
a
n
a
c
ti
,le
v
el
re
w
ol
a
n
O
:s
n
oitu
a
c
er
P
:
w
olle
Y
+
P
-
K
V
niar
b
,sitir
htra
,
m
ets
y
s
s
u
o
v
re
n
,n
oita
cin
u
m
m
o
c
,ytiralc
,y
g
re
n
e
,n
oita
vito
M
:s
e
s
U
e
vitc
are
p
y
h
r
o
laicifre
p
u
s
e
n
o
e
k
a
m
y
a
M
:s
n
oitu
a
c
er
P
:
n
e
e
r
G
-
P
V
n
i(
+
K
)ss
e
c
x
e
e
ht
s
e
c
n
ala
b
;e
h
c
a
d
a
e
h
,ytidic
a
,re
v
ef
,s
e
v
re
n
,d
ni
m
e
ht
s
m
la
c
,g
nivig
-efil
,s
e
zin
o
m
ra
H
:s
e
s
U
y
ratiutip
;n
e
elp
s
d
n
a
re
vil
s
e
n
ot
,th
gie
w
s
e
zilib
ats
,
m
silo
b
ate
m
ss
e
c
x
e
ni
d
e
s
u
n
e
h
w
a
h
p
a
K
s
e
s
a
erc
n
I
:s
n
oitu
a
c
er
P
:e
u
l
B
y
k
s(
-
V
)e
u
l
b
n
i(
+
K
V
P
)ss
e
c
x
e
e
c
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
ni
d
n
a
,n
oitatid
e
m
,e
d
utilo
s
s
eto
m
o
r
P
:s
e
s
U
la
utirip
S
re
g
n
a
s
e
zilartu
e
n
,)citoibitn
a
lar
uta
n
(
s
n
oitc
ef
ni
d
n
a
,sre
v
ef
,n
oits
e
g
n
o
c
,sr
o
m
ut
e
c
u
d
er
s
ple
H
:s
e
s
U
d
n
alg
la
e
nip
,p
e
els
,s
e
y
e
d
n
a
d
ni
m
e
ht
slo
o
c
,d
erta
h
d
n
a
d
er
uta
n
-
dlo
c
ylre
v
o
e
n
o
e
k
a
m
n
a
c
e
ulb
ss
e
c
x
E
:n
oitu
a
c
er
P
:el
p
r
u
P
sts
y
c
,ss
e
n
ffits
,nia
p
tra
e
h
s
e
c
u
d
er
,e
c
n
atsid
d
n
a
,e
gits
er
p
,ytir
o
htu
a
s
e
vi
G
:s
e
s
U
re
g
n
a
yllaic
e
p
s
e-s
n
oito
m
e
ss
er
p
p
u
s
r
o
eta
n
g
ats
y
a
M
:s
n
oitu
a
c
er
P
:teloi
V
n
e
elp
s
ni
s
elc
s
u
p
r
o
c
etih
w
s
dliu
b
,citoibitn
a
,n
oito
v
e
d
d
n
a
tn
e
m
h
c
ate
D
:s
e
s
U
elp
r
u
p
s
a
e
m
a
S
:s
n
oitu
a
c
er
P
:
d
lo
G
+
P
-
K
V
ss
e
n
s
u
oic
s
n
o
c-fle
S
s
e
s
a
erc
n
I
:s
e
s
U
la
utirip
S
s
m
ets
y
s
e
nirc
o
d
n
e
,e
n
u
m
m
i
,s
ajo
,tra
e
h
e
ht
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
d
n
a
d
ni
m
e
ht
s
e
zin
o
m
ra
H
:s
e
s
U
:eti
h
W
+
K
-
P
V
ytila
utirip
s
,e
utriv
,ytir
u
p
s
eto
m
o
r
P
:s
e
s
U
la
utirip
S
,s
n
oito
m
e
d
n
a
s
e
v
re
n
,d
ni
m
,tra
e
h
e
ht
s
m
la
c
,nia
p
d
n
a
s
n
oitc
ef
ni
,sre
v
ef
sla
e
h
,g
nir
utr
u
N
:s
e
s
U
s
g
nile
ef
e
vitr
o
p
p
u
s
d
n
a
ytilativ
s
eto
m
o
r
p
s
n
oitibih
ni
d
n
a
,ytivitis
n
e
sre
p
y
h
,y
g
ra
htel
,ytiviss
a
p
s
e
s
u
a
c
ss
e
c
x
e
n
I
:n
oitu
a
c
er
P
:
k
c
al
B
+
K
V
P
sre
hto
r
o
f
hta
e
d
f
o
n
gis/s
n
oigiler
e
m
o
s
r
o
f
r
olo
c
la
utirip
S
:s
e
s
U
la
utirip
S
e
vita
g
e
n
s
e
c
n
atsid
d
n
a
ff
o
s
d
ra
w
d
erta
h
,yti
m
n
e
,n
oitis
o
p
p
o
,n
oitc
u
rts
b
o
,e
c
n
atsis
er
s
eto
m
o
r
P
:s
e
s
U
s
n
oito
m
e
aio
n
ara
p
d
n
a
n
oicip
s
u
s
d
n
a
ra
ef
e
s
a
erc
n
I
:n
oitu
a
c
er
P
s
e
s
a
erc
ni
s
n
a
e
m
'+';s
e
c
u
d
er
s
n
a
e
m
'-'
a
h
p
a
K
=
K
,atti
P
=
P
,u
y
á
V
=
V

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
324
u
y
á
V
:s
e
c
n
ala
B
k
nip
,e
ulb
y
k
s
,n
e
er
g
dlare
m
e
,etih
w
,
w
olle
y
,e
g
n
ar
o
,d
er
,dlo
G
:s
et
a
v
a
r
g
g
A
sr
olo
c
k
ra
d
ylre
v
o
,)elp
r
u
p
,d
er(
sr
olo
c
y
h
s
alf
,th
gir
b
ylre
v
O
:s
e
p
a
h
S
d
o
o
G
d
e
c
n
ala
b
,era
u
q
s
,tf
o
s
,d
n
u
o
R
a
tti
P
:s
e
c
n
ala
B
slets
a
p
,dli
m
,e
ulb
,n
e
er
g
,etih
W
:s
et
a
v
a
r
g
g
A
g
,s
w
olle
y
,s
e
g
n
ar
o
,s
d
e
R
s
dlo
:s
e
p
a
h
S
d
o
o
G
s
m
r
o
f
g
nitarte
n
e
p
r
o
p
ra
h
s
,s
elg
n
a
dio
v
A
a
h
p
a
K
:s
e
c
n
ala
B
g
nic
n
ala
b
ts
o
m
era
s
e
g
n
ar
o
,s
w
olle
y
,s
dlo
g
,s
d
e
R
:s
et
a
v
a
r
g
g
A
sr
olo
c
h
sitih
w
re
hto
,s
k
nip
,s
etih
W
:s
e
p
a
h
S
d
o
o
G
era
u
q
s
r
o
,d
n
u
o
r
,la
citre
v
dio
v
a
;ralu
g
n
a
,di
m
ar
y
P
Astrological-Gem Therapies
All human activities are meant for the
happiness of all living beings;
such happiness is based on dharma,
(righteousness). Hence, everyone is
advised to always be righteous.
- Aßhóáñga H^idayam
Sú: Ch. 1; ver. 20
Part 2 Gem
Therapy
Jyotißh is the
Vedic
astrological system,
of which Áyurveda
was once a part. This
astrological system
notes that gems are related to the various planets and
produce a balancing effect to counter specific dis-
eases. It is a primary method of a Jyotißh astrologer’s
therapeutic measures to heal physical, mental, and
spiritual situations, based on one’s astrology chart
indicators. It is known that planets produce effects in
humans. For example, the full moon not only causes
high tides, but also affects the emotions of some
people. The gemstones were studied and used to neu-
tralize these effects.
The ancient Áyurvedic researchers studied
healing properties of gems, and found that different
stones created different effects in the human body.
The planets were seen to have corresponding colors.
The color or vibration of the gems affects the human
body. They absorb and reflect (like a filter) the
planetary rays or vibrations. Thus, gems relate to
specific energy waves. It was found that the gems
associated with each planet have varying wave
lengths.
The planetary vibrations are negative, while the
radiation of the stones is positive. When the positive
and negative vibrations are combined, they are
neutralized. Just as an umbrella or sun screen protects
one from the sun, so gems protect one from the
influence of the planets.
In ancient Vedic texts, like the Brihat Samhitá, the
origin and healing powers of various gems are dis-
cussed. Persons may use substitute stones instead of
the more expensive gems. Red garnet can replace
ruby; moonstone can replace pearl; jade, peridot, or
green tourmaline can replace emerald; and yellow
topaz or citrine can replace yellow sapphire.

325
    Section 3: Therapeutics                                                         Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies
te
n
al
P
e
v
a
W
h
t
g
n
e
L
m
e
G
e
v
a
W
h
t
g
n
e
L
(
n
u
S
a
y
r
u
S
)
0
0
0,5
6
y
b
u
R
0
0
0,0
7
n
o
o
M
(
a
r
d
n
a
h
C
)
0
0
0,5
6
lra
e
P
0
0
0,0
7
sra
M
(
la
g
n
a
M
)
0
0
0,5
8
lar
o
C
d
e
R
0
0
0,5
6
y
r
u
cre
M
(
a
h
d
d
u
B
)
0
0
0,5
6
dlare
m
E
0
0
0,5
7
retip
u
J
(
u
r
u
G
)
0
0
0,0
3
1
erih
p
p
a
S
w
olle
Y
0
0
0,0
5
s
u
n
e
V
(
a
r
k
u
h
S
)
0
0
0,0
3
1
)
n
o
cri
Z
ra
el
C
(
d
n
o
m
ai
D
0
0
0,0
6
n
r
uta
S
(
in
a
h
S
)
0
0
0,5
6
sip
a
L
/ts
y
hte
m
A
/erih
p
p
a
S
e
ul
B
0
0
0,9
7
u
h
a
R
0
0
0,5
3
etin
o
ss
e
H
n
e
dlo
G
(
a
h
d
e
m
o
G
)te
n
ra
G
0
0
0,0
7
ute
K
0
0
0,5
3
)ly
re
b
o
s
y
r
h
C
(
e
y
E
s'ta
C
0
0
0,0
7
In the Áyurvedic tradition these stones are
planetary stones, the doßhas, and the diseases used
to balance the three doßhas and to heal they bal-
Precautions: The gems have been found to have side
effects depending upon birth sign and planetary place-
ment. This is especially true of blue sapphire. Differ-
ent astrologers have different criteria to judge
contraindications. Avoiding gem therapy, unless prop-
erly advised, may be best.
ance. specific diseases. The chart below shows the
planetary stones, and the diseaes they balance.
     Jyotißh suggests wearing gems, and ingesting
touch the skin. Pendants should touch the heart them
internally (after a long heating process to or throat
chakras, and rings with different gem-make them
safe), or as gem tinctures. Stones should be worn on
various fingers, as the worn as rings and pendants are
mounted so as to elements dictate.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
326
te
n
al
P
m
e
G
s
p
le
H
sla
e
H
n
u
S
/y
b
u
R
te
n
ra
G
d
e
R
a
h
p
a
K
/u
y
á
V
,sre
v
ef
,s
n
oitc
ef
ni
,n
ois
n
etre
p
y
h
,n
e
elp
s
,tra
e
h
,e
n
c
a
,tra
e
h
,niar
b
,e
c
n
eita
p
m
i
,re
p
m
et
to
h
,elib
,th
gis
e
y
e
,a
m
e
d
e
,n
oitalu
cric
r
o
o
p
,y
g
re
n
e
w
ol
sitir
htra
,s
e
n
o
b
n
o
o
M
/e
n
ots
n
o
o
M
lra
e
P
atti
P
/u
y
á
V
sre
d
r
o
sid
latn
e
m
,g
n
ul
,y
e
n
dik
,ytilitref
ni
sra
M
lar
o
C
d
e
R
atti
P
g
nid
e
elb
,sre
clu
,s
n
oita
m
m
alf
ni
,sre
v
ef
,s
e
nits
etni
lla
m
s
,re
vil
,s
elc
s
u
m
k
a
e
w
,sre
d
r
o
sid
stn
e
dic
c
a
,ytilativ
y
r
u
cre
M
s
m
e
G
n
e
er
G
d
ni
m
-atti
P
,g
nirettuts
,sre
d
r
o
sid
latn
e
m
,ss
e
nid
dig
,o
gitre
v
n
oits
e
gid
ni
s
u
o
v
re
n
,yteix
n
a
,ss
ol
y
r
o
m
e
m
retip
u
J
w
olle
Y
s
m
e
G
a
h
p
a
K
/u
y
á
V
lairetra
,sr
o
m
ut
,
m
ets
y
s
e
n
u
m
m
i
k
a
e
w
,ss
e
c
s
b
a
,re
vil
,e
cid
n
u
aj
,th
gie
w
,n
oitalu
cric
n
oitc
n
u
fs
y
d
d
n
alg
d
n
a
e
v
re
n
,s
a
erc
n
a
p
s
u
n
e
V
/d
n
o
m
ai
D
n
o
cri
Z
ra
el
C
a
h
p
a
K
/u
y
á
V
,s
m
ets
y
s
y
ra
nir
u
d
n
a
,e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
er
,e
n
u
m
m
i
ai
m
e
n
a
,s
e
n
o
b
k
a
e
w
,ytilitref
ni
,s
y
e
n
dik
n
r
uta
S
e
ul
B
/erih
p
p
a
S
/ts
y
hte
m
A
sip
a
L
atti
P
/u
y
á
V
,n
oita
pits
n
o
c
,ytilativ
,s
e
v
re
n
,s
e
n
o
b
k
a
e
w
s
e
s
a
e
sid
e
n
u
m
m
i
,re
c
n
a
c
,sis
ylara
p
,y
s
p
elip
e
u
h
a
R
a
h
d
e
m
o
G
ll
A
,n
oita
nid
r
o
o
c
f
o
ss
ol
,n
oits
e
gid
ni
,ss
e
n
s
u
o
v
re
n
sre
d
r
o
sid
latn
e
m
ute
K
e
y
E
s'ta
C
ll
A
k
a
e
w
,g
nid
e
elb
,n
oitalu
cric
r
o
n
oits
e
gid
r
o
o
p
,sis
ylara
p
,re
c
n
a
c
,
m
ets
y
s
s
u
o
v
re
n
,s
elc
s
u
m
s
e
s
a
e
sid
e
n
u
m
m
i
Each finger is related to one of the five elements.
The pinky is earth, the ring finger is water, the middle
finger is air, the index finger is ether, and the thumb
is fire. The planets correspond to this system as well:
Mercury—earth, the sun or moon—water, Saturn—
air, Jupiter—ether. No specific planet rules the fire.
Precious gems are worn as rings in 2-carat (minimum)
and 5-carat pendants. Substitute stones are worn as
rings in 4-carat (minimums) and 7-carat pendants.
Determinations of planetary therapies are made
differently than in Western Astrology.
Vedic Origin of Gems
The Garuda Purana, an ancient Vedic text,
includes a discussion of the science of gemology. This
mythologically-based story may have semantic
parallels in modern scientific terminology, just as the
seven deities of the sun are analogous to the seven
colors of the spectrum (red, orange, yellow, green,
blue, indigo, and violet) in Vedic Astrology. Thus, it
is hoped that interested readers will seek out the
parallels between these Vedic descriptions and modern
science, rather than doubt its authenticity merely

327
    Section 3: Therapeutics                                                         Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies
because of the use of words like “gods” and “demons.”
Once, a very powerful demon, Vala, caused
trouble for all the gods in the universe. After much
hardship the gods developed a plan to capture Vala
and kill him. Once dead, Vala was cut into pieces. His
limbs were transformed into the seeds of precious
gems. All the creatures of the universe rushed to gather
the gem seeds. In the clamor some of the seeds fell to
earth, dropping into rivers, oceans, forests, and moun-
tains. There they developed into mother lodes.
Vala’s blood became ruby seeds and fell over In-
dia, Burma, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nepal, Tibet, Sri
Lanka, and ancient Siam.
His teeth became pearl seeds that spread through-
out the oceans of Sri Lanka, Bengal, Persia, Indone-
sia, and other bodies of water in the southern hemi-
sphere.
The skin of Vala became yellow sapphire seeds,
plummeting mainly to the Himalayas. Vala’s finger-
nails became hessonite garnet seeds that fell into lo-
tus ponds of Sri Lanka, India, and Burma.
His bile became emerald seeds and fell into the
mountain ranges of modern day South Africa, South
America, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. Vala’s bones
became diamond seeds. His war cry became the cat’s-
eye gem seeds. Blue sapphire seeds were transformed
from Vala’s eyes. Coral seed was transformed from
his intestines. Vala’s toenails became red garnet seeds.
His body fat became jade seeds. Quartz crystal seeds
were transformed from his semen. Vala’s complex-
ion was transformed into bloodstone coral seeds.
Gem tinctures are prepared like herb tinctures.
Gems are soaked for some time in a 50% - 100%
alcohol solution. Diamonds or sapphires (hard gems)
are soaked from one full moon to the next full moon
(one month). Opaque stones—pearls, coral (soft
stones)— are soaked for shorter time periods or in
weaker solutions.
Below is a list of gems, their related doßhas, and
their uses. Special Áyurvedic preparations exist in
which gems are burnt into ash. This removes their
harmful effects, enabling them to be ingested. Tradi-
tionally, gems were crushed and/or burnt in long pro-
cesses to make ash. Sometimes they are taken alone,
sometimes they are mixed with herbs. Gem ash
(bhasma) is more costly than herbs, but healing is
quicker. Currently, they are not imported into the
United States due to the lack of understanding of their
safety.
Key to abbreviations:
V = Váyu; P = Pitta; K = Kapha.
‘+’ means increases the doßha;
‘-’ means decreases the doßha
Ruby VK- P++
Uses: Strengthens the heart and will, improves
     digestion, circulation, agni fire, and energy;
     promotes independence, insight, and power,
Gem of the kings.
Worn: Usually set in gold and worn on the right-
     hand ring finger.
Ash: (Manikya bhasma) Actions: Stimulant,
     nervine.
Uses: Heart tonic for weak heart, nerves, and
     general debility.
Pearl VP- K+
Uses: Gives the body fluid, nourishes tissues and
     nerves, strengthens female reproductive sys-
     tem, improves fertility, and calms emotions.
Worn: Usually set in silver and worn on the left-
     hand ring finger.
Ash: (Moti bhasma)
Actions: Tonic, alterative, sedative, nervine,
     antacid.
Uses: Hyperacidity, ulcers, nose bleeds, cough-
     ing blood, liver, kidney, nervous excitability,
     hysteria, general tonic for woman and infants.
Red Coral Harmonize P V- K+ in excess Uses:
Strengthens blood, reproductive system,
gives energy, calms emotions, aphrodisiac,
     improves capacity for work, builds flesh and

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
328
     muscle—especially for males; gives courage.
Worn: Set in silver and worn on either ring or index
finger.
Ash: (Pravál bhasma)
Actions: Alterative, antacids, tonic.
Uses: Cough, asthma, swollen glands, hyper-
acidity, impotence, bleeding from the lungs,
anemia, sexual debility.
Emerald V= P- K+
Uses: Promotes healing, energizes breathing,
strengthens lungs, increases mental flexibility
and adaptability (calming agitation), regulates
nervous system, helps stops nerve pain, improves
speech and intelligence; cancer, degenerative
diseases.
Worn: VK-set in gold; P-set in silver, worn on the
middle or pinky finger of either hand. Ash:
(Panna bhasma)
Actions: Nervine, alterative, tonic.
Uses: Nervous and general debility, neurasthe-
nia, heart tonic, asthma, ulcers, skin diseases,
fevers, infections, children’s tonic.
Yellow Sapphire VPK= V— P+ in excess Uses:
Best stone for promoting health, increases ojas;
diabetes, all wasting diseases, convalescence,
regulates hormones, energy, vitality.
Worn: Set in gold, and worn on the index finger.
Ash: None.
Diamond VP- K+
Uses: Strengthens the kidneys and reproductive sys-
tem, enhances ojas, gives beauty, power charm,
enhances creativity, protects life from diseases.
Worn: Set in white gold and worn in the middle or
little finger.
Ash: (Híra bhasma)
Actions: Tonic, nutritive, aphrodisiac.
Uses: Gives strength, firmness, protects life,
increases sexual power and ojas; chronic and
wasting diseases (i.e., diabetes, TB), preserves
life in difficult diseases (e.g., cancer, AIDS).
Substitute: Zircon ash (Vaikrant bhasma).
Hessonite Garnet (Golden variety-Gomedha)
VPK=
Uses: Good balancing stone, calms nerves, quiets
mind, relieves depression, recommended
for almost everyone as it is removes illusion
(maya), and negative astral forces that are due
to the dark age in which it is believed we live.
Worn: Set in gold, worn on the middle finger.
Ash: Not used.
Cat’s-eye (Chrysoberyl) VK- P+
Actions: Nervine, stimulant.
Uses: Stimulates tejas, promotes psychic and
spiritual perception, mental disorders, stone
of seers and astrologers.
Worn: Set in gold, worn on the middle finger of
the right hand.
Ash: Not used.
Quartz Crystal VP- K+
Action: Similar to diamond but much weaker.
Uses: It is considered a stone for Venus, and being
     cloudy or milky, a stone for the moon also.
Precautions: It amplifies the existing emotions,
     leaving one open to impressions, so purifying and
    energizing it is used regularly with mantras and
    sádhaná (meditation) is necessary.
Ash: 
Rock 
crystal 
(Sphatika 
bhasma)
Actions: Alterative, hemostatic, tonic.
Uses: Bleeding disorders, anemia, chronic fever,
jaundice, asthma, constipation, general debility.
Mineral and Metallic Bhasmas
Many mineral and metal bhasmas also exist and
are used for a variety of health disorders. They are
more powerful than herbs and have a faster healing
action. Bhasmas need to be obtained from only the
most reliable pharmacies. If they are improperly burnt
one can develop severe illnesses. Currently, the United
States and a few other countries are not aware of the
non-toxic healing properties of some of the bhasmas
such as lead, tin, and mercury.

329
    Section 3: Therapeutics                                                         Chapter 11: Color and Gem Therapies
Herb-increasing Properties
of Gems & Their Tinctures
Hot and spicy herbs: Properties increased by using
ruby tincture, or along with wearing ruby gems or
substitute stones.
Tonic and rejuvenative herbs: Properties increased
with yellow sapphire or yellow topaz tinctures or
along stones or substitutes.
Blood cleansers, cool, detox liver, remove tumors:
Properties increased by taking blue sapphire tincture
or along with wearing the stone or its substitutes (i.e.,
amethyst).
Nervines and harmonizing herbs: Properties increased
by taking emerald tincture or also with wearing the
stone or its substitutes.
Stimulants and aphrodisiacs: Properties increased by
using with red coral tincture or with wearing the stone.
Emmenagogues and reproductive tonics: Properties
increased by taking with diamond tincture or by
wearing a diamond or its substitutes.
Demulcents and nutritive tonics: Properties increased
by taking with pearl tincture or by wearing pearl or
its substitute.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
330

Section 3: Therapeutics                        Chapter 12: External Influences: Lifestyles, Seasons, Exercise
 331
When one realizes Brahman,
what is there to realize,
and who is there to realize it?
Upanißhadic wisdom
Chapter 12
External Influences:
Lifestyles, Seasons, Exercise
ealth prevention, in holistic terms, means
balancing one’s whole life. Thus, beyond
considering one’s physical, mental, and spiri-
tual (inner) health, external situations of lifestyle and
environment are also examined for their effects on
health.
Morning & Evening Routine
‘Cleanliness is next to Godliness,’ as the saying
goes. The ancient Áyurvedic texts placed great em-
phasis on the daily cleansing ritual. Below are some
major suggestions.
Evacuation of bowels and urine is best done in the
squatting position as the organs are aligned for the
easiest release of waste (malas). This position also
helps dispel gas.
Water (cool) instead of, or poured on toilet paper, is
gentler to the anus. Oiling the anus after bathing is
also healthy; it prevents drying.
Brushing with astringent, pungent, and bitter roots
(or twigs made into brushes), twice a day, without
injuring gums. Flossing is important and herbal tooth
powders are also beneficial.
Scraping the root of the tongue with instruments of
gold, silver, copper, tin, or brass. Curved U-shaped
metal strips or spoons are used. Scraping removes
obstructions in respiration. By scraping the whole
tongue, one releases repressed emotions. Scraping
the tongue is also done upon waking each morning.
Gargling with water or oil in the morning after brush-
ing and scraping, improves voice, jaw, increases one’s
delight in eating; it also prevents a dry throat, cracked
lips, and loose teeth (also see Chapter 19).
Eye Wash using cool to lukewarm water improves
vision and all eye disorders, and refreshes the mind
(also see Chapter 7).
Oil Head Abhyañga using bráhmí oil (VPK=) or
sesame oil (Váyu), canola oil (Kapha) [ideally
warmed], to avoid headaches, gray and falling hairs;
it improves sense organs, promotes cheerfulness, and
a pleasant glow. Sleep becomes sound and one feels
happier. (Numerous oil abhyañgas are discussed in
Chapter 7.)
Oil Ear Abhyañga A drop or two of vegetable
glycerine, bráhmí, or canola oils rubbed into the ear
holes heals and prevents Váyu ear and hearing
diseases, stiff back, neck, and jaw. This can be done
several times a week (see Chapter 7).
Oil Body Abhyañga anointing the body with the same
warmed oils used for the head, the body becomes
firm, smooth-skinned, free from Váyu, and tolerant
of exertions and exercise. It is suggested especially
to balance the sense of touch (Váyu), as discussed in
Chapter 16. Adding medicated oils such as
mahánáráyan and daçhmúl to the base oil further
nurtures tissues, and draws toxins out of the body. If
digestion becomes sluggish due to oil application,
the number of oil abhyañgas and the amount of oil
used are reduced.
A Váyu abhyañga includes the feet, lower back,
colon area, neck, shoulders, and head.
A Pitta abhyañga includes the chest, the area of
the back behind the heart, and head.
Kapha abhyañga covers the lower abdomen, chest,
throat, and sinuses.
Foot abhyañga removes coarseness, stiffness,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
332
roughness, fatigue, numbness, sciatica, vein and
ligament constriction, cracks; it also improves vision
and sleep. Since all the organs of the body have nerves
extending to the feet, the entire body is exercised
through foot abhyañga.
Marma abhyañgas Oil abyañgas described in Chapter
7 produce positive effects that heal and keep persons
balanced. Heaviness, itching, dirt, anorexia, sweat,
and odor are removed.
Bathing (or a shower) is purifying, an aphrodisiac,
promotes life, removes fatigue, sweat, and dirt;
rejuvenates, promotes ojas. Cleaning feet and
excretory orifices daily promotes intelligence, purity,
longevity, destroys inauspiciousness and dirt. Oil
applied to the skin nourishes the tissue layers and
draws toxins to the skin. Bathing after abhyañga
removes these toxins, keeping the skin clean and
healthy.
Clean clothes enhance one’s charm, fame, and life
span. They remove inauspiciousness and give
pleasure, thus making it enjoyable to be around others.
Aroma Therapy oils, incense, scented soap, and
flowers promote longevity, charm, nourishment,
strength. They also enhance pleasing manners and
destroy inauspiciousness (see Chapter 8).
Betel leaves chewed with certain fruits and cardamom
aid in clarity and keep the mouth fresh.
Gem Therapy, colors, and ornaments promote wealth,
auspiciousness, longevity, prosperity, happiness,
charm, ojas, and destroy potential calamities in one’s
life (see Chapter 11).
Cutting hair, nails, beard/mustache is nutritive, life-
promoting; beautifies and cleans.
An umbrella alleviates natural calamities, provides
strength, protection, and guards one against the sun,
wind, dust, and rains.
Carrying a stick gives support, strength, and longevity.
It protects against enemies and destroys fears.
4:00 a.m. The práòa (vital air-force) is said to be
purest at this time of day. Thus, it is good for a walk
and for sádhaná (meditation).
Sunrise is a good time to have the eyes in the direction
of the first rays of sunlight (though not looking directly
at the sun). This exercise improves one’s vision and
vitality.
Sunlight is important to receive daily, if possible.
Taking in sunlight in the winter is more difficult
because it is colder and there is less sunlight. During
summer the sunlight is best in the early morning or
late evening, not in the intense heat between 11:00
a.m. and 2:00 p.m., when the sun is at its zenith and
its rays are strongest. Sunlight is the only source of
vitamin D4 and D5.
Find a livelihood that is not contradictory to one’s
dharma (God-given talents). Be civic-minded and
care for the body: thus, happiness is brought about.
Wash hands before and after meals: cleanliness is next
to Godliness.
Practicing Sádhaná (meditation) according to the
instructions of one’s Guru (spiritual teacher). Snuff
daily use for Váyu, Kapha and Váyu/Kapha doßhas
(see Chapter 7).
Seasonal Diet
It is recommended one’s eating habits should de-
pend primarily on one’s doßha, with a secondary con-
sideration of the season. Áyurveda discerns six sea-
sons in a year. The Aßhóáñga H^idayam also men-
tions transition periods between these seasons. De-
pending upon the country and geographical location
one lives in, the seasonal experiences may vary.
The first three seasons are considered weakening
because the sun takes away one’s strength during the
Northern Solstice. The sun and wind create a cool-
ing, drying, and heating influence by removing the
(nurturing) cool qualities of the earth, while the bit-
ter, astringent, and pungent qualities develop. Thus,
the tastes (qualities of the elements) of sharpness,
dryness, and heat (Pitta or agni) gain predominance
during this half of the year. It is the sun that burns up
the soma (spiritual nectar) that weakens people. The
tastes of bitter, astringent, and pungent are depleting
in nature, so it is advised to eat foods having sweet,
sour, and salty tastes to counteract the depleting ef-
fect.

Section 3: Therapeutics                        Chapter 12: External Influences: Lifestyles, Seasons, Exercise
 333
(
y
w
e
D
-
lo
o
C
a
rih
äih
£
)
h
cra
M
-
di
M
-
n
n
a
J-
di
M
(
g
nir
p
S
tn
a
s
a
V
)
y
a
M
-
di
M
-
h
cra
M
-
di
M
(
re
m
m
u
S
a
m
h
äír
G
)
ylu
J-
di
M
-
y
a
M
-
di
M
(
y
nia
R
á
h
är
a
V
)
.tp
e
S
-
di
M
-
ylu
J-
di
M
(
n
m
utu
A
ta
r
a
h
£
)
.v
o
N
-
di
M
-
.tp
e
S
-
di
M
(
retni
W
atn
a
m
e
H
)
.n
a
J-
di
M
-
.v
o
N
-
di
M
[Seasonal dates will vary according to country and
geographical region. While the rainy season may not be literally
experienced in some countries like the U.S., there may be subtler
solar rays and gravitational influences that will still be
applicable. Thus, some practitioners find the six seasons
applicable even in countries outside of India.]
In the chart above the latter three seasons are con-
sidered a strength-giving time. The moon becomes
more powerful, causing the sun to transfer his strength
to the lunar orb. Heat is relieved by the moist and
cool elements. In this Southern Solstice, where the
moon predominates, the sour element is active dur-
ing the rainy Varßhá season; salt prevails in autumn
and the sweet element grows in winter. These tastes
gradually tone, or give strength to, humans. During
Varßhá-He-manta (Rainy through Winter) the winds
die down and the moon’s cool rays produce soma, or
nectar, that nourishes the spiritual energies of the
people (and animals and nature). In these seasons, it
is advised to eat foods of pungent, bitter, and astrin-
gent tastes to counterbalance the predominating tastes
due to environmental effects. Traditional pañcha
karma is not indicated at this time, but Keralíya
pañcha karma is very helpful, especially for Váyu
doßhas (see chart—page 40.)
Winter (Váyu season) one avoids Váyu-increasing,
light foods, wind, cold drinks, and eats more steamed
meals and dresses warmly. The digestive fire is much
higher during this season, making heavier foods more
easily digestible. If inadequate amounts of food are
eaten, the agni fire will burn up the body’s plasma
(rasa), vitiating Váyu. Cane sugar, rice, oils, hot wa-
ter, and milk products promote longevity, when taken
during this season. Raw honey, sour, and salty tastes
are also suggested. Oil massage and heat (i.e., sauna,
steam room etc.) are also suggested. During this sea-
son, physical expressions of love between married
couples is healthy, according to Áyurveda. One’s
house is to be kept warm; drafts should be avoided.
Cool/Dewy (Late Winter - follow a program similar
to Winter, only more intensely) The house needs to
be wind-proof and amply heated. Sweet, sour, and
salty foods are eaten, while pungent, bitter, astringent,
light, cold, and Váyu-increasing foods and drinks are
avoided. Kapha accumulates in this season due to
the cold and dampness of wind, clouds, and rain. This
is the time that Pitta is balanced. This is the start of
the Northern Solstice, whose winds begin to deplete
human strength.
Spring is when the accumulated Kapha from the
previous two seasons begins to melt or liquefy (i.e.,
Kapha becomes excessed), due to the gradual
warming of the sun. This creates many Kapha
diseases. Thus, evacuative measures like emesis are
used and pungent tastes are eatern, while heavy, sour,
fatty, and sweet diet, and day naps are avoided because
they increase Kapha. Exercise, oil massage, aroma
therapy, smoking herbs, gargling, eye-washing and
warm-water bathing are all suggested. Sandalwood
paste is applied to body, and more barley (Pitta- and
Kapha-reducing) and wheat (Váyu and Pitta) products
are eaten. Springtime is the season for amour (but
physical relations are contraindicate and reserved for
the winter season).
Summer is a hot and dry season (Kapha is normal-
ized and Váyu accumulates due to the dry or dehy-
drating effect of the heat). Thus, one eats more raw
and lightly steamed vegetables, drinks cool juices,
has more sweet things, ghee, milk, and rice. Sour,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
334
ylu
J-
di
M
-
.n
a
J-
di
M
,r
u
o
s
,te
e
w
s
er
o
m
ta
e
s
ets
at
ytla
s
d
n
a
.n
a
J-
di
M
-
ylu
J-
di
M
,tn
e
g
n
u
p
er
o
m
ta
e
tn
e
g
nirts
a
d
n
a
,rettib
s
ets
at
salted, pungent, and hot foods are avoided. It is sug-
gested that there be little or no exercise at this time.
One takes naps in a cool room during the day and
sleeps in a well-ventilated room or on the roof (cooled
by moon rays) by night. Sandalwood paste is also
suggested for the body. Pearls and other cooling gems
are suggested (depending on astrological indications).
Fans, cool water, spending time in forests, and ab-
staining from sexual intercourse are suggested.
Rainy The agni fire, already weakened from the
dryness produced by the summer, is further
diminished in the rainy season. During this season,
the clouds are full of water; it is cold, windy, and in
some places, snowy. These conditions continue to
aggravate all three doßhas. The water becomes muddy
from the runoff caused by the rain, the warm earth
creates sourness of water, while the agni digestive
fire, as already mentioned, becomes even weaker. Pitta
begins to accumulate due to weakened digestion and
increased acidity in the atmospheric water. Váyu,
which had begun to accumulate in the dry or
dehydrating summer heat, becomes aggravated due
to weak digestion, acidic atmospheric conditions, and
gas issuing from the earth. Kapha also becomes
vitiated due to the acidity of the water.
Thus, in this season the three doßhas start vitiat-
ing each other, causing many diseases of all three
doßhas. This is a troubling time for the mind and body,
and all the doßhas must be monitored very carefully.
It is the transition season from the northern solstice
(depleting), to southern solstice (strengthening). De-
pending upon the weather from day to day, one has
to adjust their diet and lifestyle. Overall, one avoids
cold drinks, day naps, dew, river water, exercise, sun,
and intercourse. Foods and drinks are mixed with
honey. On windy, cool, and rainy days sour, salty,
and fatty foods are taken to pacify Váyu. Also one
takes wheat, rice, oils, soups, cooled Váyu-reducing
teas, oil massage, aroma therapy, baths, light clean
clothes. A humidifier is used, if needed. Pañcha
karma, purification therapies (see Chapter 7) are sug-
gested as well (medicated emesis, purgation, enemas,
and nasal oil therapy). Grain soups, medicated grape
wines, or fermented foods are recommended.
Autumn The aggravated Pitta from the rainy season
worsens as a result of the sudden warmth of the sun’s
rays. (In America, the equivalent is perhaps Indian
summer— the transition between summer and fall.)
Thus, Pitta reduction therapy is suggested. Medicated
ghee (clarified butter with Pitta-reducing herbs),
water, bitter, astringent, and sweet-tasting foods,
easily digestible foods should be eaten, leaving room
in the stomach (i.e., do not eat until satiated).
Purgation therapy is also recommended. Lifestyle
indictions include sitting outside the house (on
porches or balconies) in the evenings, wearing
sandalwood oil or powder, drinking pearl water or
wearing pearls, and moonlight bathing. It is advisable
to avoid snow, ingesting alkalines, heavy meals, sour
foods, excess or warm oils, fatty foods, exposure to
the sun, alcohol or cigarettes, daytime naps, and
eastern breezes.
Generally, persons should have a little of each of
the six tastes (i.e., sweet, sour, salty, pungent, bitter,
astringent) each day. However, during each month in
which any of the tastes are environmentally
predominant, one should reduce or avoid that taste to
maintain balance. Since that taste is already excessed,
consuming foods of that taste will only cause more
imbalance. So each person must determine what
constitutes a comfortable amount of each taste.

Section 3: Therapeutics                        Chapter 12: External Influences: Lifestyles, Seasons, Exercise
 335
a
h
ä
o
D
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
I
t
h
gil
S
e
c
u
d
e
R
a
h
ä
o
D
u
y
á
V
-
y
a
M
-
di
M
ylu
J-
di
M
-
ylu
J-
di
M
ts
u
g
u
A
-
di
M
atti
P
-
ylu
J-
di
M
.tp
e
S
-
di
M
-
.tp
e
S
-
di
M
.v
o
N
-
di
M
a
h
p
a
K
-
.tp
e
S
-
di
M
.v
o
N
-
di
M
-
.c
e
D
-
di
M
.n
a
J-
di
M
a
h
ä
o
D
s
e
sic
r
e
x
E
ts
e
B
u
y
á
V
,)e
sicre
x
e
ts
e
b
e
ht(
g
nikla
w
,g
nic
n
a
d
,g
ni
m
m
i
w
s
,g
ninilo
p
m
art
.g
niik
s
y
rtn
u
o
c-ss
o
rc
atti
P
llih
-
n
w
o
d
,)e
sicre
x
e
ts
e
b
(
g
nikla
w
,str
o
p
s
m
a
et
,str
o
p
s
reta
w
,g
niik
s
g
nikih
a
h
p
a
K
,)sla
e
m
retfa
yllaic
e
p
s
e
-
ts
e
b
(
g
nikla
w
,g
nig
g
oj
,)lla
bte
k
s
a
b
.g.e(
str
o
p
s
e
vitc
a
str
o
p
s
reta
w
Transitional Periods are the seven days at the end
and beginning of each season. Áyurveda advises
slowly discontinuing the foods and lifestyle of the
preceding season, and gradually adopting those
suggested for the coming season. It is said that
diseases are created by suddenly ending one habit,
and just as suddenly beginning another. (Aßhóáñga
H^idayam- Sútra. Ch. 3. verses 58-591/2).
Exercise (Vyayama)
Another important lifestyle routine is exercise. It
is a very important healing therapy for a balanced
state of health. Exercise tones and balances all seven
tissues (dhátus) and channels (srotas), improves blood
circulation, muscle strength and tone, weight con-
trol, and the respiratory and digestive systems. Fur-
thermore, it creates a harmonious state of mind. There
are three levels of exercise: passive (e.g., massage),
active (e.g., walking, skiing), and energy-balancing
(e.g., yoga, Tai Chi). Yet, to prevent insufficient or
excessive exercise, Áyurveda stresses an individual
approach to exercise for each doßha .
In the 1980’s there was a popular saying, “no pain,
no gain.” However, this is only true for Kapha doßhas.
For Váyu and Pitta constitutions, the saying is, “No
pain, no pain.” That is, exercise until one begins to
perspire, then stop. Excess exercise will hurt and de-
hydrate Váyu doßhas, and it will overheat Pitta doßhas.
On the other hand, Kapha persons need a very active
routine and are strongly advised to exercise a little
past the point of fatigue. This improves mental alert-
ness, digestion, and weight control. Professional and
semi-professional athletes, and those who are on a
program to build up their endurance, will need to
perspire and feel some fatigue. These guidelines
should always kept in mind and adapted as needed.
Váyu Doßhas: Though they prefer fast, exciting ac-
tivities that will further raise their air element, they
do better with slower, more grounding exercise. Ac-
tive sports include walking (the best exercise), jump-
ing on a trampoline, swimming, dancing, and cross-
country skiing. To prevent drying out, it is best that
Váyu doßhas oil their bodies as a warm-up. Yoga or
stretching is also advised before and after exercising.
Drinking Váyu-reducing tea before exercise also pre-
vents dehydration. Váyu doßhas tend to have joint
and arthritic problems, so oil massage, stretching, and
exercises that neither stress nor have high impact on
the joints are useful. Varying exercises (cross-train-
ing) helps keep the Váyu mind satisfied. Afterwards,
eating a snack will restore energy. Yoga or stretching
is suggested to remove stiffness. Five minutes in a
steam bath or hot tub helps relax and offer moist,
penetrating heat (but always keep the head out of the
heat—see Chapter 7 on pañcha karma).
Pitta Doßhas: Have strong, athletic bodies. They love
a challenge and competition, but need to maintain a
sense of fun during their workout. Team sports curb
their tendency towards aggression and overly intense
competitiveness, and develop their organization and

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
336
b
r
e
H
tife
n
e
B
str
o
p
S
a
h
d
n
a
g
a
w
h
¤
A
ni
+
K
+
P
-
V
ss
e
c
x
e
e
n
u
m
m
i
d
n
a
d
ni
m
e
ht
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
,s
e
u
ssit
d
n
a
s
elc
s
u
m
s
dliu
b
;n
oitartn
e
c
n
o
c
d
n
a
n
oita
nid
r
o
o
c
y
d
o
b/d
ni
m
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
;s
m
ets
y
s
g
niy
ar
g
d
n
a
n
oits
u
a
h
x
e
sretn
u
o
c
í
m
h
á
r
B
=
K
P
V
,n
oitartn
e
c
n
o
c
,y
r
o
m
e
m
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
;cin
ot
niar
b
ts
e
b
e
ht
,s
e
v
re
n
d
n
a
slle
c
niar
b
s
eta
n
e
v
ujer
;n
oitatid
e
m
d
n
a
e
c
n
e
gilletni
d
n
a
nik
s
d
o
olb
e
ht
s
eifir
u
p
;
m
ets
y
s
e
n
u
m
m
i
d
n
a
sla
n
er
d
a
e
ht
hti
w
d
e
s
u
n
e
h
W
.re
vil
i
it-
of
ss
e
c
o
r
p
g
nig
a
e
ht
s
e
sre
v
er
t
h
¤
á
r
P
n
a
v
y
h
C
=
K
P
V
er
o
m
;tn
a
dix
o
-itn
a
n
a
;y
r
o
m
e
m
d
n
a
n
oitartn
e
c
n
o
c
s
e
v
o
r
p
m
i
s
e
g
n
ar
o
n
a
ht
C
ni
m
ativ
y
erf
m
o
C
+
K
-
P
V
s
er
utc
arf
d
n
a
,s
d
n
u
o
w
,s
niar
p
s
sla
e
h
,ht
w
o
r
g
e
u
ssit
s
eto
m
o
r
p
iT
-
o
F
+
K
-
P
V
s
dliu
b
er
;s
e
n
o
b
d
n
a
,stn
e
m
a
gil
,s
n
o
d
n
et
,s
elc
s
u
m
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
m
ets
y
s
s
u
o
v
re
n
e
ht
d
n
a
,s
y
e
n
dik
,re
vil
s
n
e
htg
n
erts
,s
e
u
ssit
á
hóh
äijñ
a
M
*
*
+
V
-
K
P
s
etalu
g
er
d
n
a
s
e
s
n
a
elc
;s
e
n
o
b
n
e
k
o
r
b
d
n
a
s
e
u
ssit
d
e
g
a
m
a
d
sla
e
h
reifir
u
p
d
o
olb
ts
e
b
e
ht
;y
e
n
dik
d
n
a
,n
e
elp
s
,re
vil
cire
m
r
u
T
=
K
P
V
f
o
e
n
o
;s
e
siu
r
b
d
n
a
,s
niar
p
s
,s
niarts
sla
e
h
,stn
e
m
a
gil
s
e
h
cterts
e
sicre
x
e
er
o
fe
b
r
u
o
h
1
e
k
a
T
.stn
a
dix
oitn
a
ts
e
b
e
ht
leadership skills. Oil massage and yoga or stretching
is advised before a workout. After exercising, yoga
and relaxation are important. A cup of cooled herbal
tea helps one to cool down. Enjoying a steam bath
for 5 to 10 minutes is a good way to unwind (keeping
the head out of the heat—see Chapter 7).
Kapha Doßhas: Tend towards inactivity, yet need to
exercise the most. They have the strongest constitution
and require a strong workout, exercising a little past
the point of fatigue. This improves their digestion,
circulation, lymphatic system, controls weight and
cellulite, and develops mental alertness. Having a dog
as a pet takes advantage of their devoted nature to get
Kapha doßhas up and out on a walk. Jogging is
excellent for the Kapha person (but not for Váyu and
Pitta doßhas). They also do well in a structured
exercise class.
Usually, persons are advised to breathe evenly
during exercise to strengthen the lungs and digestive
system; however, if there are respiratory, digestive,
or inflammatory disorders, a workout is not advised.
Herbs
While many people take vitamins to enhance
athletic performance, Áyurveda suggests that they
may be difficult to digest and absorb. Herbs offer a
more fundamental form of nutrition in their holistic
or synergized form, which mother nature created—
unlike vitamins, which may cause a potential for
imbalance. Further, herbs are easily digested,
assimilated, and work quickly. It is useful for the Váyu
doßha athlete to drink some herbal tea or fruit juice
before and after exercising to prevent dehydration.
The chart below lists herbs that athletes are ad-
vised to take between exercise sessions. They can be
taken internally and applied externally as pastes.

Section 3: Therapeutics             Chapter 13: Áyurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling
 337
In all of life’s activities, one should adopt
the middle course; avoid extremes.
Aßhóáñga H^idayam: Sú. Ch. 2; ver. 30
Chapter 13
Áyurvedic Psychology, Ethics
and Spiritual Counseling
hen reading the original Áyurvedic texts
(i.e., Charak Saåhitá, Sußhrut Saåhitá,
Aßhóháñga H^idayam), one sees that
Áyurveda is truly a complete, or holistic, science. In
these ancient writings, insights into the science of
mind and body were seen as interdependent, and a
complete system of psychological healing was laid
out.
In Chapter 12, we discussed the role of the envi-
ronment as one of several factors in creating imbal-
ances. This also includes the external mental or psy-
chological environment. Practically speaking, when
a person cannot find any internal or physical causes
for an illness, Áyurveda suggests looking to other
factors (both mental and physical): for example,
lifestyle plays a vital role in a balanced or healthy
life. Environmental changes can balance a person as
much as herbs, aromas, or other factors. Áyurveda
emphasizes the natural restoration and development
of harmony and health, in the home and surround-
ings. People are advised to do the following:
√Take in positive impressions.
√   Release negative emotions (i.e., do not suppress
them).
√   Maintain and develop positive self-worth and self-
esteem.
√   Remember that the goal of life is Divine God
Home:
√
Insure surroundings of beauty and harmony.
√Gain rest and happiness.
√    Use full-spectrum light bulbs in the winter if
suffering from depression.
√  Make your dwelling, or at least some part of
it, into a temple of sacred healing.
√  Prepare an altar with photos of saints, sages, dei-
ties, sacred objects, statures, gems, yantras, incense,
flowers, belts, and the like (according to your faith).
When you use this space only for meditation and
chanting, it will grow in the energy of spiritual peace.
Nature:
√  Daily walks renew, revive, and refresh.
√  Take hikes and nature walks; go camping.
√  Visiting oceans, streams, waterfalls, and other natu-
ral bodies of water.
√  Visit public gardens, or till and plant your own
garden (with waterfall and pond if possible).
√  Get adequate sun and fresh air daily.
Doßhas and the Environment
     Váyu: Gains rest, relaxation, stability, peace and
security from the environment.
     Pitta: Needs relaxation, recreation, amusement,
beauty, affection, and delight.
     Kapha: Needs exercise, work, stimulation,
motivation, exertion.
Love and Emotions
     Consciousness, or mokßha. When a person is cen-
tered within themselves, there is a feeling that Mother
Nature will provide all of one’s essential needs, food,
shelter, peace, contentment, grace, and Divinity. This
faith in her will constantly grow. Faith emanates from
within the individual, is automatically experienced,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
338
and is shared with others.
     Faith or Divine love can be cultivated through
sádhaná (meditation), proper diet, aromas, music,
massage, yoga, and other therapies. These spiritual
and healing methods allow persons to actively take
positive control of their lives, clear their emotions,
and enlarge their inner Divinity. These modalities help
persons of different doßhas in specific ways:
     Váyu: Releases fear and anxiety, and develops
peace, faith, and courage.
 Pitta: Releases anger, resentment, impatience, and
develops love, compassion, and forgiveness.
Kapha: Releases greed, attachment, clinging,
lethargy, and develops clarity and detachment from
these emotions.
Developing Self-Worth
In the book Yoga Vani; Instructions for the
Attainment of Siddhayoga, Vedic advice is offered for
developing one’s self-esteem. People are advised to
try the following:
C Test truth on the touchstone of their own heart.
C  Be aware that doubt can come even disguised as a
friend, undermining one’s desires and efforts for
health and Self-Realization.
C  Realize that doubt is like a ghost trying to scare
one from their sádhaná and spiritual life.
This Vedic advice provides methods to overcome
doubts. A person learns what is true through a
threefold process:
1) What one reads in the scriptures.
 2) What one’s Guru or teacher tells them.
 3) What one experiences for themselves.
Only when all three situations come together will
one have true knowledge. So one always makes sure
they experience things for themselves before believing
anyone or anything (i.e., does not follow blindly).
C  Have faith in one’s Guru or and their meditation
instructions.
C  The doubting or low self-esteem mind becomes
peaceful through sádhaná and other Áyurvedic prac-
tices. A far-flying kite will easily come to hand when
the string is wound around the stick. So too, the
troubled mind comes under control through repeated
repetitions (i.e., revolutions) of the mantra.
C  Practicing sádhaná daily forces the mind to work
tirelessly, moving up and down the sußhumòá (the
spiritual tube in the spine) until the mind tires and
thoughts leave of their own accord. Then, the mind
automatically becomes silent.
As one begins to feel and see this growing inner
Divinity extend to others and the outer world, their
sense of self-worth is strengthened. Thus, people are
advised to notice and release negative attitudes and
wishes (e.g., “I ’d rather be sick than confront this
issue, I’m dumb and worthless, Nothing good ever
happens to me.”)
By contemplating, “Who am I?”, one begins to
feel inner Divine grace, thus instantly releasing
negative thoughts, self-created or accepted from
others. By not limiting oneself, one is able to accept
their mistakes as a challenge—to alter the situation,
and grow. Each mental doßha has a specific exercise
or focus to achieve balance:
Váyu: Has to give up the negative self-idea that
they are weak, afraid, isolated, agitated, or disturbed.
Pitta: Has to reduce the need to overachieve and
take power (it makes the person appear domineering
and others look worse).
Kapha: Has to practice atonement and give up the
idea that they are defined by what they own, their
family, culture, or job. They have to challenge a false
sense of contentment.
Inner and Outer Worlds
As one releases negative ideas they hold about
themselves and their life, they find that the outer world
reflects how they feel within. People, animals, and
nature are all a part of the same web of life; touch
one area of the web and the whole web is affected.
To help oneself, one must help others. As the
realization of the interconnectedness or

Section 3: Therapeutics             Chapter 13: Áyurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling
 339
unboundedness of one’s inner Divinity grows, the
view of separateness between the inner and outer
world diminishes. One begins to see that everyone
and everything is a part of the same Divine essence.
Conversely, when things are seen as separate from
the Self, one longs for that which is believed to be
other than the Self. This longing causes grief or
suffering. However, as Self-Realization grows and
one begins to see all things (i.e., themselves and
others) as a part of the same Divine essence, then
longing, grief, and suffering diminish. One begins to
feel content because nothing is separate from
themselves. Further, since the Self and others are seen
as Divine, then the feelings of Divinity (i.e., eternal
grace and bliss) replace the previously felt negative
emotions and thoughts.
Another important way to develop this holy
experience is by following one’s dharma (one’s life
path or purpose; using one’s innate or God-given
talents). Working in a career one loves is another
definition of following one’s dharma. When persons
work at something they love, it ceases to feel like
work. When one uses their God-given talent, it creates
a stronger connection between themselves and the
Divine. Persons feel they are doing something
meaningful and useful; life feels more purposeful.
Following one’s dharma is not only uplifting for
the individual, but by definition, is also beneficial for
others. Thus, each doßha begins to find a more positive
social outlook.
Váyu: The idea that the world is a harsh,
unsupportive, clashing, chaotic, and unadjustable is
reversed.
Pitta: Their idea that the world is a place to gain
power and recognition is changed to a more
harmonious and integrated view.
Kapha: A sense of greed and their need for outer
security, clinging, and accumulation of material things
is reversed.
Áyurveda and Counseling
The ancient Áyurvedic texts were replete with
information on how to live a healthy balanced life:
√   Lifestyle considerations based on physical
constitution.
√   Lifestyle considerations based on mental or
emotional constitution.
√   Psychological insights discuss personal,
spiritual, career, relationship, and environmental
issues.
√   Maintenance, prevention, and longevity.
Charak Saåhitá says that the practitioner who has
even a basic knowledge of Áyurveda and practices
out of love and caring for others will be a better
practitioner than one who knows everything about
the topic, yet is more concerned with fame and
fortune. In short, to be completely effective, the
essence of the practitioner must be able to touch the
Soul of the client.
Practitioner/Client Exchange
The original Áyurvedic texts clearly state that
counseling involves tact, diplomacy, and positivity
on the part of the practitioner. Respect for the client
is paramount. Warmth, concern, and carefully
listening to the client is better than having excess
knowledge and skill while maintaining an
impersonal or uncaring attitude. (Conversely, these
ancient scriptures advise that the client also be
respectful of the practitioner.)
Practitioners are advised not to become too
intimate with clients (i.e., they should maintain a
professional relationship), or else clients may begin
to view the practitioner as a friend. Then, advice is
only casually followed. A fine line exists between
being sensitive and being casual or intimate.
Respect for the Divine within clients is urged
because it allows them to listen to their own intuition
and arrive at their own choices. As clients recognize
the value and ability of their intuition, they find an
increase in their own self-worth. Thus, it is important
that clients understand the scope and potential that

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
340
Áyurveda offers. In this way clients have more faith
in the process and can more easily follow the
Áyurvedic way. Clients must also feel their personal
and spiritual life will be respected, knowing that
consultations will be kept confidential.
Doßha Personalities
The Charak Saåhitá notes that each doßha has a
different personality; therefore, each doßha requires
a unique behavioral approach.
Váyu: They are more fearful, and appear nervous,
upset, or distracted. These doßhas may feel hesitant,
insecure, fidgety, unsettled, or doubtful about
themselves or the therapy. Conversely, they may be
overly enthusiastic and excited, expecting too much
with no real motivation behind it. They tend to be
ungrounded and hard to deal with (i.e., they need to
have an ‘into’ body experience). These people may
feel negative and worried about themselves and their
condition, imagining things are worse than they really
are (i.e., hypochondria).
Therapy: The practitioner attempts to get them to
be more realistic about their situation and how to
correct it; they need to bring them down to earth. They
need to be treated delicately, like flowers. Váyu
doßhas responsibly start their programs, then begin
to slack off after a while.
Pitta: They think they know who they are and
what they are doing. Probably, they will tell the
practitioner what they should do for them. These
people will analyze themselves and try to take over
the consultation. They may have a critical, aggressive,
or quarrelsome nature, asking for credentials or
questioning the reliability of Áyurveda itself. Because
they enjoy authority status and hierarchy, the
practitioner needs to respond simply and objectively.
This doßha may expect the practitioner to heal them.
They may judge the practitioner’s qualifications or
want the practitioner to tell them how they will be
healed. However, the practitioner is advised not to be
dragged into such game-playing. In short, the more
practitioners try to justify themselves, the more the
Pitta doßha will doubt them. If the client is not happy
with the credentials, then it is just as well; because
with this client’s frame of mind, the therapy could
not work.
Therapy: First, the practitioner is advised to remain
objective and rational, discussing the critical nature
of the individual so they can learn to understand it as
a cause of their imbalances. This process of
awakening one’s abilities to discriminate enables the
client to control their lives as opposed to their trying
to control life; they can change from having a critical
nature to a discriminating disposition. Pitta doßhas
need to be treated in a friendly manner. These
constitutions are cooled (balanced) by calm, pleasant
circumstances and behavior. Only then will they feel
the practitioner is on their side. This doßha needs to
feel they are seen in an authoritative light. When Pitta
doßhas understand what is entailed in self-responsible
healing, they are very good at applying and following
the therapies. However they must be cautioned not to
become fanatical in the application of therapy; to
avoid burnout, the practitioner should urge
moderation. If the therapy does not go well, however,
they are apt to become angry and critical. It is best
for practitioners not to promise too much and to show
that healing is the responsibility of the client.
Kapha: These persons need to be motivated,
stimulated, or shocked into getting well. They are
often lethargic, slow to act, or lazy; and find it hard to
implement things. If left to themselves they will
remain inert. They do not need comfort; although,
they may seek it. Sentimentality is one cause of their
health imbalances.
Therapy: Kapha doßhas do not require much
explanation; they need an extra a push. They need to
be warned in order to make them respond and work
on becoming healthy. This doßha requires time and
patience to implement information. They are more
responsive to love and personal care, along with an
insistence and firmness regarding the fundamentals
of self-healing. If they slip back into their old habits,

Section 3: Therapeutics             Chapter 13: Áyurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling
 341
they return to their self-indulgent behavior. Thus, they
may need more frequent visits and more interchange
to stimulate them to get started. Once they start, they
do well, with only an occasional need for motivation.
Váyu/Pitta: This doßha moves back and forth
between fear to anger. They may only be looking for
someone to dump their negative problems on. Usually
their immune systems and energy levels are weak,
and find it hard to undergo questioning or constructive
criticism. Their fears and angers will often be
suppressed.
Therapy: They need much nurturing, patience,
consideration, and tact.
Pitta/Kapha: This dual doßha is both energetic
and stable; they are healthy and possess a strong
immune system. Usually content, they approach
holistic health for enhancement and improvement of
energy. They lack the adaptability and flexibility of
Váyu energies. This doßha prefers to dominate or
control and to be possessive and conservative.
Therapy: They need movement, activity, creativity,
and new challenges.
Váyu/Kapha: These persons lack fire, energy,
motivation, passion, and enthusiasm. They are
generally weak, passive, dependent, and
hypersensitive. They agree to everything they are told
to do, but do not have the energy to carry through.
Emotionally and mentally, they are nervous or easily
disturbed. They can be chameleon-like in their
personality, appearing as others want them to be.
Therapy: Delicate and sensitive questions are advised.
These dual doßhas respond to warmth and firmness,
but it is hard to tell how well they are following the
therapy. The practitioner is advised to see through
them, helping them to become clearer and more prac-
tical in their lives.
Client’s Attitude
First, the practitioner is urged to judge the sin-
cerity of the client. Some people do not really want
to be well, as they equate their lives with their ill-
nesses. In this case, no one can help them heal. It is
usually because one wants to be sick that they get
sick. Being ill draws attention to themselves. The
practitioner decides if a client wants help or merely
attention.
The first questions addressed to the client are, “Do
you want to be well? Do you have anything to gain
by staying sick? Is your illness an escape? Will you
spend the time needed to become well? Do you want
to be healed or is this just a temporary amusement?
Are you going to take responsibility for your health
and heal yourself? Do you expect someone else to
heal you?” The practitioner awakens the client’s in-
telligence and waits to hear them make a commit-
ment to heal themselves.
Yama and Niyama Ethical
Codes of Conduct
Good deeds done for
reward bring heaven.
Good deeds done
without desire bring
Liberation.
Upanißhadic Wisdom
Even the insects and ants should be treated with
compassion and kindness, just as one’s own self.
Aßhóáñga H^idayam: Sú: Ch. 2; ver. 23
To develop health and Self-Realization, sádhaná
and Áyurvedic therapies are suggested. Further
developments in spirituality and healing are gained
by following the rules of virtuous behavior.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
342
Yama
1. Ahimsa—not harming, not causing trouble to
people, animals or the environment, or not feeling
envy. One’s job must be considered (i.e., this rule
doesn’t apply if one has a job that may require killing,
like fishing or being a soldier. But even for the soldier,
killing is to be only in self-defense or to protect the
lives of the oppressed). Those whose job doesn’t
involve killing are advised not to kill.
2. Truth or saying what one means. Sincere words
are meant to clarify one’s ideas.
3. Non-Stealing—Not coveting other people’s
possessions; in thought, word, or action.
4. Brahmacharya—avoiding coition in thought,
word, and action is applied to single persons.
Married couples also have a form of brahmacharya
as discussed in the ¤hástras.
5. Aparigraha, or non-acceptance—to cease from
wanting or chasing after material wealth or fame
because it keeps one’s mind attached or bound (i.e.,
not free or at peace).
Niyama
1. Purity (external) means pure food and
cleanliness. (Internal) means a pure or sattwic mind
attained through spiritual practices.
2. Contentedness with what is obtained
through luck or the Grace of God.
3. Tapas, or rigor. Originally, tapas referred to being
able to bear extremes of heat and cold, hunger, and
thirst, etc. Today, many gurus say this sort of tapas is
no longer needed. However, rigor may be seen in
terms of personality. If a person offers excessive praise
(warmth) or treats one in a very cold manner, persons
are advised to ignore both and maintain their
concentration on their inner Divine Self-Worth and
the growth of their Self-Realization.
Wisdom sacrifice (spiritual inquiry from
realized persons and meditation) is far
superior to material sacrifice (austerities).
Bhagavad Gíta Ch 4 ver 25-34
     Chapter 17 of the Bhagavad Gíta defines austeri-
ties as a threefold process involving the body, speech,
and mind.
Body: Worship of God, holy persons, gurus, and
the wise; act with purity, simplicity, continence, and
non-injury.
Speech: That which doesn’t cause harm or pain to
others, is true, pleasant, and beneficial; and regular
scriptural study.
Mind: Cheerfulness, kindness, silence, self-
control, and purity of heart.
4. Study of Scriptures. Reading scriptures such
as Bhagavad Gíta, Yoga Vasißhta, and Upanißhads
is beneficial for developing a spiritual understanding
or framework. Practicing sádhaná, as instructed by
one’s guru, is actually the deepest level of study
because it is learned through direct experience within
oneself.
5. Thinking of God as the Be-all and End-all.
Credit all actions to the Supreme Soul. This helps
eliminate the desire for the consequence of action,
(e.g., I am not the doer, I am only the instrument.
God is the doer) [of course this is not meant to be
used as an excuse for living irresponsibly]. Thus, one
becomes less attached to the material world and more
devoted to the Divine Grace.
Faith
Faith develops Self-Worth. The highest form of
Self-Worth is Self-Realization: seeing that the Self is
Divine. It is an essential tool that keeps the mind from
developing intellectual error. Intellectual error means
to doubt one’s true Self, and results in seeing objects
as Eternal. So, faith in the growth of one’s spiritual
experiences (faith in what one experiences through
their inner eye) is essential. Faith in the spiritual
teacher and their instructions is needed.
Even well-meaning family and friends may cause
one to doubt their inner spiritual feelings; others do
not know what is in one’s own spiritual heart. Thus,
it is advised to hold onto what one knows from
experience. Then, one’s mind will continually
maintain correct intellectual judgments for spiritual,
mental, and physical health.

Section 3: Therapeutics             Chapter 13: Áyurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling
 343
s
a
m
a
Y
g
n
i
w
ollo
F
f
o
stl
u
s
e
R
a
m
a
Y
a
s
m
ih
A
r
u
o
y
s
d
ra
w
ot
yti
m
n
e
sle
ef
e
n
o
o
n
htu
r
T
ytila
er
s
e
m
o
c
e
b
d
r
o
w
s'e
n
o
g
nila
et
S
-
n
o
N
d
e
niatta
si
s
m
e
g
f
o
htla
e
w
a
y
r
a
h
c
a
m
h
a
r
B
e
g
e
dl
w
o
n
k
d
n
a
y
g
re
n
e
e
s
u
f
ni
ot
re
w
o
p
s
w
o
r
g
s
e
n
o
relb
m
u
h
e
ht
otn
u
e
c
n
atp
e
c
c
a-
n
o
N
d
e
nia
g
si
s
htrib
s
u
oiv
er
p
f
o
e
g
d
el
w
o
n
k
s
a
m
a
yi
N
g
n
i
w
ollo
F
f
o
stl
u
s
e
R
a
m
a
yi
N
ytir
u
P
s
e
m
o
c
e
b
d
ni
m
ci
w
tta
s
)
ylo
h
d
n
a
er
u
p
(
tn
e
m
tn
etn
o
C
d
e
nia
g
si
yticilef
elb
ara
p
m
o
c
ni
s
a
p
a
T
h
sin
a
v
s
eitir
u
p
m
i
la
cis
y
h
p
d
n
a
latn
e
m
Spiritual Áyurveda
If money is lost, nothing is lost.
If health is lost, something is lost.
But if character is lost, everything is lost.
Smiles
As discussed earlier, the root cause of all illness
is a lack of faith or connection with the Divine. Loss
of love of one’s inner, highest Self is the first stage in
the development and cause of disease. Thus, if one
devotes themselves to loving and thinking of them-
selves in the highest, most Divine sense, the root of
illness is most easily eradicated.
To gain a deeper spiritual insight into Áyurveda,
we look at the ancient Vedic scriptures that describe
three bodies, or sheaths, that each human being has.
1) Physical Body: (Sthula £haríra) is where the 3
humors, Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha are the main ener-
getic operating forces. Included in the physical body
are 16 attributes, 5 sense organs, 5 organs of action, 5
elements and the mind (connected with the senses).
There are two causes of lack of health, as discussed
earlier, mind and body. Physical sorrow results in the
loss of equilibrium of the doßhas. Mental sorrow
arises from anger, greed, desire, attachment, fear,
melancholy, envy, and inability to attain desired ob-
jects. Troubles are also twofold, creatures and spir-
its. The first comes from the self and other people,
animals, insects, and the like. The second comes from
spirits (i.e., various forms of negativity) and weak
planets found in one’s Jyotißh astrology chart).
2) Astral Body: (Sukßhma £haríra) consists of 17
attributes:
Five senses of knowledge (attributes 1 through 5)
Five senses of action (attributes 6 through 10)
Five life-breaths (attributes 11 through 15)
Intellect, ego (attribute 16)
Mind, mind’s heart (attribute 17)
It is not the physical organs (i.e., eyeball, nose, etc.),
but the senses—sight, smell, vision, etc.—that pro-
vide information. Their physical limbs do not consti-
tute actions, their essence does.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
344
e
s
n
e
S
r
el
u
R
e
m
o
H
th
gi
S
n
u
S
lla
b
e
y
e
g
nira
e
H
ki
D
elo
h
ra
e
lle
m
S
r
a
m
u
K
iniv
h
ä
A
lirts
o
n
ets
a
T
a
n
u
r
a
V
e
u
g
n
ot
h
c
u
o
T
u
y
á
V
nik
s
e
s
n
e
S
r
el
u
R
e
m
o
H
*
h
c
e
e
p
S
in
g
A
f
o
n
a
g
r
o
h
c
e
e
p
s
p
s
ar
G
a
r
d
n
I
m
la
p
kla
W
a
r
d
n
e
p
U
to
o
f
eterc
x
E
*
*
a
m
a
Y
s
u
n
a
/eta
nir
U
n
e
m
e
s
ss
a
p
ita
p
aja
r
P
slatin
e
g
s
u
y
á
V
/
n
oitc
e
ri
D
y
tr
e
p
o
r
P
e
m
o
H
ò
á
r
P
tu
o
tra
e
h
n
á
p
A
n
w
o
d
s
u
n
a
n
á
m
a
S
la
u
q
e/d
o
o
f
sts
e
gid
le
v
a
n
n
á
d
U
p
u
ta
o
r
ht
n
a
á
y
V
/d
o
o
f
d
ets
e
gid
s
etu
birtsid
tu
o
h
g
u
o
r
ht
y
d
o
b
elo
h
w
r
el
u
R
s
el
u
R
a
g
a
N
g
nip
u
c
cih
e
m
r
ú
K
htu
o
m
e
ht
g
nin
e
p
o
a
r
a
kir
K
g
niz
e
e
n
s
atta
d
a
v
e
D
g
nin
w
a
y
a
y
ajn
a
n
a
h
D
n
oitirtu
n
e
s
n
e
S
d
n
i
M
r
el
u
R
/n
oita
ni
m
rete
D
n
oitulo
s
errI
n
o
o
M
e
s
n
e
s-
b
u
s
(
tr
a
e
H
s'
d
n
i
M
atti
h
C
)
r
el
u
R
ss
e
n
e
vitisiu
q
n
I
atu
y
h
c
A
e
s
n
e
S
tc
ellet
n
I
r
el
u
R
n
ois
ulc
n
o
c
a
ta
g
nivirr
A
á
m
h
a
r
B
e
s
n
e
s-
b
u
s
(
fle
S
a
r
a
k
m
a
h
A
)
r
el
u
R
o
g
E
a
r
a
k
å
a
S
Senses of Knowledge
Senses of Action
Senses of Life-Breaths
Life-Breath Assistants
Senses and Sub-Senses
This subtle or astral body is also
where the chakras exist.
3) Causal or Essential Body: (Karana £haríra)
surrounds the other two bodies in an oval or egg shape.
It is the seed form of all attributes of the other two
bodies. Yet, there are no attributes to it, just as an
entire tree is contained in the seed but no tree is found
at this level. The causal body consists of the five
tanmatras (primal sensory energies, before they
develop into the five senses) and the primal energies
that develop into the elements (in the astral and
physical bodies). Thirty-five astral potentials and 16
physical potentials exist here. Within this seed are
the person’s karmic impressions that motivate them
through each birth. The causal body is located in the
spiritual heart, situated just to the right of the center

Section 3: Therapeutics             Chapter 13: Áyurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling
 345
y
d
o
B
lle
C
t
n
e
m
el
E
laireta
M
d
o
o
F
htra
E
larts
A
,d
ni
M
,efi
L
e
g
d
el
w
o
n
K
ri
A
,eri
F
,reta
W
la
s
u
a
C
th
gile
D
re
ht
E
of the chest.
Creation itself emerges from this Supreme energy,
for it is the cause of causes. It is the knowledge of
oneness of all things with the Creator (Brahmá). Being
one, it causes many, yet ‘the many’ are essentially
the one, just as a plate, a mug, and a pitcher are
essentially all clay. It is called the delight cell due to
its abundance of delight. One can experience delight
through self-luminous experience. It is also called
pralaya, or universal sound sleep, because the
universe is annihilated in this body. Upon waking
from sound sleep one may feel, “It was so peaceful, I
was not aware of anything.”
It is called a sheath because it conceals its true
delight and properties. This sheath is the cause of
ignorance. It has two energies, abaran and bikßhepa
(concealment and hallucination). A person may think
the sun has become nonexistent when a cloud covers
it. Similarly, a person may believe the causal body is
nonexistent due to concealment by the causal sheath.
It is the illusion that prevents persons from realizing
their true inner nature. A piece of rope may appear to
look like a snake. Similarly, the Soul may appear to
be the actor. One may say, “I am a happy, a sad, or an
infatuated person.” This creates various illusions of
life (maya). Properly stated, the reality of life is, “I
am eternal and unchanging. Happiness or sadness is
an ever-changing illusion.”
Hairs grow of themselves, vegetables grow of
themselves, so the first two bodies, the physical and
astral, automatically grow from the causal body. The
causal body grows by itself. No other reason exists
for it to happen.
5 Delight Cells
The three bodies are divided into five cells, food,
life, mind, knowledge, and delight.
1. Food Cell (Annamaya Koßha): The physical body
is made up of food taken from the parents and
transformed into semen and blood. Its cell or sheath
hides the Soul, as a husk hides the grain. Thus, the
Soul appears to be divided and troubled by birth, life,
and death, when actually it is eternal —the creator of
these processes.
2. Life Cell (Práòmaya Koßha): This cell involves
the fire organs of action and the 5 life breaths. The
life sheath has concealed the true nature of the
passionless Soul, making it seem full of passion. It
makes the speechless Soul seem to be the orator and
the desireless Soul seem to be full of desire.
3. Mind Cell (Manomaya Koßha): This sheath
includes the 5 senses of knowledge and mind, hiding
the true nature of the Soul. The result is that the
doubtless Soul appears as doubting, the sightless Soul
appears to see, the sorrowless Soul seems full of
sorrow, etc.
4. Knowledge Cell (Vigñanamaya Koßha): This
cell comprises the 5 senses of knowledge and the
intellect. It conceals the true nature of the Soul by
appearing as the doer or knower. It gives the Soul
ego, action, name, fame, pride, etc.
5. Delight Cell (Anandamaya Koßha): Delight
constitutes love, delight, and enjoyment, concealing
the true nature of the Soul which is beyond relative
experiences of love, delight, etc. (i.e., these relative

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
346
experiences have a beginning and end. The Soul is a
never-ending experience of Divine love, etc.). This
cell appears as the causal body of all beings.
Devotion:
The Best Áyurvedic Medicine
Through devotion or attention to the eternal
Divine state of life, one heals and prevents disease
and ultimately develops and attains Self-Realization,
the goal of Áyurveda. For spiritual healing, a personal
or devotional approach is crucial. Some people believe
in K^ißhòa, some in Jesus, others in Buddha, still
others commune with their God through music.
Devotion is considered the major healing practice of
Áyurveda, for it is only through sádhaná (devotional
meditations or prayer) prescribed by one’s spiritual
teacher or guru that karmic diseases can be erased
and persons can merge with their beloved form of
God.
In order to find a qualified teacher, or guru, one
first must decide what one is looking for. Different
gurus teach different subjects, much as is done in
school. Many teach about powers, fame, and fortune.
However, only a rare few teach simple, natural Self-
Realization. A true guru is one who, at first sight,
produces bliss or pleasure in a person. Also, they will
charge students no fees for training.
Some people who have already been following a
guru may feel they have learned all they can and need
to move on to another guru. The Vedic scriptures not
only validate this feeling, but suggest it is necessary
for the student to make the change if and when the
time comes. Specifically, the Vedas state that if a
student has spent at least a year sincerely following a
teacher’s guidance and still does not have pleasant
results, they have the right and obligation to change
teachers. Thus, even the choosing of one’s guru is
very much along the Áyurvedic lines of taking control
of one’s health; self-responsibility. Persons are
cautioned against blindly following teachers. The
scriptures say that 3 aspects to knowing Truth exist:
the words of the guru, the words of the scripture, and
the experiences of the pupil. Only when all 3 are
corroborated does one feel confidant that something
is true.
In this state one embraces everyone and everything
as the same (Divine) Self. One sees all as themselves;
everything inside, outside, and in between is the same
Divine eternal Self. The Divine Self is all that exists.
Then, no separation can exist; no cause for wanting
or longing can arise. When longing ceases to be, no
suffering or disease can develop. Suffering only
results from seeing something as separate from
oneself and desiring to make it yours. Sadness
develops because one misses that from which they
believe they are separated. Once this illusion is seen
through, the cause of suffering vanishes, just as the
darkness cast by a cloud disappears once the sun
shines unobstructed.
This is the Vedantic goal of life and the Áyurvedic
goal as well. Thus, following one’s personal spiritual
path is the best Áyurvedic medicine.
While the importance of having a spiritual guru
has been discussed, not everyone will find or desire a
guru. In this case, one is advised to listen to their
inner guru. The inner guru is the highest guru.
Origin of the Spiritual Body
The Vedic scriptures, the Srutis, discuss the spider
that produces thread from within itself. The thread is
woven into a web, and then withdrawn back into its
own body. This is said to be analogous to the universe
that is produced from Eternal Consciousness
(Chaitanya) and then vanishes into itself. This is the
only cause of creation. Further, it is said that from a
mere ‘glance’ of the consciousness, its energy begins
to move outward (with tamas—lethargy or
destruction— as its main quality) and the sky (ether)
is created. Consciousness then glances at the sky and
air, or Váyu is produced. Glancing at Váyu, fire (tejas)
is then created. From consciousness are produced by
tamas, the destroyer of the in-gazing at tejas, water
(ap) is born. Lastly, earth distinguishable. These 5
elements are essential (p^itivi) is created from
consciousness glancing or undivided. The spiritual
and material bodies at water. They are distinguishable
because they are created from them.

Section 3: Therapeutics             Chapter 13: Áyurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling
 347
e
g
e
d
l
w
o
n
K
f
o
s
e
s
n
e
S
5
st
n
e
m
el
E
lait
n
e
ss
E
5
n
oitc
A
f
o
s
n
a
g
r
O
5
a
w
tta
S
stn
e
m
el
E
s
aja
R
)ra
e(
g
nira
e
H
.1
re
hte/y
k
S
.1
e
u
g
n
o
T
.1
)
nik
s(
h
c
u
o
T
.2
ri
A
.2
d
n
a
H
.2
)e
y
e(
th
gi
S
.3
eri
F
.3
te
e
F
.3
)e
u
g
n
ot(
ets
a
T
.4
reta
W
.4
slatin
e
G
.4
)e
s
o
n
(
lle
m
S
.5
htra
E
.5
s
u
n
A
.5
tra
e
h
stn
e
m
ele
laitn
e
ss
e
5
lla
)efil(
y
g
re
n
e
lativ
,tc
elletni
,d
ni
m
:stc
e
p
s
a
4
s
a
h
tra
e
h
e
h
T
.o
g
e
d
n
a
,tra
e
h
tc
e
p
s
A
n
oitc
n
u
F
d
ni
M
d
n
a
n
oitulo
s
er
n
oitulo
s
erri
tc
elletn
I
g
nik
a
m
n
oisic
e
d
tra
e
H
ss
e
n
e
vitisiu
q
ni
o
g
E
e
c
n
etsix
e-fle
s
:stc
e
p
s
a
5
s
a
h
y
g
re
n
e
lati
V
,n
á
p
a
,ò
á
r
p
n
á
y
v
,n
á
d
u
,n
á
m
a
s
la
u
divid
ni
:stra
p
2
s
a
h
y
d
o
b
la
utirip
s
e
h
T
la
sre
vin
u
d
n
a
Five Senses of Knowledge
(sense of hearing, sight, smell, taste, and touch) origi-
nate in the sattwic portions of the five elements. Five
organs of action (tongue, hands, feet, anus, and geni-
tals) originate in the rajasic (action) portions of the
five elements.
The 5 senses of knowledge are sattwic, while
the 5 organs are rajasic.
Sound is produced in the sky (Akaäh). The ears
hear the sound and the tongue produces the sound.
Air (Váyu) can be felt (touched) on the skin, and
the hands grasp through touch.
Fire‘s (Tejas) attributes are beauty and form. The eye
appreciates this movement (seen as gracefulness) and
comes from the feet that move.
Water‘s (Ap) attribute is taste. The tongue tastes,
and the sexual organ is the main source of delightful
sensation. For example, the sense of taste is on the
tongue, producing delightful taste, and the action of
delight is felt from the genitals.
Earth‘s (P^itivi) attribute is smell, and the anus is
the primary discharging channel of malodorous smell,
as stool.
Universal: Consciousness or Supreme Self, living
in the universal spiritual body, is called Sutrátma
(thread of the Self) because it is the common thread
in every object, like a thread in beads. It is also called

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
348
Hiranyagarbha and praòa because it possesses
knowledge, will, and energy created by the 5 essential
elements. This Hiranyagarbha is finer than the
material elements. Within the body one feels as
though in a state of half-sleep. Three cells—
knowledge, mind and delight—exist here. Here the
Soul possesses will, desire, etc., just as in the waking
state; only it is not material. Thus, it is called the state
of absorption of the material elements.
Individual: Consciousness (Chaitanya), living in the
individual spiritual body, has a brilliant inner sense.
It is finer than the individual material body; one feels
the existence of the brilliance as the state of half-
sleep. Three cells also exist in this state with will,
desire, etc., and are also called the absorption of the
material body. That is, the individual material body
exists in seed form in the individual spiritual body.
Individual and universal spiritual bodies mentally
experience the sounds concerning enjoyable objects
(enjoying objects in secret).
Origin of the Physical Body
Hiranyagarbha or Supreme God, residing in the
universal spiritual body, divides the 5 essential
elements with 5 material elements. This happens with
a ‘glance’, for revealing Himself in material form.
The material world was created from these elements.
The 5 essential elements are divided into 2 parts
(10). The first 5 parts are each divided into 4 equal
parts. These smaller parts of each element are added
to the other half of each element. These 4 equal parts
combine with the half-elements, producing the
material elements. Each material element is made up
of 1/2 material element (i.e., water (ap) is 1/2 material
water, 1/8 essential sky (akaßha), 1/8 essential air
(Váyu), 1/8 essential fire (tejas), and 1/8 essential
earth (p^itivi). [see diagram on next page]
From these 5 divided or material elements, the 14
worlds have been created (7 worlds above and 7
worlds below). In these 14 worlds the material bodies
of 4 different kinds of beings are born (from the
womb, egg, sweat, and earth). Their food and drinks
are also produced in these worlds.
In addition to universal and individual spiritual
bodies, individual and universal material bodies also
exist. The individual material body arises from
separate objects of knowledge (e.g., a tree, a drop of
water, etc.). The universal material body is born of
knowledge of objects in combination (e.g., forest,
lake). The food cell and material body are products
of foods arising from the transformation of edible
fluids and material enjoyment respectively.
Consciousness in the universal material body is
called Vaiswanara because it functions in all humans
as a whole. It is also called Virat because it has various
manifestations. This is the awakening of the universal
material body.
Consciousness in the individual material body is
called Viswa and functions as ego in different material
bodies while maintaining the spiritual body. This is
the awakening of the individual material body. In the
waking state, these two material bodies perceive the
material world through the senses (Bahihpragña).

Section 3: Therapeutics             Chapter 13: Áyurvedic Psychology, Ethics, and Spiritual Counseling
 349
Composition of the Five Elements
Ether Material Element
1/2 Ether
1/8
Air
1/8
Fire
 1/8
Water
 1/8
Earth
Essential Elements
Material Element
1/8
Fire
 1/8
Water
 1/8
Earth
 1/8
Ether
1/2 Air
Air Material Element
Essential Elements
Material Element
1/8
Air
 1/8
Water
 1/8
Earth
 1/8
Ether
1/2 Fire
Fire Material Element
Essential Elements
Material Element
1/8
Air
1/8
Fire
 1/8
Earth
 1/8
Ether
1/2 Water
Water Material Element
Essential Elements
Material Element
1/8
Air
1/8
Fire
 1/8
Water
 1/8
Ether
1/2 Earth
Earth Material Element
Essential Elements
Material Element

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
350

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                          Chapter 14: Circulatory System
 351
Section 4:
Specific Illnesses and Diseases:
Signs and Symptoms, Cause,
Development,  and Therapies

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
352

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                          Chapter 14: Circulatory System
 353
With the understanding of Tridoßha theory and the
various therapies available in Áyurveda, this section
looks at each individual illness and disease. Here, is
described in detail, the cause, signs and symptoms
(including the hidden symptoms), path of
development, and therapeutic suggestions. When
different doßhas are responsible for various forms of
an illness or disease, they are discussed individually.
The index above shows the disorders covered in
this section, grouped according to the various bodily
systems. In a few cases, some of the disorders can be
related to two systems and so will be discussed at the
end of one chapter and related to the next system
(chapter) as well.
Chapter
System
Diseases, Conditions, Topics
Page
14
Circulatory
Raktapitta, anemia, heart diseases, blood pressure,
arteriosclerosis, paraplegia
355
15
Digestive
Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea/dysentery, digestive and
abdominal disorders, jaundice, gall stones, dyspepsia,
indigestion, gastroenteritis, colic, hyperacidity, gastritis,
malabsorption, food allergies, parasites, constipation,
hemorrhoids, obesity, candida, ulcers, toxin (áma)
363
16
Infections/
Wounds
Fever, abscess, sinus, wounds, ulcers, fractures/dislocations
393
17
Respiratory
Cough, breathing, hiccup, T.B., cold
409
18
Urinary
Stones, retention, gravel, obstruction, diabetes
419
19
Ear/Nose/
Throat
Ears, ear lobes, nose, throat, catarrh, hoarse throat, eyes,
mouth disorders
429
20
Nervous
Nervous system, convulsions, sciatica, epilepsy,
addictions, alcohol, fainting, coma, wasting, multiple
sclerosis, Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s
457
21
Skin
Warts, skin disorders, leukoderma, herpes zoster
479
22
Neoplasm
Scrotum, hernia, fistula, elephantiasis, tumors, cancer
493
23
Reproductive
Female reproductive, pregnancy/childbirth, grahas
(planets afflicting newborns), male reproductive, prostate,
venereal diseases
503
24
Immune
HIV/AIDS, epstein barr
527
25
Metabolic
Edema, meningitis, tonsillitis, gingivitis, dental abscess,
goiter, hypo- hyperthyroid gout, thirst
531
26
Miscellaneous
3 vital marmas (heart, bladder, head), arthritis/rheumatism,
dangerous spiritual practices, herbs for dhátus and organs,
gland definitions, herb doses and times; recipes, mutually
contradictory foods, herbal preparation, use, and mixing;
acupuncture
541
27
External
Beauty Care, Jyotiäh - Vedic Astrology, Vedic
Architecture, Feng Shui, Scientific Research
557

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
354

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                          Chapter 14: Circulatory System
 355
Vághabhata excels in sútrasthána.
Sußhruta excels in sárírasthána.
Charak excels in chikitsá
preface in Charak Saåhitá
Chapter 14
Circulatory System
Bleeding, Anemia, Heart, Blood Pressure, Arteriosclerosis, Paraplegia
Bleeding (Raktapitta)
evelopment: The causes of bleeding
include overeating or drinking substances
that increase Pitta, (e.g., red peppers, gar-
lic, onions, alcohol; penetrating, pungent, sour, or
salty tastes), animal products, dry vegetables; excess
junk food or pastries after an excess of food. The
excessed Pitta (blood or hemoglobin by-product)
opens the entrances of circulation channels. It then
enters these channels and mixes with the blood, cir-
culates throughout the body, and blocks the chan-
nels. The blood and Pitta vitiate or aggravate each
other because they are both of a heating nature. As
the heat increases, it becomes malodorous, and be-
gins to penetrate vessel and tissue cell walls. Thus, it
diminishes the clotting process and produces bleed-
ing. The liver and spleen are the origin sites of bleed-
ing. When Pitta is in liquid form, it is related to ranjaka
and pachaka (which are in the stomach, liver, and
spleen). Bleeding is due to Pitta associated with Kapha
(and a little Váyu). Examples of bleeding diseases
are hemophilia, purplish skin patches (purpura), and
an excess of red blood corpuscles (polycythemia
vera).
Premonitory or Incubatory Signs: Heaviness of head,
loss of appetite or taste causing burning sensations in
the chest (which then produces indigestion), needing
cold things and feeling hot, fumes coming from the
stomach or mouth, increased acidity, vomiting or the
fear of vomiting from seeing vomited materials, foul
smelling vomit, cough, difficult breathing, dizziness,
exhaustion, smelling or tasting iron, blood, and raw
fish; burps of sour taste and vinegary smell, loss of
voice, reddish, yellowish, or greenish eyes, skin, nails,
urine, or feces; nose, mouth, ear and eye excretions;
pimples, body ache, indistinguishability of blue, red,
and yellow colors, seeing red, yellow, or blue colors
in dreams.
Features: Bleeding from the facial orifices (nose,
mouth, ears, eyes, throat), from the lower orifices
(penis, urethra, vagina, genital tract, or rectum), from
all channels, through hair follicles on the skin, or si-
multaneously through upper and lower orifices.
Pitta is the primary doßha causing bleeding. Kapha
is the secondary doßha for upper orifice bleeding.
Váyu is the secondary doßha for lower orifice bleed-
ing. All three doßhas are the secondary cause of si-
multaneous upper and lower orifice bleeding.
When vitiated blood (Rakta Pitta) becomes mixed
with Kapha, it becomes dense, pale yellow, oily, and
slimy. When Rakta Pitta is associated with Váyu, it
becomes gray, reddish, foamy, thin, and non-oily. If
Rakta Pitta is further vitiated by Pitta, it becomes pale
red and black. When two, or all three doßhas, vitiate
the blood, the signs and symptoms of the respective
doßhas occur. [Generally Pitta causes vitiated blood,
but later it may mix with Kapha or Váyu to cause
what is referred to as Kapha-caused bleeding or Váyu-
caused bleeding. Secondary-doßha rules are the same

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
356
for other diseases (e.g., fevers that are mainly Pitta-
caused or for tumors that are mainly Váyu-caused).
When the aforementioned primary doßhas mix with
the other doßhas, they create fevers or tumors said to
be caused by the other respective doßhas.]
Upper Bleeding
This is indicated by bleeding from the nose, mouth,
and ears. These diseases can be healed through
purgation with Pitta-relieving herbs (bitters—e.g.,
musta, chiráyatá, kuóki; and astringents—mañjißhþhá,
red raspberry, turmeric) that also relieve Kapha. After
Kapha has been balanced, sweet herbs also can be
used to balance Pitta. Upward bleeding mainly leads
to association with Kapha.
Lower Bleeding
Places of lower bleeding include the rectum,
urethra, and genitals. These diseases are controllable
through emesis and sweet, moist, Váyu-reducing
herbs. Downward bleeding mainly leads to
association with Váyu.
Purgatives help reverse the direction of vomiting,
whereas vomiting reverses the direction of lower
orifice bleeding.
If bleeding is associated with only one doßha it
can be healed. If two doßhas are associated with the
bleeding, it cannot be healed, but it may be controlled.
Simultaneous bleeding cannot be healed because no
herb or therapy can produce simultaneous healing
results. Tridoßhic herbs are recommended (e.g.,
gokßhura, gotu kola, guæúchí, coriander, bh^i´garáj,
triphalá). Bleeding from both directions leads to
association with Váyu and Kapha.
Complications: Mainly hoarseness, but also
weakness, anorexia, indigestion, difficult breathing,
coughing, fever, diarrhea, edema, consumption, and
anemia can develop.
Bleeding Therapies
After determining the cause, direction (and its main
and secondary doßhas), the strength of the person and
the disease, the person’s constitution, season and stage
of disease, either reducing (purificatory) or toning
(palliative) therapies are begun.
When a strong person has mild bleeding—
produced by any one doßha (without other
complications), therapy is begun.
If bleeding is caused by over nourishment and the
person is strong (and their muscles are strong), then
it is not advised to stop the bleeding immediately
because the doßhas are mixed with áma and will have
a natural tendency to be eliminated. Premature
stoppage of bleeding can cause many problems such
as throat obstructions, bad smell in the nose, fainting,
anorexia, fever, benign tumors, enlarged spleen,
constipation, skin diseases, difficult urination,
hemorrhoids, abscesses, and poor complexion (but if
the person is weak and the doßhas are diminished,
then it is necessary to stop the bleeding).
Fasting and Nourishing Therapies: Since Pitta and
blood become aggravated due to áma, fasting is the
first line of therapy. This holds true for upward
bleeding, áma, aggravated Kapha, or if hot and oily
factors caused the bleeding. For all other causes
nourishing therapy is used.
The Charak Saåhitá (Chikitsásthánam Ch. 4 verses
31-35) suggest the following therapies,
Upper Bleeding During the earliest stage, a
soothing tonic is given, boiling 12 grams of herbs
[date palm sugar, grape juice, bitter herbs (e.g., musta,
ámalakí, bh^i´garáj, gokßhura, mañjißhhá, jasmine),
sandalwood and licorice] in 3.072 liters
(approximately 3 quarts) of water until half the water
is left. It is then cooled and taken with cane sugar
(tarpana).
Downward Bleeding In the earliest stage, rice flour
boiled with 11 parts water (peyá) is taken. This is a
very good and time-tested remedy for hemorrhagic
dysentery. Herbs appropriate for balancing the
excessed doßha(s) are used for both upward and
downward bleeding. For one desiring sour tastes,
ámalakí and pomegranate teas are used.
Sweet, nourishing liquids are useful in the earli-
est stage of bleeding, even when Kapha is involved,
because they alleviate Pitta (the predominantly
excessed doäha.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                          Chapter 14: Circulatory System
 357
e
s
u
a
C
g
nita
ere
v
o
a
h
ä
o
D
)s(
elpitlu
m
s
a
h
ä
o
d
r
e
p
p
U
g
n
i
d
e
el
B
*
d
e
siv
d
a
y
p
are
ht
n
oita
g
r
u
p
r
e
w
o
L
g
n
i
d
e
el
B
n
o
p
u
g
nid
n
e
p
e
d
d
n
a/sis
e
m
e
e
vitailla
p
-
htg
n
erts
s’
n
o
sre
p
*
y
p
are
ht
g
nih
sir
u
o
n
r
o
g
n
i
d
e
el
B
r
e
p
p
U
g
n
i
d
e
el
B
r
e
w
o
L
hti
w
r
u
ol
F
n
r
o
C
:ts
1
,reta
w
dlo
C
e
e
h
g
d
n
a
,
ra
g
u
s
e
n
a
c
-i
m
e
s
d
elio
B
:ts
1
(
e
cir
y
reta
w
á
y
e
p
)
tn
e
g
nirts
a/retti
B
:d
n
2
o
sla
n
a
c
s
a
et
,s
b
re
h
g
nin
etsio
m
e
d
ulc
ni
;d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
e
kil
s
b
re
h
g
nits
af
te
e
w
S
:d
n
2
s
b
re
h
g
nih
sir
u
o
n
Other Therapies
 For purgation or emesis, one needs to have a strong
digestion and constitution. Persons need to be
prepared for the therapies, and should have no
complications. These therapies are useful only when
bleeding is caused by over nourishment and an excess
of aggravated doßhas. Muscle tissue also must be
strong, and therapies should be practiced only during
their appropriate times of day and seasons.
Aßhþáñga H^idayam Therapies
Foods that alleviate bleeding disorders include rice,
múngdal, lentils, chick peas, kidney beans, neem,
chiráyatá, steamed bitter vegetable soups, and ghee.
When bleeding is associated with Kapha, more
diuretic vegetables are used. Simple meals may be
made from watery-cooked rice (peyá) with ghee and
balá.
     Should thirst be accompanied by bleeding, sev-
eral therapies are useful: tea made with bitter herbs
or fruit juices that are sweet or bitter (e.g., grape or
cranberry). Should one have a strong digestion and
constitution, they may drink water until satisfied.
However, for all others, water is taken in small quan-
tities.
For Váyu-caused bleeding, demulcent herbs like
comfrey, balá, and vaå¤ha lochana are very helpful.
Anemia (Páòæu-roga)
Development: When the doßhas become
aggravated, and Pitta is mostly excessed, the Pitta in
the heart is forced into the arteries and veins attached
to the heart. It is Váyu that causes Pitta to move and
then spread throughout the body. Pitta then vitiates
Kapha, skin, blood, and muscles, causing them to
turn yellowish white (most common color), deep
yellow, or green. Five kinds of anemia exist: Váyu,
Pitta, Kapha, Tridoßha, and a kind from eating mud.
Premonitory Signs: Heart palpitation, dry skin, loss
of taste and appetite, yellowish urine, not sweating,
poor digestion, weakness, and exertion.
Symptoms: The tissues become heavy and loose,
ojas is burnt up; thus damaging the health of the blood
and fat. Tissues become flabby, the heart rate
increases, and eye sockets swell; there is debility,
anger, and expectorating of phlegm. Other symptoms
include loss of speech, dislike of food and cold things,
hair loss, poor digestion, weak thighs, fever, difficult
breathing, constant ear noise, dizziness, and exertion.
Váyu: Body aches, piercing pain, tremors, blackish
red complexion; discoloration of veins, nails, feces,
urine, and eyes; edema, gas, astringent taste, dry feces,
pain in the ribs and head, dry skin, anxiety, insomnia,
and constipation.
Pitta: Veins, nails, feces, urine, and eyes are green
and/or yellowish, fever, unconsciousness, thirst, per-
spiration, fainting, a desire for cold things, body odor,
bad breath, bitter taste, loose bowels, yellow urine

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
358
and stool, acidity, burning sensation.
Kapha: Veins, skin, face, eyes, urine, and stool are
white; there is stupor, salty taste, hair standing on
end, loss of voice, excess phlegm and salivation,
cough and vomiting, edema, overweight, sleepiness,
and heaviness of the limbs.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all doßhas appear, and are
difficult to bear.
Mud: Habitual eating of astringent mud aggravates
Váyu. Eating salty mud aggravates Pitta. Sweet mud
aggravates Kapha. Plasma and other tissues are
vitiated by the dryness of mud that further dries the
tissue’s channels. Mud does not get digested and fills
and blocks the channels. This produces edema in the
abdomen, legs, face, and genitals; parasites develop
in the alimentary tract, feces are warm, watery, and
mixed with blood and mucus, weakened sense organs,
loss of physical strength, life sap (ojas) complexion,
and digestion. Anemia develops thereafter.
Amoebic Dysentery: Yellow skin; wide, white eyes.
Therapies
General: After unction, strong emesis and
purgation (using bitter herbs) are required. A
wholesome diet is then followed (according to one’s
doßha). Rice, barley, wheat, green gram (múng) soup,
lentils, and ghee are eaten along with herbs that
balance one’s doßha and symptoms. Sesame seeds,
pomegranates, black grapes, and cane sugar or
molasses help build the blood. The Áyurvedic iron
ash (loha bhasma) quickly helps build blood.
Chyavan Prá¤h, ghee, and saffron in warm milk, taken
twice daily; and turmeric ghee are very helpful.
Triphalá and aloe vera gel cleanse the bowels and
stimulate liver function. Other useful herbs include
mañjißhóhá, ¤hatávarí, and punarnavá.
Váyu: Organic yogurt, boiled milk, sesame oil,
and ghee. Only steamed vegetables (i.e., not raw).
Pitta: Salads, sprouts, green leaf vegetables,
dandelion leaf, and red raspberry leaf. Chlorophyll
cleanses bile and blood. kaóuká, barberry, chiráyatá
(king of the bitters), aloe, and the main liver herb,
bhúámalakí.
Kapha: Improves digestion and removes
congestion with hot spices such as cinnamon, saffron,
turmeric, or t^ikatu. Harítakí is another useful herb
for Kapha doßhas. As with Váyu, steamed vegetables
are required.
Traditional Ghees (Gh^ita):
Dádimádya Gh^ita: 160 gms. pomegranate
(dáæima), 80 gms. coriander (dhányaka), 40 gms.
each of chitraka and ginger (¤huòóhí), 20 gms. of
pippalí. All are combined into a paste and cooked
with 800 gms. of ghee and 2.56 litters (@21/2 qts.).
This ghee alleviates heart diseases, anemia,
hemorrhoids, enlarged spleen, Kapha and Váyu
disorders, difficult breathing, cough, and difficult
labor (it is even said to aid conception in a sterile
woman).
Kaóukádya Gh^ita: 41 gms. each of kaóuká, musta,
turmeric, barberry, kuóaj; 10 gms. each of paóola,
sandalwood, tráymán, pippalí, neem, cedar,
chiráyatá. These herbs are pasted together and cooked
with 640 gms. of ghee and 4 times as much organic
milk. This recipe helps internal bleeding, fever,
burning sensation, edema, fistula, hemorrhoids,
menorrhagia, and skin eruptions.
In more serious cases and for Kapha-caused
anemia, harítakí ghee is taken to alleviate anemia,
followed by emesis. Emesis is brought about by
drinking large amounts of milk with emetic herbs.
Sickle Cell Anemia
(Yakrit Janya Raktalplata):
     Due to liver damage, red blood cells become sick
and die earlier than normal. Iron supplements are not
give in this case, although herbal irons such as
punarnavá are useful. Purgatives are also useful.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                          Chapter 14: Circulatory System
 359
Therapies: First, oil massage is applied, followed by
strong emesis and purgation (if persons are strong
enough). Wholesome foods and moderation of foods
include basmati rice, barley, whole wheat, ghee soups,
peas, lentils, and oils according to one’s doßha. Herbs
include triphalá, turmeric, guæúchí, t^ikatu, musta,
viæa´ga, chitrak, neem with honey; they are taken
every morning with boiled milk and ghee. One-half
cup yogurt with 1/2 cup water (Kapha takes 1/4 cup
yogurt with 3/4 cup water) with punarnavá is ad-
vised. £hilájit is also recommended. Black sesame
seeds, pomegranates, black grapes, cane sugar, mo-
lasses, and ghee; herbs of aloe gel, ámalakí, harítakí,
saffron (or safflower), ¤hatávarí, mañjißhþhá, and
punarnavá are all blood builders.
Váyu: Herbs include chitrak, coriander, Pippalí,
triphalá, guæúchí, ginger, raisins, taken with boiled
milk.
Pitta: Herbs include coriander, dandelion leaf, red
raspberry leaf, nettles, chlorophyll, barberry, kaóuká,
aloe gel, guæúchí, musta, viæa´ga, neem, and grapes
or raisins with boiled milk. Foods include leafy
vegetables and sprouts.
Kapha: Herbs include chitrak, coriander, pippalí,
t^ikatu, viæa´ga, musta, turmeric, saffron or safflower,
cinnamon, neem, and ginger, taken with honey. Foods
include raisins and Kapha-reducing items.
Amoebic Dysentery: Kuþaj and musta
Heart Disease
(H^idroga)
Causes: Five causes of heart disease exist: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, Tridoßha, and that caused by parasites or in-
fections.
These disorders are caused by eating foods that
are very hot, hard to digest, astringent, and bitter. They
are also caused by excess fatigue, injury, reading aloud
for many hours, excess worry, or suppression of
natural urges.
Development: The causes listed above create doßha
excesses weakening plasma (rasa) tissue localizing
themselves in the heart, causing pain.
Angina, a common condition, results when the heart
does not receive enough oxygen. This is usually re-
sults from coronary artery disease.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Severe pricking, piercing, bursting,
constricting or splitting pain; dryness, immobility,
emptiness, increased heart rate, unfounded
helplessness, grief or fear, tremors, body contractions,
dislike of noise, fainting or coma, obstructed
breathing, tight chest, numbness, insomnia, difficult
breathing, dry cough, dark rings around the eyes,
hypersensitivity. Attacks occur after straining or from
fear, anxiety, worry, etc.; and after fainting or nervous
heart conditions.
Pitta: Thirst, dizziness, fainting, burning
sensation, severe sweating, acidity, exhaustion,
vomiting (sourness) bile, hot fumes; yellowish skin,
eyes, and stool; fever, flushed or bloodshot eyes,
dizziness, inflammatory heart conditions (e.g.,
myocarditis, endocarditis, pericarditis).
Kapha: Heart stiffness, heavy like a stone,
coughing, poor digestion, expectorating mucus,
excess sleep, lassitude, loss of taste and appetite, fever,
congestive heart situations or cardiac edema.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas.
Parasites/infections: Eyes have black
discoloration, fainting, heart feels oppressed or torn,
dry, irritated skin, excess mucus expectoration.
Therapies:
General: Mental and physical rest; avoid worry,
anger, etc. Persons need to meditate on what they
truly would love to do with their lives. Gentle yoga
or stretching is also useful to calm and integrate the
mind and body. The main herb, arjuna, is useful for
all forms of heart disease. It tones the heart and lungs,
stimulates blood circulation, stops bleeding, promotes
tissue healing, and strengthens the heart muscle.
Additional therapies include ghee, a¤hwagandhá, and
saffron. For angina, arjuna and kuähtha (VPK=) or
hi´g and sage (VK-) are useful.
Váyu: Ingesting Váyu-reducing foods and

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
360
liquids; oily vitamins of A, E, and D, garlic, rest.
Pitta: The intake of Pitta-reducing foods and drinks,
avoiding hot and pungent spices, salt, alcohol, garlic,
onions, greasy foods, red meat. Herbs include arjuna,
saffron, sandalwood, ¤hatávarí, gotu kola, aloe vera
gel, kaóuká, and chitrak. Purgation is also useful.
Kapha: Avoiding dairy, sugar, eggs, fatty meat,
salt, and other cholesterol-producing foods, and
remaining on a diet of Kapha-reducing foods and
liquids. Herbs include arjuna, guggul, calamus,
cardamom, t^ikatu.
Tridoßha: Combinations of the above respective
therapies.
Parasites: See Chapter 15 on parasites. Therapies
include antiparasitical/anti-infection herbs. Dr. S.
Sandhu’s clinical experience finds that arjuna chúròa
works better for the congestive cardiac diseases; tamra
bhasma (copper ash/yogendra rasa is one such
formulation) or wearing a copper bracelet is the best
for obstructive cardiac heart conditions. Modern
medicine also divides the heart conditions into these
two main types (i.e., congestive and obstructive).
Other modern Áyurvedic authorities have found
that constipation or diarrhea may be forcing air
upwards, affecting the heart. Thus, just by regulating
the stool, clients have found relief from some forms
of heart disease.
Hypertension/High Blood Pressure
Its causes and therapies are similar to heart
diseases.
Additional causes and development: First, excess
mental stress (i.e., worry, anxiety, tension) can be
caused by Váyu. Second, certain hormonal imbal-
ances (e.g., adrenal, thyroid, and reproductive hor-
mones) can be caused by Pitta. Thus, obstruction of
the blood or urinary channels (srotas) or kidney prob-
lems can be caused by Kapha. Should gas, constipa-
tion, or diarrhea be present, Apána Váyu (downward
air) may be forced upward, putting pressure on the
heart.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Sudden changes in pressure, irregular or an
erratic pulse—caused by worry, strain, overwork,
nervousness, and insomnia.
Pitta: Flushed face, red eyes, violent headaches,
sensitivity to light, nose bleeds, anger, irritability,
burning, sometimes with liver complications.
Kapha: Constant high pressure, obesity, fatigue,
edema, high cholesterol.
Therapies:
General: Arjuna strengthens the heart, especially
if the pulse is weak.
Váyu: Brain tonics such as gotu kola, jaóámáòshí,
a¤hwagandhá, ¤ha´k pußhpí, bh^i´garáj, garlic, and
a Váyu-reducing diet and lifestyle. £hirodhárá (hot
oil poured on the head for 7 to 14 sessions) also heal
nerves and mental stress.
Pitta: Aloe vera gel, chiráyatá, kaóuká, rhubarb,
harmonizing herbs like ¤hatávarí, mañjißhþhá, musta,
triphalá, balá, gotu kola, and a Pitta-reducing diet
and lifestyle. Garlic, onions, and other hot, salty, and
pungent items will aggravate the condition.
£hirodhárá is also very helpful.
Kapha: Myrrh, t^ikatu, arjuna, hawthorn berries,
diuretics like gokßhura, and a Kapha-reducing diet
and lifestyle. £hirodhárá is also very helpful.
Long term use of blood-pressure medicine, or even
herbs (i.e., sarpagandha), without balancing the
underlying cause, will eventually cause side effects.
Arteriosclerosis
This condition relates to the blood vessels. The
arteries thicken and harden because of deposits of
cholesterol on the artery walls. This is one of the
causes of hypertension: arteries loose their elasticity
and cannot bear the pressure of blood flowing through
them.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                          Chapter 14: Circulatory System
 361
Causes: High cholesterol and clogged arteries.
     Váyu: Hardened arteries.
    Pitta: Fat accumulation.
   Kapha: Fat accumulation.
Therapies: similar to heart disease.
     General: Arjuna strengthens the heart, especially
if the pulse is weak.
     Váyu: Garlic, yogaraj guggul, myrrh, and saffron
in boiled milk.
   Pitta: Kaißhore guggul, turmeric, aloe vera gel,
kaóuká.
     Kapha: Garlic and purified guggul, myrrh, saffron.
Hypotension/Low Blood Pressure
Causes: Usually a Váyu disorder, it develops
through debility, anemia, malnutrition, and other
chronic diseases.
Váyu: Caused by poor circulation.
Pitta: Hormone imbalance, anemia, damaged liver.
Kapha: Caused by congestion, phlegm, clogging,
stagnation, blood flow reduction, dehydration, and
edema.
Therapies:
General: Arjuna strengthens the heart, especially
if the pulse is weak.
Váyu: Garlic, turmeric, ginger, pippalí, cardamom.
Pitta: Bhúámalalí, mañjißhþhá, gotu kola,
turmeric, and saffron in aloe vera gel.
Kapha: T^ikatu, garlic, turmeric, ginger, pippalí,
cardamom.
Paraplegia (Úrustambha)
Definition: Excess Kapha and fat derange Váyu and
Pitta in the legs and stiffen them, causing immobility
and coldness. Paraplegia is related to both the
circulatory and digestive systems, so therapies need
to address both systems. Western medicine considers
this a nervous system disorder.
Cause: This disorder can be caused by eating fatty,
hot, light, and cold foods before digesting one’s last
meal, or by eating moist or dry foods, yogurt, milk,
meat, or drinking bad wine. Other causes include
excessive naps, staying up too late, under- or
overeating, exertion, fear, suppression of the natural
urges, or oiliness. Additional causes include toxins
in the bowels (along with fat blocking any or all of
the three doßhas) that move to the legs and thighs
through the blood vessels in the legs. This causes the
buildup of excess fat to hamper leg coordination and
restrict leg movement.
This excess Kapha in the thighs causes heaviness,
exhaustion, burning, pain, numbness, tearing pain,
contraction, quivering, and piercing, that may even
be life threatening.
Western medicine only sees neurological-related
causes such as, spinal chord injury, MS, acute
transverse myelitis,  and other similar diseases that
cause lesions in the spinal chord. See chapter 20 for
Nervous system disorders and therapies.
Premonitory Signs: Brooding, sleepiness, feeling
excessively wet, anorexia, fever, hair standing on end,
vomiting, and lassitude in the calves and thighs of
the legs.
Symptoms: Excessive malaise of the legs, continuous
burning and pain, feet ache when placed on the
ground, no sensation to cold, unable to stand, feeling
that the thighs are broken and carried by someone
else. (If trembling, with burning and piercing pain,
exists, the illness cannot be healed unless it has just
developed.)
Precaution: Unction, emesis, purgation, and enema—
although useful for all other diseases—will only
aggravate this condition. With this condition, if the
nervous system is weak and oil is applied to the legs,
the symptoms are further aggravated, because unction
and enema aggravate Kapha. Neither purgation nor
emesis will remove Kapha in the legs (as it is well
below the stomach, the seat of Kapha).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
362
Therapies: Constant application of reducing and
drying therapies removes the abundance of Kapha and
toxins (áma). Foods include barley, warm, bitter and
dry vegetables; herbs include neem, triphalá, harítakí,
pippalí, bilwa, sandalwood, musta, chitrak, and
calamus with honey water. Salts and sweets must be
avoided.
If drying therapies cause excess dryness, then some
ghee or canola oil with gokßhura, calamus,
a¤hwagandhá, pippalí, guggul, nirguòæí,chitrak, and
a small amount of rock salt are advised. These are all
taken with honey and basmati rice.
External: Measures include Kapha-reducing
therapies such as massaging the legs with sand from
anthills, powder from bricks, honey, mustard, and
a¤hwagandhá paste, and sprinkling water with a
decoction of neem, bilwa, and gokßhura. Massage is
also done with Mahánáráyan, pañchaguòa, and
vißhgarbha oil.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 363
Chapter 15
Digestive System
Anorexia, Vomiting, Diarrhea\Dysentery, Digestive and Abdominal
Disorders, Jaundice, Gallstones, Dyspepsia, Indigestion, Gastroenteritis,
Colic, Hyperacidity, Acid Gastritis, Malabsorption, Food Allergies, Parasites,
Constipation, Hemorrhoids, Obesity, Candida, Ulcers, Áma
Anorexia (Arochaka)
auses: There are 5 causes for loss of appetite,
taste, or anorexia: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, Tri-
doßha, and mental (e.g., grief, fear, anger).
An excess of the doßhas (individually or combined)
or an apathetic mental state tends to block the heart
region and the channels (srotas) that carry food (e.g.,
esophagus). This causes aversion to foods.
Symptoms: Continual vomiting may occur, leading
to dehydration.
Váyu: Overeating Kapha-increasing foods
causes tingling gums, an astringent taste in the mouth,
severe weight loss, loss of appetite, fear, anxiety, in-
somnia, chest and abdominal pains and cramps, pal-
pitations, throat constriction, difficulty swallowing,
and choking feelings.
Pitta: Bitter and sour taste, bad smell in the
mouth, burning sensations in the heart region.
Kapha: Sweet or salty taste, Kapha-coated mouth,
nausea, vomiting, exuding watery substance from the
mouth or the nose, itching, heaviness of the body,
water-brash, lethargy, and fatigue.
Tridoßha: Abnormal taste or absence of taste.
Mental: Worry, anger, delusion, dullness, or other
emotions, associated with a particular doßha.
Therapies
General: Herbs
digestive herbs: cardamom, ginger
to stop vomiting: red raspberry, ginger
tonics: chyavan prá¤h, a¤hwagandhá
nervines: gotu kola, sandalwood, jaóámáò¤hí,
a¤hwagandhá.
Foods—bland rice and múng dal. Avoid
coffee, tea, drugs, stimulants.
Massage—sesame oil applied to the feet and head,
     and ¤hiro dhárá.
Aromas—sandalwood oil applied to the forehead.
General Regimen: Different types of foods are
combined with the person’s doßha-balancing foods.
Bathing cleanses the body from outside. Light emesis
is done twice daily for internal cleansing (morning
and evening). Oral hygiene—brushing, eating rock
candy with tulsí herb.
Váyu—first, emesis should be induced with a
vachá decoction. This is followed by an herbal tea
made with pippalí, cardamom, and viæa´ga powders.
Pippalí, viæa´ga, raisins, rock salt, ginger, and
medicated wine can be ingested as an appetizer to
stimulate hunger.
Pitta—persons are administered an emetic with
jaggery (cane sugar) juice. Also, cane sugar, ghee,
salt, and honey should be eaten.
Kapha—individuals are given an emetic with
neem leaf decoction, ajwan, fennel, and alcohol
mixed with honey.
Tridoßha—all of the above measures are used.
Mind—herbs to calm the mind (e.g., bráhmí,
a¤hwagandhá, jaóámáò¤hí), providing consolation,
sympathy, and cheerfulness, uncovering the cause of
the trouble (e.g., disappointment with career), and
planning strategies to change things for the better.
Physicians shouldn’t feel shy if they don’t know the nomenclature of the disease,
for there is no rule, custom, or state that every disease has a name.
Aßhóháñga H^idayam Sú. Ch. 12: ver. 64

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
364
Vomiting (Chardi)
Causes: Vomiting is caused by the following:
Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, Tridoßha, and unpleasant sensory
experience. Upward moving Váyu (Udána) becomes
abnormal and aggravates all the doßhas causing them
to move upward.
Premonitory Symptoms: Nausea, salty taste in
mouth, excess salivation, loss of taste and appetite.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Vomiting of food causes pain in the navel
region, back, and ribs, regurgitating occurs a little at
a time, with an astringent taste and frothy substance;
it is blackish, thin, and is emitted only with difficulty
and force. Other symptoms include belching,
coughing, dry mouth, heart and head pain, hoarseness,
and exhaustion. Vomiting caused by parasites, thirst,
áma, and pregnancy are also caused by Váyu.
    Pitta: Vomit is ashen, brown, green, or yellow in
color. It may be bloody, sour or bitter tasting, and
hot. Thirst, fainting, heat, or burning sensations in
the body may be felt.
Kapha: Substance is oily, thick, cold and thready,
sweet or salty tasting, and comes out in a large,
continuous quantity; hair stands on end, the face
swells, one feels a stupor, nausea, and cough.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all the doßhas appear.
Senses: Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, or
touching unpleasant, dirty things, foul smells, disturb
the mind, causing vomiting associated with heart
region pain.
Therapies:
Only when vomiting is not associated with
complications can it be healed. When severe vomiting
occurs in persons who are weak, with bleeding or
pus, or have a moon-like complexion, they cannot be
healed.
General: All forms of vomiting are due to gastric
irritation. Therapies of lightening (exercise,
sunbathing), and for Váyu-caused vomiting are used
first. Harítakí with raw honey, or castor oil with boiled
milk, reduces the upward motion of the doßhas. An
emetic is advised. Debilitated persons should use only
pacifying measures.
Váyu: Bilwa, barley, cardamom, cloves, coriander,
ginger, raspberry, vaå¤ha lochana, Pippalí, black
pepper, and garlic. If the person suffers heart
palpitations, ghee, rock salt, yogurt, and pomegranate
juice are recommended.
Pitta: Neem, chiráyatá, bilwa, coriander,
raspberry, vaå¤ha lochana, sugar cane. If Pitta is
excessed in the stomach, an emetic with sweet herbs
(e.g., licorice) is administered to cleanse the stomach.
Afterwards, one drinks a mixture of cooked barley
with raw honey and cane sugar, or basmati rice with
green lentil soup. Grapes and coconut are also useful
foods. Ámalakí, pittapapra, balá, and sandalwood
may be mixed with food.
Kapha: An emetic made with a decoction of
pippalí, neem, and rock salt cleanses the undigested
food toxins (áma) from the stomach. Afterwards, (at
meal time) barley may be eaten with neem and yogurt/
water (1/4:3/4), green lentils. Herbs include
cardamom, bilwa, cloves, ginger, triphalá, musta, and
raspberry, which, when mixed with raw honey, stop
vomiting.
Tridoßha: Herbs, foods, and other therapies advised
for each doßha are used. Season, time of day, strength
of the person, and their digestion, are all taken into
consideration.
Psychological Stress: Pleasant conversation,
consolation, exhilaration, stories, socializing with
friends all help reduce the stress that causes vomiting.
Additionally, pleasant aromas and flowers, fermented
drinks, sour fruits and vegetables all contribute to
healing.
If a person experiences any complications while
vomiting, appropriate measures as described in the
respective chapters are used. Long-term vomiting
greatly aggravates Váyu.
Thus, a Váyu-reducing diet (i.e., bulk- and
semen-promoting foods and herbs) is used to restore
balance and strength.
Diarrhea (Atísára) and
Dysentery (Praváhika)
Cause: There are 6 forms of diarrhea: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, Tridoßha, fear and grief, and undigested food

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 365
(áma). Causes include drinking excessive amounts
of water, eating very hot, dry, fatty, hard, cold, or
unaccustomed foods, puddings, sesame seeds,
sprouted grains, excess wines, overeating, eating be-
fore the last meal is digested, and eating at unusual
times. Further causes include improper oleation
therapy, drinking bad water, excessive use of alco-
hol, overdoing water sports, suppression of natural
urges, hemorrhoids, intestinal parasites, changes in
lifestyle, and seasonal changes. As accumulating
Váyu becomes aggravated, it causes the Kapha (wa-
tery element) to move downward, dampening the di-
gestive fire before entering the alimentary canal. This
causes the feces to become watery and produce diar-
rhea.
There are 5 types of dysentery: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, Tridoßha, and blood (raktapitta).
Premonitory Signs: Prickling pain in the heart region,
rectum, and alimentary tract; weak body, constipa-
tion, gas, and indigestion.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Watery feces, small quantity, expelled with
noise, severe pain, and difficulty. It may be dry, frothy,
thin, rough, or scaly, slightly brown and frequently
expelled. Alternatively, it may seem gooey, burnt, and
slimy. One may experience a dry mouth, prolapsed
rectum, hair standing on end, and straining to expel
stools.
Pitta: Yellow, black, algae green, blue, red, or deep
yellow color, mixed with blood and foul smelling;
thirst, fainting, perspiration, burning sensation, painful
elimination, burning and ulcerated rectum.
Kapha: Solid, slimy, thready, white, mucus, fatty,
frequent, heavy, foul smelling, difficult elimination
followed by pain, sleepiness, laziness, dislike of food,
mild straining to eliminate stools or frequent and
urgent need to eliminate.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas simul-
taneously.
Fear/Grief: This situation can cause persons to
eat very little. The heat of tears and secretions of the
nose, mouth, and throat can increase and move to the
alimentary tract to weaken digestion and blood tissue
(rakta dhátu). Vitiated blood is then expelled, mixed
with feces or by itself. It is very difficult to heal.
Emotional causes increase Pitta and Váyu, causing
liquid feces and diarrhea; feces are quick, warm, fluid,
and float on water. Symptoms are the same as Váyu.
Undigested Food (Áma): Diarrhea is of two types:
1) with áma and without áma, and 2) mixed with
blood and without blood. With áma, stools sink in
the water, have a foul smell, are associated with
intestinal gurgling; undigested food remains in the
stomach, abdominal pain, excess salivation.
Symptoms of “without áma” feces have the opposite
qualities.
When food is not properly digested (áma), doßhas
combine with áma and become excessed. They then
travel in the wrong channels, weakening tissues
(dhátus), waste products (malas), and cause frequent,
multicolored feces and abdominal pain.
If diarrhea is allowed to continue without being
healed, it develops the disorders of the duodenum.
This is discussed later.
Therapies:
General: Diarrhea caused by excess doßhas (due
to undigested food) needs to be eliminated. Initially,
astringent herbs and foods are not used to stop
diarrhea with áma (toxins) until the toxins are expelled
with the stool. If the diarrhea is prematurely halted
while áma is still in the body, it may cause various
diseases (e.g., hemorrhoids, edema, anemia, tumors,
fever, etc.). Rather, it is advised to allow initial áma
diarrhea to come out, and even to induce it by taking
harítakí. It is a part of the body’s defense mechanism
to expel toxins (áma). Thus, stopping diarrhea when
it is still toxic goes against the body’s natural healing
process.
Persons with a moderate doßha excess take
decoctions to stimulate the appetite and strengthen
the digestion. If doßhas are greatly excessed, then
lightening therapy (i.e., pañcha karma, etc.) is
advised.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
366
General: Herbs include pippalí, ginger, coriander,
harítakí, calamus, gokßhura, bilwa, fennel.
Váyu: (the same as Kapha) balá, gokßhura, bilwa,
ginger, coriander, calamus, pippalí, chitrak, sour
pomegranate, da¤hmúl, ámalakí, ghee, and rock salt
are taken with foods and drinks to strengthen the
digestion and the constitution.
Pain, gas retention, and the desire to pass urine or
stool (but cannot): Are healed with bilwa, pippalí,
ginger, cane sugar, and sesame oil.
Diarrhea with a dry mouth (dehydration): Basmati
rice, barley soup, green lentils, sesame seeds, bilwa,
kuþaj, í¤habgol fried in ghee, and sesame oil/added
with yogurt and pomegranate, cane sugar, ginger.
When Kapha is diminished, excessed Váyu
presents serious problems; therefore, this condition
must be immediately healed.
Váyu/Pitta: Enemas.
Pitta: Kuóaj, chiráyatá, kaóuká, bilwa, sandalwood,
lotus seeds, ginger, pomegranate, sesame seeds,
mango (taken with raw honey), ghee, and rice water.
If the appetite is good and digestion strong, goats’
milk will heal Pitta diarrhea.
If pain recurs after cleansing, oil enemas should
be administered immediately, using ghee to 1/4 the
amount of sesame oil, with ¤hatávarí, bilwa, and milk.
If diarrhea continues, one receives a massage. Then,
a pichá basti followed by bath is taken [the soft bark
of silk cotton tree and pawdar mixed with oil and
ghee]. Next, persons have meals of boiled milk and
Pitta-reducing foods. If one eats Pitta-increasing foods
in this condition, it may lead to bloody diarrhea and
thirst, pain, burning, and rectal inflammation. Should
this occur, boiled goats’ milk with raw honey and
cane sugar is ingested and used to wash the anus.
Foods include boiled rice with this milk decoction,
and ghee. If the person is strong, food (e.g., rice)
should be eaten after milk is digested. Weak persons
eat food just after the milk. Alternately, fresh butter
mixed with honey and sugar is eaten before meals.
The rice is soaked in water overnight, and crushed
and rubbed the next morning. When the water from
this rice is drunk, it heals bloody diarrhea.
Áma: Purgation is advised (i.e., see lightening
therapies in pañcha karma chapter) if the person is
strong. After lightening therapy, meals are to include
barley gruel with balá, ¤hatávarí, and gokßhura.
Green lentils improve digestion. If diarrhea continues,
digestives like t^ikatu, and astringents like comfrey,
gentian, lotus seeds, red raspberry, and yellow dock
may be used.
Thirst: Boiled water with musta and sandal-
wood.
Dysentery: One takes bilwa, sesame paste,
yogurt, ámalakí, and ghee.
Amoebic dysentery: Kuóaj along with immune-
boosting herbs (e.g., guæúchí). £ha´k bhasma (shell
ash) reduces acid indigestion if present.
Bacillary Dysentery: See therapies for Pitta
diarrhea.
Bleeding diarrhea: A diet of ¤hatávarí or ghee
cooked with milk (before or after passing stools) heals
this disorder. Alternately, one may eat sandalwood
mixed with sugar and honey, followed by rice water.
For frequent movements with small amounts of blood,
and associated with pain and Váyu (i.e., difficulty in
passing stools), pichá basti, or oil enema with ghee
and the above mentioned herbs.
Upper/lower channel bleeding: If Pitta-in-
creasing foods are continually eaten, severe rectal
inflammation can develop, and is fatal. Herbs include
lotus seeds, dúrba, and nágke¤har.
Chronic diarrhea: This causes a weak anus.
Frequent, local application of ghee or oil can heal
this condition.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 367
Inflamed anus: This is caused by frequent
movements. It is healed either by sprinkling a cold
decoction of sugar cane, ghee, milk, and raw honey,
or by applying the mixture as a paste on the
inflammation. Ghee may also be applied first before
sprinkling with ghee, neem oil, or sandalwood oil.
Kapha: Emesis (i.e., lightening therapy) and
improved digestion are the first concerns. Ginger,
coriander, bilwa, musta, harítakí, calamus, pippalí,
chitrak, nutmeg, and sour pomegranate are used to
strengthen the digestion. Later, balá, gokßhura, bilwa,
viæa´ga, and rock salt are combined with foods and
drinks to strengthen the constitution. One part yogurt
mixed with 3 parts water (lassi) also promotes
digestion. Alternately, either a mixture of pippalí with
honey or a mixture of chitrak with lassi heals this
condition.
When áma is digested persons may still suffer from
diarrhea with small amounts of stool retention, pain,
mucus, and the urge to pass stool or urine (but cannot).
Therapy includes radish soup with bákuchí, yogurt,
pomegranate, and ghee. (Other diuretic vegetables
may be used.)
Should the above condition also have
complications of passing blood and mucus with thirst,
boiled milk with ghee, bilwa, or castor oil is used.
If rectum prolapse with pain exists after eliminating
áma, first the inner rectum is oiled and fomented to
soften it. Then herbs are taken including ámalakí,
ghee, or oil enema (with da¤hmúl and bilwa), or ghee
cooked with dry ginger, sour yogurt, triphalá, and
¤hatávarí.
Váyu/Kapha: (or excessive diarrhea caused by
Kapha or dysentery with pain), pichá basti is applied,
followed by an enema with pippalí, bilwa, calamus,
and black salt. Afterwards, one bathes, and then one
eats. In the evening, one receives an oil enema made
from the same herbs mixed in sesame oil.
Tridoßhic: Herbs from each category are used. If
all three are equally unbalanced, the order of healing
is Váyu first, Pitta second, and Kapha third.
Otherwise, whichever is most unbalanced is treated
first.
Fear/Grief: 
Váyu-reducing 
therapies,
psychotherapeutic measures that produce exhilaration
and consolation.
Digestive Disorders
(Grahaní)
[related to duodenum; sprue/malabsorption]
Normal functioning of the digestive fire (agni) or
enzymes, is responsible for proper digestion and
metabolism. The digestive fire resides in the stomach,
duodenum, small and large intestines, and directly
affects complexion, strength, weight, immune
strength, energy, vital breath, and life span. Digested
food also nourishes the seven tissues (dhátus) and
life sap (ojas). Thus, the whole body depends upon
healthy digestion. Therefore, it is advised to eat fresh,
organic, wholesome foods and liquids. This is done
with a peaceful frame of mind, according to one’s
doßha, the season, time of day, and in proper
quantities.
Causes: Chronic diarrhea, ingesting foods and liq-
uids that dampen and deplete the digestive fire (me-
tabolism), fasting, eating before the last meal is di-
gested, eating foods that are too heavy, cold, rough,
stale, or contaminated. Other causes include misuse
of pañcha karma, excessive oleation, emaciation,
suppression of natural urges, and extreme mental
stress.
Premonitory Signs: Weakness, taking a long time to
digest foods, increasing acidity, salivation, bad taste
in the mouth, loss of taste or appetite, thirst, exhaus-
tion, dizziness, abdominal distention, vomiting, ear
noise, intestinal gurgling, burning, heaviness.
Development: When feces are mixed with áma and
food and are eliminated before, during or after diges-
tion of the food, there may be no elimination at all, or
elimination may sometimes be solid and sometimes

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
368
liquid; or elimination occurs only after feces accu-
mulate in the colon. This is said to be a serious ill-
ness. This cause of diarrhea differs because of excess
elimination (with or without áma) only after diges-
tion of food. Four types of gastrointestinal disorders
exist: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, and Tridoßha.
Air-Caused (Vátaja Grahaòiroga): Váyu is
increased by eating foods that are pungent, bitter, and
astringent; meals that are heavy, rough, or cold;
fasting, excess travel, suppression of urges, excessive
sexual intercourse, or extreme mental stress. This
dampens the digestive fire, making digestion difficult
or variable. Thus, food becomes fermented and many
symptoms develop.
Fire-Caused (Pittaja Grahaòiroga): Pitta is
increased in the digestive tract by excessive eating of
foods that are pungent, uncooked, sour, alkaline, and
by foods that cause heartburn. This inactivates the
gastric enzymes (like pouring hot water over a fire;
or raises agni so high it burns up nutrients).
Water-Caused (Kaphaja Grahaòiroga):
Excessive eating of foods that are very difficult to
digest, fatty, cold; eating before the last meal is
digested, and sleeping after lunch, cause Kapha
excesses in digestion.
Tridoßha Grahaòiroga: Habits of all three
doßhas create this disorder.
Symptoms: Emaciation, heat, mouth fumes,
difficult breathing, fever, fainting, headache, food
remains stagnant in the stomach, swelling of hands
and feet.
Váyu: Palate dryness, difficult breathing, ear pain,
pressure or noise; constant pain in the ribs, thighs,
groin, and neck; simultaneous vomiting and diarrhea,
desire for all tastes, increased hunger and thirst,
cutting rectal pain, post-digestive gas, eating food
brings comfort, abdominal tumor, hemorrhoids,
splenic diseases, anemia, believing one has heart
disease, difficult elimination occurs after long
intervals, liquid feces are non-oily, thin, frothy,
uncooked, cough, non-digesting of foods, headaches,
fainting, giddiness, stiff back and waist, lower back
pain, yawning, aches, thirst, fever, vomiting, griping,
anorexia.
Hyperacidity causes dryness of throat, mouth, thirst,
blurred vision, noises, thumping or ringing in the ears,
pain, emaciation, debility, bad taste in the mouth,
insatiable appetite for food, cough, difficult breathing.
Pitta: Food toxins, when mixed with Pitta, cause
bluish-yellow—or yellow—liquid feces, body odor,
sour belching, burning sensations in the heart and
throat areas, loss of taste, appetite, and thirst.
Kapha: Poor digestion, vomiting, loss of taste and
appetite, coated mouth, expectoration, cough, nausea,
nasal mucus, heavy throat and abdomen, belching
with bad smells and sweetness of taste, debility, loss
of sexual desire, broken, uncooked, heavy, mucus-
filled feces; large quantity of feces, weakness, and
wasting (although persons are not emaciated).
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all doßhas are present.
To restore health, the digestive fire must be
restored. Digestive illness is one of the 8 diseases
said to be difficult to heal. The other 7 are diseases of
the nervous system, urinary stones, leprosy, diabetes,
enlarged abdomen, hemorrhoids, and fistula
(abnormal passages from abscesses, cavities or hollow
organs to the skin or other abscesses, cavities or
hollow organs).
Therapies:
Poor digestion with áma (undigested food toxins):
Symptoms include distention, salivation, discomfort,
burning, anorexia, and heaviness. Therapies to
eliminate these problems include drinking warm
water or a decoction made of pippalí and black
mustard seeds. [See also p. 391]
Váyu: Asafoetida, ginger, black pepper, rock
salt, herbal digestive wines.
Pitta: Lodhra, ámalakí, nágke¤har, chiráyatá,
viæa´ga.
Kapha: Nutmeg, rock salt, ajwan, pippalí.
Intestinal áma: Purgation and digestive stimulants
such as castor oil and cardamom, respectively.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 369
Rasa and áma: Lightening therapy (i.e., pañcha
karma, exercise, foods that are light, hot, sharp, and
dry, carminative/digestive herbs— [e.g., ginger and
musta, harítakí and ginger, drunk with hot water]).
After the stomach is cleansed, persons eat light
foods such as thin gruel and kicharí, followed by
digestive stimulant herbs.
When the digestive fire begins to become
stronger, but stool, urine, and gas retention continue,
persons should be given oil massage and fomentation
for 2 or 3 days, then followed by a non-oily enema.
After Váyu is balanced and the toxins are loose,
one takes castor oil purgation (2 tsp. in a cup of hot
water before bed).
Should there be constipation, an oil enema is
administered, along with digestive stimulants, sour
herbs like ámalakí, and sour pomegranate, and other
Váyu-reducing herbs (i.e., cardamom, ginger, balá).
Váyu: When áma is completely removed, one
takes ghee with digestive stimulant herbs. Herbs like
da¤hmúl, ginger, pippalí, triphalá, t^ikatu, and chitrak
reduce Váyu and promote digestion. Black salt is also
helpful. They are taken with warm water and also
used for massage. One-half cup yogurt and 1/2 cup
water (lassi) taken after meals also improves
digestion.
Pitta: This doßha is reduced by purgation or
emesis. Afterwards, the digestive fire is stimulated
by eating light, bitter, astringent, cool, and moist
foods; cool liquids, ghee, and sour pomegranates.
Herbs include sandalwood, musta, neem, ginger,
mañjißhþhá, kaóuká, kuþaj, and bilwa. T^ikatu may also
be taken for Pitta digestive problems, though its nature
is heating. One-half cup yogurt and 1/2 cup water
(lassi) taken after meals also improves digestion.
Pungent and sour foods and black salt may be taken
only when mixed with bitter and astringent foods.
Cane sugar or rock sugar is also useful when mixed
with the herbs.
Kapha: Pungent, hot, digestive, and bitter herbs
include viæa´ga, chitrak, mañjißhþhá, cardamom,
turmeric, pippalí, t^ikatu, triphalá, musta, calamus,
guæúchí, and neem. Kapha-reducing foods are taken
as well, including barley.
Abdominal Diseases (Udara Roga)
Causes: All diseases, especially udara roga, are
caused by deranged waste material in the body
(malas—feces, urine, and sweat, and the three
doßhas), caused by poor digestion and metabolism.
The main cause of abdominal disorders is constipa-
tion. Other causes include indigestion, contami-
nated food, and accumulation of doßhas and wastes
(malas).
When the digestive fire is weak and persons eat
foods that are difficult to digest, indigestion develops.
Other causes include unhealthy or unnatural habits
like forcing the passing of stool. The result is an
accumulation of the doßhas that vitiates the Práòa
Váyu, Agni, and Apána Váyu. The excess of air
obstructs the air circulating upward and downward.
These excessed doßhas become lodged between the
skin and the muscle tissues. This causes abdominal
distention, leading to all abdominal diseases,
including the accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal
cavity of the abdomen (ascites). This is caused by
the simultaneous vitiation of all three doßhas.
Different types of these diseases are caused by
various situations, eating overly hot, salty, alkaline
(laxatives), sour, and poisonous foods and liquids,
and improper administration of pañcha karma. Other
causes include improper food, liquids, and habits after
pañcha karma; eating very dry, spoiled, or mutually
adverse foods (e.g., fish and milk, milk and salt, hot
and cold water). Further causes are emaciation from
splenic diseases, hemorrhoids, and sprue
(malabsorption, anemia, and gastrointestinal
disorders).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
370
Ignoring diseases by continually eating and
drinking harmful food and liquids, and suppressing
the natural urges will also cause abdominal disorders.
Weakening of the channels of circulation, allowing
undigested food toxins to remain in the body, and
over-nourishment can also cause abdominal disorders.
Other causes include the consumption of foods and
liquids that irritate the mind and body; obstructions
caused by hemorrhoids, hair, and hard stools;
intestinal ulcerations or perforations; and excessive
aggravation of the doßhas. These are all related to
excess Kapha and Váyu; a deficiency of Pitta the and
digestive fire.
Eight forms of abdominal distention exist: Váyu,
Pitta, Kapha, Tridoßhic, enlarged spleen (and liver);
rectum, intestines, and ascites (peritoneal).
Premonitory Signs: Loss of hunger, extended
digestion time with burning, inability to tell whether
food is digested (excess Váyu), steady loss of strength,
breathlessness after mild activity, increase of feces
quantity but difficult elimination, slight leg and foot
swelling, joint pain on the sides of the urinary bladder,
distention with bursting pain (even with small
quantities of easily digestible foods), with abdominal
line marks and loss of abdominal folds. One may
experience difficulty digesting sweet, oily, and heavy
foods and liquids, indigestion arising from all foods
and liquids, constant loss of strength, shortness of
breath upon mild exertion, constipation due to dry
foods and Udána Váyu (excess upward moving air),
distention and pain in the lower belly, protruding vein
networks, no folds in the abdomen.
Development: The three doßhas, becoming
aggravated, obstruct both the top and bottom channels
of water metabolism, blocking the channels that carry
sweat and water (Svedhana and udakavaha srotas),
and create abnormalities of outward and downward
moving airs (Práòa and Apána Váyus) and the
metabolism (agni). This causes water to accumulate
between the skin, muscles, and joints, thus enlarging
the abdomen. This causes abdominal disorders of a
Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, or Tridoßhic nature (the first four
of the eight forms of udara roga).
There are eight types: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha,
Tridoßha, and those caused by enlarged spleen (or
liver), intestinal obstruction, intestinal perforation, and
fluid accumulation. Persons with this disease have
dry palates and lips; swollen feet, hands and abdomen;
inactivity, loss of strength and desire for food,
emaciation, severe gas, and a deathly appearance.
Váyu: Because of excess dry foods, insufficient
water, exertion, suppression of the natural urges,
upward movement of air, emaciation and fasting,
excess Váyu results. This excess moves through the
abdominal sides, cardiac region, urinary bladder, and
anus, weakening the digestion, and thereby increasing
Kapha (due to undigested foods). Kapha then blocks
the movement of Váyu that then becomes stuck
between the abdominal skin and muscle tissues, and
causes swelling. Thus, Váyu is the main doßha
responsible for poor digestion, while Kapha is a
secondary factor.
Pitta: Caused by pungent, sour, salty, very hot and
sharp foods, exposure to heat (fire and sun), eating
foods that cause a burning sensation, and eating before
the last meal is digested. When the excessed Pitta
flows to locations of Váyu and Kapha, it blocks them.
Pitta then moves upwards to weaken the digestive
fire.
Kapha: Due to a lack of exercise, taking naps,
eating excess sweet and oily foods, eating yogurt,
milk, meat, and living in marshy places. Thus, Kapha
becomes excessed and blocks the circulatory
channels, obstructing Váyu in the outer intestines.
Váyu then puts pressure on Kapha, causing Kapha
types of abdominal diseases.
Tridoßhic: All three doßhas simultaneously
become excessed when a person with poor digestion
eats unwholesome, raw, heavy, or mutually adverse
foods. As a result, the three doßhas slowly accumulate
in the alimentary tract viscera, causing abdominal
diseases.
    Enlarged Spleen and Liver (Plího-yakrddalu-
dara): Enlarged or displaced spleen is caused by
overly irritating food, excess travel, strenuous exer-
cise, lifting heavy objects, or walking long distance,
overindulging in sexual activity, emaciation due to

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 371
excess vomiting therapies, chronic illness, or excess
blood (either due to an excess quantity of blood, fat,
or muscle tissue). The spleen hardens as it becomes
enlarged. When ignored, the spleen puts pressure on
the abdomen and pancreas, causing this disorder. Five
varieties of plího dara exist: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha,
Tridoßhic, and blood. The enlarged liver is identical
to the spleen; however, it happens only on the right
side of the abdomen.
Intestinal Obstruction (Baddha-gudo-dara):
This is caused by Váyu (as ruler of the rectum)
becoming excessed from obstructions due to small
hairs (e.g., eyelashes) in food, upward moving air in
the abdomen, hemorrhoids, intestinal intrusion into
its passage (lumen), and gas (obstructed Apána Váyu).
This excessed Váyu weakens digestive and metabolic
enzyme power, obstructing the movement of feces,
Pitta, and Kapha, and causes this disease.
Intestinal Perforation (Chidro dara): Caused by
sand, grass, splinters, bones, or nails in food, deep
yawns, or overeating. This intestinal wound begins
to ooze and the food juices reach the exterior of the
intestine. The rectum and intestine become filled with
this liquid, which causes acute abdominal swelling.
Ascites (Udako dara): (Fluid accumulation in
abdominal peritoneal cavity) Poor digestion develops
from drinking excess water after oleation therapy,
being emaciated by weak digestion, or worsening
digestion caused by drinking excess water. From this,
Váyu within the lower left stomach and the duodenum
(kloman) becomes blocked by Kapha. Also, the water
circulatory channel (udakavaha srota) increases its
water supply that obstructs the circulatory channels.
Deranged Váyu and Kapha further increase this water,
causing ascites.
Symptoms:
General: Sides of the abdomen are distended,
gurgling noises, leg and hand edema, poor digestion,
smooth chin, and emaciation. One may experience
stupor, debility, accumulation of feces, urine, and
sweat (especially feces); poor digestion, burning,
swelling, gas, and abdominal fluid during the most
serious stages.
There is slight red color with veins appearing, gas
and sounds, obstructions arising and subsiding in the
navel region and intestines, pain in the heart, waist,
navel, rectum and groin, expelling loud sounding gas,
obstructed feces, insufficient urine.
Váyu causes upward-moving air, pain, and gas. Pitta
causes delusion, thirst, burning, and fever. Kapha
causes heaviness, loss of taste and appetite, and
abdominal hardness. The liver, situated on the right
side, when enlarged and displaced, causes abdominal
swelling similar to the spleen.
Váyu: Swelling of hands and feet, scrotum, and
pain in the central and upper abdomen, ribs, waist,
legs, scrotum, and back. One may feel cutting pain in
the joints, dry cough, body ache, heaviness of the
lower body, waste accumulation, grayish or reddish
skin, nails, eyes, urine, and feces; occasional increase
and decrease of the abdomen, pricking and piercing
pain, thick, black abdominal veins, hollow sounding
abdomen (when tapped), gas moves all around the
abdomen with pain and noise. Other symptoms
include abdominal cracks, colic pain in the sides of
the abdomen and chest, upward moving abdominal
air, general weakness, emaciation, weakness,
anorexia, indigestion, cracking pain in the fingers,
lower abdominal heaviness, constipation, unable to
pass gas or urine, Váyu moving up, down, and
sideways with colic pain and noise.
Pitta: Fever, fainting, burning, thirst, bitter taste,
dizziness, diarrhea, yellow or greenish complexion,
nails, eyes, urine, and feces; abdominally veins of
yellow, blue, green, or coppery-red color; perspiration,
heat, soft to the touch, quickly collects fluid. One
may experience giddiness, pungent taste, sense of
pain, smoke rising, and stickiness. These symptoms
may indicate the development of ascites (udako dara).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
372
Kapha: Physical debility, loss of the sensation of
touch, swelling, heaviness, excess sleep, nausea, loss
of taste and appetite, difficult breathing, cough, white
complexion, eyes, nails, feces, and urine, smooth,
unmoving abdomen with a whitish vein network,
slowly increasing over time, becoming hard, cold,
and heavy. One may also develop anorexia, indiges-
tion, general weakness, numbness, hand, leg, thigh,
and scrotal swellings, hard and heavy abdomen.
Tridoßhic: Appearance of the signs of each doßha
listed above; nails, complexion, eyes, urine, and stool
become afflicted with all the colors mentioned for
each doßha; a vein network with the colors of the
doßhas described above. Other symptoms include
ingesting menstrual blood, wastes, etc., poisons.
When doßhas mixed with blood become aggravated
and localized in the abdomen, it creates emaciation,
fainting, dizziness, and produce an enlarged abdomen,
symptoms of all the doßhas, and quickly developing
fluid. This is a serious condition, most troubling
during cold, windy, and cloudy days.
Spleen /Liver (Plího-yakrddalu dara): The spleen
is displaced from the left side and becomes enlarged
from habitually eating excessive amounts of food,
exhaustion, excess travel, sex, exercise, heavy work,
walking, vomiting, weakness due to diseases,
increased blood, plasma, and other tissues. The
enlarged spleen becomes hard like a stone, then as it
increases, resembles a tortoise shell. This covers the
whole abdomen, along with difficult breathing, cough,
severe thirst, bad taste in mouth, pain, fever, yellowish-
white complexion, fainting, vomiting, burning,
delusion, slightly red or discolored, with blue or deep
yellow lines. Other symptoms include weakness,
anorexia, indigestion, constipation, urine and
abdominal gas retention, fainting, thirst, vomiting,
prostration, poor digestion, emaciation, finger joint
or colic pain, alimentary tract distention caused by
air, reddish or discolored abdomen, green, yellow, or
blue vein network. The same symptoms develop for
the liver as for the spleen.
Intestinal Obstruction (Baddha-gudo dara):
Thirst, dry mouth and palate, burning sensation, fe-
ver, exhaustion in the thighs, cough, difficult breath-
ing, weakness, anorexia, indigestion, constipation, not
passing urine, abdominal distention, vomiting, sneez-
ing, headache, colic pain in the heart, umbilical re-
gion, and anus, no peristaltic movement in the abdo-
men, reddish-blue vein network or a knotty vein net-
work, elongated abdominal swellings looking like a
cow’s tail.
Intestinal Perforation (Chido dara): Eating bones
or other sharp things can puncture or ulcerate the
intestines. The undigested food flows out through that
hole or ulcer in small quantities, collects in the rectum,
gets mixed with feces, becomes foul smelling, slimy,
yellowish-red, and gradually fills and enlarges the
lower abdomen. Then fluid fills the abdomen,
manifesting symptoms of the respective doßhas, and
being associated with difficult breathing, thirst, and
dizziness.
Ascites (Udako dara): No appetite, thirst, colic pain,
difficult breathing, cough, discharge from the anus,
general debility, a multicolored vein network on the
abdomen, hollow sounding abdomen (upon tapping).
Overall, this is considered a difficult disease to
heal; therefore, before any water accumulates in the
abdomen, the condition should be immediately
attended to. If water is allowed to accumulate, the
deranged doßhas become displaced and liquefied.
This will cause stickiness in the joints and circulatory
channels, and divert sweat away from the external
channels (moving the sweat sideways). This sideways
movement further adds to the accumulated abdominal
water. The sticky fluid makes the abdomen round,
heavy, and numb; the sides of the abdomen become
excessively enlarged. The vein networks then
disappear and the navel area is mainly afflicted. Then
the disease spreads to the rest of the abdomen and
water begins to accumulate therein.
If the condition is still not corrected, persons
experience complications of vomiting, diarrhea,
tamaka (bronchial) asthma, thirst, and difficult
breathing. Other complications include pain in the
sides of the chest, hoarseness, anorexia, and
suppression of urine. At this point, the disease can
only be controlled but no longer healed unless strong
medicines (i.e., with poisonous properties) are

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 373
prescribed or surgery is performed.
After 14 to 15 days without treatment, abdominal
swelling (baddha-gudo dara) cannot be healed (but
can still be controlled). Ascites with water in the
abdomen, and acute abdominal swelling due to
intestinal perforation (chidro dara) can only be healed
by poisonous medicines or surgery.
Although some illnesses are generally curable,
there may be other complications that allow these
illnesses to be controlled but not completely cured.
Complications include swollen eyes, curved genitalia,
sticky and thin skin, weakened strength, blood,
muscle, and digestion.
Symptoms of swelling of the heart, difficult
breathing, hiccup, anorexia, thirst, fainting, vomiting,
and diarrhea are the most life-threatening
complications.
Abdominal diseases may also exist without the
accumulation of water (ajátodaka). Its symptoms
include almost no swelling (in the abdomen or legs),
reddish abdomen, hollow sound upon tapping, not
very heavy, gurgling sounds are always present.
Persons may experiences a vein network covering
the abdomen, gas will move from the rectum to the
navel, distending the navel area (distention releases
after passing stool and gas). Other symptoms include
colic pain around the heart, navel, groin, lumbar, and
anus; forceful elimination of gas, moderate digestion.
Excessive salivation causes a lack of taste in the
mouth, scanty urine, and hard stools.
Therapies:
These diseases are the most difficult to heal unless
the diseases are detected in early stages, there is no
fluid, and the diseased person is still strong.
Therapy is suggested when there is no abdominal
swelling, reddish, hollow sounding (upon tapping),
not very heavy, and continual gurgling sounds. Other
symptoms that require therapy include many vein
networks, a distended navel (that subsides after
passing the gas), pain in the heart, groin, waist, navel,
and anus. Further symptoms include passing hard gas,
moderate to strong digestion, mouth salivation
causing tastelessness, scanty urine, or hard stools. All
these signs indicate symptoms without fluid; they may
undergo therapy for healing.
Persons having swollen eyes, crooked genitals,
moist and thick skin, lack of strength, blood, digestion,
and suffering from emaciation should not undergo
therapy. Abdominal disorders, with complications of
swollen vital organs, difficult breathing, hiccup,
anorexia, thirst, fainting, vomiting, and diarrhea are
considered fatal.
General: Since this illness is mostly caused by
the contribution of all the doßhas, therapies to alleviate
all three doßhas are used. Appetizing, light foods (e.g.,
basmati rice, barley, green lentils, múngdal, barley
gruel, vegetables).
Herbs include pippalí, harítakí, ginger, chitrak,
and viæa´ga with cane sugar, rock salt, and ghee. The
watery residue of yogurt (whey—muttadh/takra) is
useful in all abdominal diseases. Persons should avoid
animal products (especially fish), sesame seeds,
pastries, foods that are hot, salty, sour, burning, and
heavy; water, physical exercise, long walks, naps, long
journeys.
Váyu: When persons are strong, they first undergo
oil massage and fomentation, followed by castor oil
purgation. Once the doßha is balanced and the
abdomen no loner distended, a cloth bandage is
wrapped around the abdomen to prevent Váyu from
distending it again; the cloth compresses space that
can cause a pocket of gas. Purgation is done daily to
remove accumulated doßhas obstructing the digestive
channels. After passing stool, one eats a Váyu-
reducing diet and drinks boiled milk (before meals
or after food is digested) to develop strength. Once
strong, the person gradually reduces intake of milk
to prevent nausea.
If upward movement of Váyu (Udána/reverse
peristalsis) occurs, the digestive fire is strengthened
by vegetable soups with a bit of sour and salty tastes
to it. Later, oil massage, fomentation, and dry enemas
are given. Oil enemas are used for twitching,
convulsions, pain in the joints, in cases of twichings,
convulsions, pain in joints, bones, sides, back, and
sacrum. This enema is also useful for persons
suffering from stool and gas retention, or for the strong
person.
If persons are weak, old, or very young, or with
only a slight increase of Váyu, the only therapy

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
374
suggested is pacification. Persons need a mild Váyu-
reducing diet. Examples include ghee, vegetables,
soup, rice, boiled milk (alone), dry or oil enema, mild
massage, yogurt/water drink (1:1) with pippalí, and
black salt.
Non-oily enemas use da¤hmúl with rhubarb or
other strong purgatives, while oil enemas include
castor or sesame oil cooked with Váyu-reducing herbs
(e.g., triphalá, cardamom), and sour herbs like
ámalakí.
Váyu: With side pain, stiffness, and constricted heart
area, herbs include bilwa and balá. Oil laxatives like
castor oil are useful. Afterwards, t^ikatu, da¤hmúl, or
hi´g is taken.
Pitta: Strong persons use purgatives from the
beginning of therapy, while weak persons are first
cleansed by oil enemas, and then by milk enemas.
When their physical and digestive strength returns,
they receive an oil massage, followed by purgation
with boiled milk and castor oil, yogurt/water (1:1)
drink with cane sugar.
Kapha: First oil massage, then fomentation
followed by evacuation through fomentation, sweat,
and laxatives. After that, one takes Kapha-reducing
foods, liquids, and herbs for pacification, 3/4 warm
water with 1/4 fat-free yogurt (lassi) with t^ikatu.
Kapha/Váyu: Ghee and sesame oil with ginger
and pippalí.
Tridoßha: The therapies used depend upon the
most vitiated doßhas. One quarter fat-free yogurt with
3/4 water (lassi), mixed with cane sugar, t^ikatu, and
rock salt.
Enlarged Liver and Spleen: Aloe gel, chiráyatá
(or gentian), saffron (or safflower), punarnavá,
bhúámalakí, and bh^i´garáj with ghee. Light foods
and vegetables are also eaten. Váyu or Kapha forms
may require cauterization. Pitta excesses require milk
enemas, drinking boiled milk and bloodletting.
Yogurt/water with honey, sesame oil, calamus, and
ginger are other therapies.
Cirrhosis—bh^iògaráj is the best herb; other
herbs for enlarged liver.
Infected Hepatitis—guæúchí, sudarähan, iron
supplements; and enlarged liver herbs; nila (isatis)—
antibiotic.
Chronic Liver Complaints—aloe gel, guæúchí
extract, ámalakí, ¤hatávarí; olive, sesame, and
avocado oils rebuild the liver.
Intestinal Obstruction: Fomentation followed by
non-oily and oil enemas, irritant herbs (e.g., chitrak,
pepper, ginger, harítakí), oil, and salt. Rhubarb, castor
oil, or senna purge the system, healing reverse
peristalsis and Váyu. Yogurt water with rock salt and
pippalí is also helpful. Boiled milk with ginger,
viæa´ga, chitrak, or t^ikatu is another useful remedy.
Intestinal Perforation: Kapha therapy is used
(except for fomentation), and includes yogurt/water
with pippalí and raw honey. If thirst, cough, fever,
loss of weight (deteriorated in flesh), poor digestion,
lack of hunger, difficult breathing, colic, or weakened
senses exist, therapies cannot help the condition.
[When the digestive fire (pachak agni) is reduced,
food is not digested or absorbed. Thus, persons do
not gain weight. Hot spices increase the digestive fire.]
Ascites: Kapha-reducing foods and few liquids.
Herbs include t^ikatu, calamus, triphalá, and chitrak.
Yogurt/water with raw honey and sesame oil are other
useful therapies.
Complications: With edema, hard bowels, colic
thirst, or fainting, herbs are used for debilitation after
passing stools. Boiled milk is also helpful.
A¤hwagandhá with ghee is spread on the abdomen,
and water (with punarnavá, calamus, ginger, and
coriander) is sprinkled over it (this herbal mixture is
also ingested).
Váyu with edema, distention, tumors and
hemorrhoids: Pippalí, chitrak, ginger, and da¤hmúl.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 375
Jaundice (Kámalá Roga)
Causes: Jaundice can develop either from anemia, or
on its own. When it arises from anemia, it is caused
by aggravated Pitta (from Pitta-in-creasing foods and
lifestyle). The excessed Pitta then burns up the blood
and muscles, producing jaundice in the alimentary
tract (g.i.t.). The excessed doßha then travels through
the transportation channels (srotas) and produces
jaundice in the different tissues. Its symptoms include
deep yellow eyes, urine, skin, nails, mouth, and fe-
ces; burning, indigestion, thirst, greenish-brown com-
plexion, and weakness of the sense organs.
When Váyu and Pitta are excessed, there is
greenish-bluish-yellow complexion with dizziness,
no sexual desire, mild fever, stupor, physical
weakness, and poor digestion.
Jaundice can occur simply from ignoring an
aggravated Pitta condition. This leads to jaundice with
edema and is hard to cure. Edema is the major
secondary complication of anemia and jaundice.
Therapies: First, oil massage, then mild emesis and
purgation with bitter herbs. Foods include basmati
rice, barley, whole wheat, soups, peas, lentils, and
oils that reduce Pitta; white radish, yellow squash,
green leafy vegetables, chlorophyll, dandelion, and
sugar cane. The best herbs include bhúámalakí,
guæúchí, and sudarähan chúròa (will aggravate Váyu
symptoms). Other herbs include triphalá, neem, balá,
bh^i´garáj, bilwa, sandalwood, lemon grass, kaóuká,
barberry, vidárí kand, ámalakí, gotu kola, aloe gel,
turmeric, barberry, t^ikatu, dry ginger with boiled
milk, cane sugar, and ghee.
Gallstones
Causes: Congestion obstructs the bile flow and
inflames the gallbladder wall.
Symptoms:
General: Symptoms include acute pain in the
liver and gallbladder, swelling, and tenderness.
Váyu: Stones are black or brown, dry or rough;
they cause severe pain but mild inflammation and
fever.
Pitta: Stones are yellow, red, or green with
sharp angles, painful and inflamed.
Kapha: Soft, round, whitish stones, rarely
painful.
Therapies:
Purgation with aloe or rhubarb (mixed with
fennel) is required in acute conditions. Bhú-ámalakí,
turmeric, and mañjißhóhá are next used to cleanse the
liver and blood.
Certain herbs break up stones. These include
gokßhura, kaóuká, and paßhana bedha. Taken with
coriander or turmeric, the herb’s actions are directed
to the gall bladder.
Dyspepsia (Mandágní)
Four kinds of gastric fire or digestive activity
(jaóharágni) exist: Vißhamágni (Váyu-caused),
tíkßhòa (Pitta-caused), mandágni (Kapha-caused),
and samanágni (normal digestion). Vißhamágni is
variable digestion. Tíkßhòágni digests normal and
excess quantities of food too quickly. Mandágni
cannot digest any food. Samanágni digests normal
quantities of food without causing any difficulties;
this is the ideal state of digestion.
Indigestion (Ajíròa)
Three kinds of indigestion exist: Áma (Kapha-
caused), vidaghda (Pitta-caused), and vißhóabdha
(Váyu-caused). [Some authorities suggest three other
forms of indigestion: Rasaeßha (indigestion of
nutrients), dinapáka (food is digested the next day
but without causing difficulty), and prativásara
(indigestion immediately after eating each meal).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
376
Causes:
Drinking large quantities of water, eating insuf-
ficient or excess amounts of food at unusual times,
eating unwholesome foods, suppression of natural
urges, insomnia, and daytime naps. Mental causes
include eating when angry, jealous, anxious, worried,
frightened, grieving, miserable, or in pain.
Symptoms:
General: Weakness without exertion, heaviness
of the body, not eliminating gas and stool, giddiness,
constipation, or diarrhea.
Váyu: Abdominal pain or distention, gas retention,
delusion, and other Váyu symptoms.
Pitta: Giddiness, thirst, fainting, sour and hot
belchings, sweating, burning sensations (e.g.,
heartburn), and other Pitta symptoms.
Kapha: Abdominal and body heaviness, nausea,
belching, swelling of the cheeks and eyes.
Nutrition: Aversion to food, abdominal heaviness,
extreme belchings. Pain develops whereever áma
resides in the body. Many diseases can develop
because doßhas travel in the body with áma.
Indigestion is the cause of many diseases. When
it is healed, other diseases are healed automatically.
Complications:
Indigestion can lead to fainting, delirium, vom-
iting, excessive salivation, debility, giddiness, and
even death. Insomnia, restlessness, tremors, suppres-
sion of urine, and fainting are the five most troubling
complications. (Indigestion can cause three other dis-
eases, visúchiká, alasaka, and vilambiká—see below).
Healthy Digestion:
Symptoms include belchings without bad smell
or taste, enthusiasm, proper elimination of gas, stool,
and urine; lightness of the body, natural hunger and
thirst.
Therapies:
    Váyu: Moist heat (fomentation). Herbal
combinations include triphalá, yogaraj guggul,
hi´gwasták chúròa, sitopaládi, chúròa, laßhunadi
vaói, and lavaòa bháskar. Other useful herbs include
asafoetida, ginger, cumin, and rock salt.
Pitta: Velamina (vomiting with warm salt water).
Drinking cold water helps reduce acidic digestion.
Harítakí and raw honey can be licked, or harítakí
and drákßhá ingested. Aloe vera, musta, chiráyatá,
and mahásudarßhan chúròa.
Kapha: Fasting until one feels better. The same
therapies as Váyu, plus black pepper, chitrak, and
t^ikatu (i.e., hotter spices quickly raise the digestive
fire).
Nutrition: Rest in bed, dry heat (fomentation);
harítakí, and dry ginger. Cardamom, coriander,
turmeric, and fennel can be taken with meals daily to
maintain health and prevent indigestion.
Visúchiká (Gastro Enteritis)
Symptoms: When persons suffer from indigestion,
mad food cravings, careless eating habits, and
overeating, they may experience pricking pain (as if
needles are sticking them). Other symptoms include
fainting, diarrhea, vomiting, severe thirst, burning
sensations all over, poor complexion, tremors, pain
in the heart area and head, and twisting of the arms
and legs. (Therapies below)
Alasaka
Symptoms: Severe abdominal distention, delusion,
crying helplessly, upward-moving gas (i.e., blocked
downward movement of the gas), not eliminating gas
and stool; thirst, belching. (Therapies below)
Vilambiká
Excess Kapha and Váyu remains in the body and
cannot be expelled. This condition is very difficult to
heal or cannot be healed.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 377
Therapies:
     If these 3 conditions can be healed, therapies
include dry heat (fomentation), strong emetics and
purgatives, fasting, bathing, or sprinkling emetic or
purgative decoction water, and non-oily enemas.
Herbs include vachá, hi´g, or ativißhá with tepid
water. Rock salt, ghee, triphalá, pippalí, and t^ikatu
are also useful. A mixture of pippalí and ginger in
hot water is also effective.
Peyá (thin gruel), digestive and appetizing herbs
(e.g., cardamom, cumin, coriander, fennel, etc.) are
taken when hunger returns.
Anáha
This condition occurs when áma and/or feces
accumulate in the digestive tract, obstructing normal
movement. Accumulated áma produces thirst, runny
nose, burning sensation in the head, stomach pain
and heaviness, heart pain, stiff joints in the back and
waist, obstructed feces and urine, fainting, vomiting
of feces, difficult breathing, and other symptoms of
alasaka (see above).
Therapies:
When áma obstructs the digestive tract
1) First, emetics are administered, then digestive
herbs and foods.
2) If vomiting of feces does not occur, the body re-
ceives dry heat fomentation and digestive herbs are
taken.
3) Purgative herb powders can be blown into the
intestines with a tube (through the rectum).
 4) Purgative herbal past suppositories (vartis) are
then used.
5) Persons can take emetic or purgative decoctions.
6) Once áma is removed, non-oily enemas are used
(purgative herbs, honey, and rock salt). 7) If
needed, an oil enema can also be used.
Colic (£húla)
Causes:
Váyu: Excessive exercise, travel, or sexual
intercourse; not sleeping at night, drinking very cold
water, eating very dry foods (i.e., dry, astringent, and
bitter items), overeating, injury, sprouted grains,
incompatible foods (e.g., hot and cold items at the
same meal), stale foods, suppression of natural urges,
fasting, excessive laughing, or talking.
Pitta: Excessive intake of hot, pungent, sour,
irritating, and fermented foods and liquids; anger,
overheating, fatigue, overexposure to the sun, and
sexual intercourse.
Kapha: Excessive intake of animal products, fatty
substances, diary, sugar, nuts, and other Kapha-
increasing items and habits.
Tridoßha: Indulging in habits of each of the
three doßhas causes tridoßhic colic.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Pain in the heart, ribs, back, waist, and
urinary bladder. The pain (pricking and tearing)
becomes worse during or after digestion, in the
evenings, in cloudy or cold weather. Other symptoms
include gas, distention, insomnia, variable appetite,
nervousness, and palpitations.
Pitta: Thirst, delusion, burning sensation near the
navel, hyperacidity, heartburn, diarrhea, perspiration,
irritability, fainting, and giddiness. Colic becomes
more painful around noon and midnight during
digestion and in rainy weather. Colic is relieved during
cold weather and by eating and drinking sweet and
cold items.
Kapha: Nausea, cough, debility, anorexia, salivation,
stomach pain, white or clear phlegm, congestion,
vomiting, feeling full after eating. These symptoms
are worse at sunrise and in the spring and fall seasons.
Tridoßha: Severe symptoms of all three doßhas
appear throughout the day and are difficult to heal.
Practitioners do not attempt to heal incurrable cases.
Therapies:
     General: Since Váyu is the underlying cause of
colic, air-reducing therapies are advised: fomentation
(moist heat application), oil abhyañga, and ghee.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
378
Herbs include cardamom, ginger, and fennel for
abdominal pain, dispelling gas, and digesting food
and áma. Hi´g, nutmeg, chamomile, and jaóámáò¤hí
relieve colic pain. Light, simple meals are advised.
Váyu: Herbs include rock salt, viæa´ga, chitrak,
pippalí, hi´g, lavaò bháskar chúròa, and drákßhá
(medicated grape wine). Small, light, and warm Váyu-
reducing foods and liquids are taken. An anti-áma
diet is also useful for a few days.
Pitta: First, one drinks cold water and induces
vomiting. Thereafter, cool foods, liquids, and life-
styles are advised (i.e., Pitta-reducing). Bitter herbs
such as chiráyatá and kaóuká are suggested.
Carminative herbs like fennel, mint, coriander, cumin,
and saffron are also helpful. Avipattikar chúròa with
a little dry ginger is another useful mixture.
Kapha: This condition requires drinking an
emetic decoction followed by vomiting. Dry
fomentation (heat application) and heating herbs (e.g.,
pippalí, dry ginger, vachá, t^ikatu, chitrak) are used,
as well as the Váyu-reducing therapies discussed
above.
Tridoßha: The above therapies used depend
upon the predominant symptoms.
Párßhva-¤húla
Causes, Development and Symptoms:
Excess Kapha in the sides of the body blocks Váyu,
causing abdominal distention and intestinal rumbling.
Persons experience pricking pain in the ribs, heart,
and bladder; insomnia, no appetite, difficult and
painful breathing. This condition is caused by excess
Váyu and Kapha.
Therapies:
Hi´g, rock salt, and tumburu are taken in a barley
decoction. Castor oil and drákßhá (medicated grape
wine) are also effective.
Kukßhi-¤húla
Causes, Development, and Symptoms:
Excess Váyu affects digestion, and when located
in the hips and abdomen, interferes with previously
eaten meals. Thus, all foods remain undigested.
Symptoms include heavy breathing due to
accumulated feces. This causes the person to toss in
agony, and to find no relief in any position or posture.
This condition is caused by excess Váyu.
Therapies:
Vomiting and fasting are advised if persons are
strong. Acidic and appetizing herbs are taken to reduce
Váyu and áma. Dry ginger, hi´g, b^ihatí, kaòókárí,
vachá, ku¤hóá, ativißhá, and kuóaj are recommended.
Purgatives, non-oily and oily enemas can reduce
accumulated excesses. Oil abhyañga and sweating
(hot poultices) are useful, as are fermented rice
washes.
Cardiac Colic (Hirchula)
Causes, Development, and Symptoms:
Weakened plasma (rasa) causes excess Váyu
(which acts with Pitta and Kapha) in the heart area.
This results in colic pain in the heart region.
Symptoms include difficult breathing. The condition
is caused by excess rasa and Váyu.
Therapies:
Heart disease therapies are used (see Chapter
14), as well as those mentioned above for Váyu.
Bladder Colic (Básti-¤húla)
Váyu becomes excessed in the bladder because
of suppression of urine and feces, causing pain in the
bladder, groin, and navel. This causes further
suppression of urine, stool, and gas. It is caused by
excess Váyu. Váyu-reducing therapies mentioned
above are used.
Urinary Colic (Mutra-¤húla)
     Excess Váyu causes piercing pain in the genitals,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 379
intestines, hips, lower abdomen, and navel areas. This
pain prevents the release of urine. Váyu-reducing
therapies are used.
Abdominal Colic (Vit-¤húla)
Váyu becomes excessed when dry foods are eaten,
weakening the digestive fire and preventing stool
evacuation. This causes excruciating pain in the lower
abdominal area. Pain begins on the right or left side,
then eventually spreads to the whole abdomen. Other
symptoms include rumbling sounds, unquenchable
thirst, vertigo, and are followed by epileptic fits.
Therapies include fomentation (moist heat
application), emetics, non-oily and oily enemas,
purgatives, and the Váyu-reducing herbs mentioned
above.
Annaja-¤húla
Overeating during weakened digestion aggravates
Váyu, preventing the digestive tract from digesting
food. This causes intolerable colic pain. Symptoms
include abdominal distention, epileptic fits, nausea,
belching, vilambiká (see indigestion), shivering,
vomiting, and fainting. Váyu-reducing therapies
mentioned above are used.
Gulma (benign abdominal tumor) therapies are
used for all colic conditions.
Hyperacidity
Excessive gastric juice activity results in
acidic or sour taste in the mouth.
Causes:
Váyu: A variable digestion cannot always digest
foods. When food is not digested, áma develops.
These undigested food toxins begin to ferment,
causing burning sensations.
Pitta: Eating too many hot, spicy, sour, greasy
foods and spices (e.g., onions, garlic, red peppers);
incompatible foods, alcohol, and overeating. Other
causes include eating too many sweets, such as cakes,
which ferment and produce acid in the stomach.
Kapha: Weak digestion allows áma to develop
when food is not digested. Thus, toxins ferment and
cause burning sensations.
Symptoms:
Heartburn, belching with sour taste or fluids,
nausea, vomiting.
Therapies:
Váyu: Hi´gwasták, rock salt, laßhunadi vaói,
drákßhá, along with antacids like ¤haòkh bhasma,
ávipattikar chúròa, fennel, and pravál piähti.
Pitta: Pitta-reducing foods and herbs, antacid
foods like milk and ghee. Acidic and sour foods are
avoided, including bananas (sour post-digestive
taste), pickles, wine, and yogurt. Useful herbs include
¤hatávarí, licorice, aloe gel, chiráyatá, and antacids
like ¤háòkh bhasma (conch shell ash) and ávipattikar
chúròa.
Kapha: Hi´gwasták, rock salt, laähunadi baói,
drakäha; and antacids like ¤há´kh bhasma (conch
shell ash) and ávipattikar chúròa.
Acid Gastritis/Acid Reflux (Amlapitta)
This is an inflammation of the stomach and its
lining.
Causes and Symptoms:
Eating incompatible food combinations, spoiled
foods, and very sour or acidic foods or liquids
increases Pitta in persons with already excessed Pitta.
Symptoms include indigestion, exhaustion, nausea,
belchings with bitter or sour taste, heaviness, loss of
appetite, burning sensation in the chest and throat.
Pitta symptoms are twofold, upward (úrdhvaga) and
downward (adhoga).
Downward Symptoms: Thirst, burning sensations,
fainting, giddiness, delusion, diarrhea, nausea, skin
rashes, poor digestion, hair standing on end,
perspiration, yellowish skin.
Upward Symptoms: Vomiting green, yellow, black,
blue, red, sour, thin, and sticky materials, followed

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
380
by mucus. Other symptoms include bitter or sour
tastes from vomiting or belching, burning sensations
in the throat, chest, upper abdomen, hands and feet;
headache, loss of heat, loss of appetite, Kapha/Pitta
fever, circular, itching, studded rashes with numerous
pimples.
The longer a person has had gastritis, the more
difficult it is to heal.
Váyu-caused: Tremors, delirium, fainting,
sensations of pins and needles, weakness, pain,
darkened vision, giddiness, delusion, hair standing
on end.
Kapha-caused: Expectorating thick phlegm,
heaviness, fatigue, loss of appetite, coldness,
weakness, vomiting, white coating on the tongue,
burning sensation, itching, sleeping longer and more
often.
Váyu/Kapha-caused: Symptoms of both doßhas.
Pitta/Kapha-caused: Belching with bitter, sour,
and pungent tastes, burning sensation in the chest,
upper abdomen, and throat; giddiness, fainting, loss
of appetite, vomiting, fatigue, headache, salivation,
sweet taste in mouth.
Therapies:
Therapies are the same as for hyperacidity. Milk
is recommended for Váyu and Pitta excesses.
Malabsorption (Sprue)
Causes: Environmental bacteria, poor eating habits,
excessive eating or fasting, ingesting overly hot or
cold items, eating canned, stale, or junk foods. It also
develops from chronic diarrhea, constipation, or dys-
entery; excessive use of purgatives or colonics, anti-
biotics, and from excessive mental and physical
stresses.
Symptoms:
       Váyu: Variable digestion, white spots or ridges
on fingernails, teeth marks on the front arc of the
tongue, constipation, abdominal distention, migrat-
ing pain, dry skin, cracked tongue, hemorrhoids, anal
fissures, emaciation, weak muscles and bones, arthri-
tis. Stools vary from watery to gaseous, hard, and
dry movements. One may experience palpitations,
anxiety, insomnia, depression, and faintness.
Pitta: Overly strong digestion, dysentery or
diarrhea (yellow-colored), abdominal pain, low-grade
fevers, infections, inflammation, ulceration, burning
sensation, anemia, malodorous feces, white spots or
ridges on finger nails, teeth marks on the front arc of
the tongue. The tongue marks deepen when angry or
irritable (i.e., Pitta-increasing emotional situations).
Kapha: Weak digestion, teeth marks on the front
arc of the tongue, mucus in the stool, diarrhea and
constipation, dull abdominal pain, congestion, edema,
diabetes, white spots or ridges on fingernails.
Therapies:
General: Light, simple, easily digested meals
depending upon one’s doßha. Yogurt-water (lassi)
improves digestion. If persons are strong, they can
tolerate a lassi fast for several days. Kicharí (basmati
rice and múngdal) should then be introduced into the
diet. Absorption-promoting herbs include cardamom,
fennel, cumin, harítakí, and drákßhá wine.
Váyu: Váyu-reducing foods and lassi with fresh
ginger are beneficial. Herbs taken with meals include
cardamom, pippalí, fresh ginger, cinnamon, fennel,
hi´gwasták, cumin, chitrak, harítakí, laßhuòadi vati,
and drákßhá wine. Useful foods include whole grains
and steamed vegetables (i.e., not eaten raw).
Pitta: Pitta-reducing foods and lassi with cardamom
are beneficial. Herbs taken with meals include
cardamom, fresh ginger, fennel, cumin, chitrak,
harítakí, ávipattikar chúròa, and drákßhá wine.
Onions, garlic, red peppers, salty, fermented, fried
and greasy foods increase Pitta, and therefore
aggravate this condition.
Kapha: Kapha-reducing foods and lassi (1/4

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 381
cup lo-fat yogurt: 3/4 cup water) with dry ginger are
beneficial. Herbs taken with meals include cardamom,
pippalí, dry ginger, cinnamon, hi´gwasták, cumin,
chitrak, harítakí, t^ikatu, laßhuòadi vati, and drákßhá
wine. Dairy, cold liquids, raw vegetables, salt, and
sweet aggravate this condition.
Food Allergies
This condition is due to weak immune and
nervous systems, and poor digestion—that creates
toxins in the body. These systems are weakened
through taking antibiotics, junk food and food
additives, environmental pollution, anxiety, worry,
and stressful lifestyle. Children born to mothers with
weak immune systems and allergies may also exhibit
these conditions; though breast-fed children are less
likely to develop food allergies.
Váyu doähas, having the most delicate nervous
systems, are more likely to have food allergies. There
may be a parallel emotion of not feeling nurtured.
Kapha doähas, with weak digestive fire, may also
exhibit food allergies.
Symptoms:
General: Gas, indigestion, bloating, diarrhea,
constipation, congestion, skin rashes, headaches.
Certain foods are more likely to cause allergic
reactions such as milk and wheat (difficult to digest),
corn, soy; nightshades (contain alkaloids) such as
eggplant, tomato; strawberries, peaches.
Váyu: Beans, soy, corn, and other Váyu-in-
creasing foods.
Pitta: Nightshades and sour fruits (e.g., strawberries,
peaches, apricots).
Kapha: Dairy, wheat, and other Kapha-in-creasing
foods.
Therapies:
General: Initially, persons need to avoid the foods
that cause allergic reactions while taking herbs to
improve the digestion (e.g., cardamom, coriander),
calm the nerves (e.g., gotu kola), and improve the
immune system (e.g., guæúchí); follow one’s doäha
food plan, exercise, and reduce stress.
Therapies listed under malabsorption are used here.
Once the allergies are diminished, stronger immune-
boosting herbs like ¤hatávarí and a¤hwagandhá can
be taken.
Parasites (Krimi)
Causes: Both internal and external forms of parasites
exist. Sweat, Kapha, blood, and feces are the 4 causes.
There are 20 species of parasites.
External (Báhya): Parasites are the result of poor
hygiene; they are the size, shape, and color of sesame
seeds, have many legs, and reside in the hair and
clothes. Two types exist: head lice and body lice. Head
lice are black, and hide in the roots of hair. Body lice
are white and reside in the hairs of the pubis and
armpit, and are also found in clothes, particularly in
the seams. Both are passed from person to another
on combs, brushes, clothes, and other personal
belongings, or their eggs are transmitted on loose
hairs. They produce rashes, eruptions, itching, and
small tumors.
Internal (Abhyantara): Arise from aggravated
doßhas through unsuitable foods and life-styles,
harmful or unethical actions such as scolding,
defaming, killing, robbing, or unethical past life
actions. The aggravated doßhas invade all the channels
inside the body, vitiating the skin, lymph, blood, and
muscles, making these areas welcome spots for
parasites to live. They are also caused by too many
sweets, molasses, milk, yogurt, grains, Kapha grains
(Kapha parasites), leafy vegetables (that cause more
feces), and green legumes (feces parasites).
Kapha: Parasites reside in the stomach and small
intestine. When they increase in number, they move
throughout the alimentary tract. Their size and shape
vary. Seven species exist. They cause nausea, excess
salivation, indigestion, loss of taste and appetite,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
382
fainting, vomiting, fever, gas, abdominal distention,
emaciation, excess sneezing and nasal mucus.
Blood (Raktaja): Parasites reside in the blood
vessels, are very small, without legs, round, copper
colored, and are of six species. Symptoms include
skin discoloration, burning, itching, pricking pain,
raised patches, and symptoms of other skin diseases.
These parasites are related to malaria, filaria, bacilli
(leprosy), and viruses in the blood, liver, and spleen.
They come from mosquito, flea, and bedbug bites.
Some parasites are carried in the alimentary tracts of
people who help with health maintenance.
Feces (Puríßhaja): Reside in the colon, usually
moving downwards. When they increase in number
they travel up to the stomach and small intestine. Then
they cause the smell of feces in the mouth, belching,
and exhalations. They are thick, round, thin, and
threadlike, or thick, blue, yellow, white or black, and
of five species. They cause diarrhea, dysentery,
abdominal pain; they also cause food to remain
undigested in the stomach, emaciation, poor digestion,
and rectal itching when feces are expelled.
Sweet—causes growth of parasites: Kapha/feces—
intestinal parasites (round-worms, hook-worms,
threadworms, tapeworms, amoebas, and eggs enter
the body through infected water and food, when
improperly cooked or cleaned. A strong digestion
destroys the eggs and parasites, a weak digestion
allows the eggs and parasites to grow and harm the
person.
Therapies: Parasites are more common in Váyu and
Kapha doßhas, usually associated with áma or
undigested foods. Long-term infestation causes
wasting of tissues and deranging Váyu. Parasites are
found in the three doßhas in
Váyu: Stool
Pitta: Blood
Kapha: Mucus or mucus membranes, stomach, or
small intestine.
General- Tridoßhic:
1) First, a detoxification diet (áma reduction),
avoiding sweets, meats, dairy, fried foods, and
yeast products, while eating more lightly steamed
vegetables.
2) Purgation first, then 3 to 5 days on antiparasitic
herbs. For gentle purgation a cup of triphalá tea
with two teaspoons of castor oil are be taken upon
rising. By noon, three to five stools are passed. A
stronger purgation involves making a rhubarb tea
before bed (1 tsp. rhubarb powder). Rhubarb also
has antiparasitical properties.
3) Immune-boosting formulas like siddha
makardhwaj, kuþajahan vati and kuþajariähta help
quickly overcome parasites.
Váyu: Certain herbs cause agni (digestive fire) to
burn up the parasites: Hi´g, black pepper, cayenne,
triphalá, musta. A Váyu-reduction diet avoiding rich
and sweet foods, and using hot spices and castor oil
purgatives. If malnourished or weak, a¤hwagandhá,
balá, or ginseng are added.
Pitta: Bitter tastes cleanse and reduce worms. Herbs
include viæa´ga (the main Áyurvedic herb for
worms), kuóaj (the main herb for amebic parasites—
especially for amoebic dysentery), kaóuká, tulsí, be-
tel nuts, musta, aloe gel, and chitrak. Pumpkin seeds
may also be eaten freely throughout the day. Castor
oil purgatives are also useful. A Pitta-reduction diet
includes lots of raw foods, vegetable juices, and
greens, and omits hot spices.
Kapha: Bitter tastes cleanse and reduce worms,
viæa´ga (the main Áyurvedic herb for worms), kuóaj
(main herb for parasites), kaóuká, tulsí, betel nuts,
chiráyatá and musta, agni- (digestive fire) promot-
ing herbs to burn up the parasites: hi´g, black pep-
per, pippalí, and ginger. Pumpkin seeds may also be
eaten freely throughout the day. An anti-Kapha diet
with lots of hot spices (consume until sweating be-
gins), sugar, and dairy are avoided; rhubarb root is
used as a purgative.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 383
Constipation (Ãnáha)
Signs of a Healthy Colon: No tongue coating, easy
passing of stool immediately upon waking in the
morning. Stools should float (not sink), two to three
stools daily.
Signs of an Unhealthy Colon: The back third of
the tongue is coated, stools sink, one or no stools
passed daily.
Causes: Eating foods that are difficult to digest
and/or are Váyu-increasing; developing as a result of
fever or infection, sleeping too much, suppressing
the urge to defecate. Other causes include a hectic
lifestyle, sexual intercourse in the morning (weakens
the downward flow of air/Apána Váyu), coffee or tea
in the morning (is drying), and a lack of exercise.
Mental causes include excess emotions (e.g., worry,
fear, anxiety, anger, impatience, nervousness.)
Symptoms:
Váyu: Dry colon, gas (with or without pain),
abdominal distention, brownish coating on the back
of the tongue, bad breath, anxiety, headache (because
air is pushed upward instead of down and out with
the stool), urge to urinate but difficulty passing urine.
Pitta: Usually constipation occurs at the end of
fevers because toxins collect in the small intestine
and colon. Other causes include eating foods that are
too greasy, fried, salty, spicy, pungent, and hot (i.e.,
Pitta-increasing items). Symptoms include anger,
irritability, thirst, sweating, body odor, burning
sensation, reddish tongue with yellow coating; bad
breath, flushed complexion, headache, and violent
dreams. The liver is usually in need of detoxification
as well.
Kapha: Causes include sleeping too long, day naps,
lack of exercise, and Kapha-increasing foods. Excess
mucus develops and clogs the system, causing
heaviness, lethargy, fatigue, mucus in the stool, a pale,
fat tongue with white or mucus coating, abdominal
bloating, dull pain, edema.
Therapies:
General: The best herb for the colon is triphalá,
which draws toxins from the colon and promotes
toning, rejuvenation, and the passage of stool. It is
taken in the morning and evening (1/2 to 1 tsp. with 4
times as much water). Triphalá is a gentle and mild
laxative made from three fruits, ámalakí, bibhítakí,
and harítakí. To achieve a stronger effect, ginger is
added to the mixture and harítakí is doubled in
quantity. When passing stool, squatting is a more
natural position for bowel movements.
Váyu: Váyu-reducing foods, liquids, and life-style
are required. Ingesting ghee and sesame oil will
moisten the colon, as will dairy and small quantities
of oily foods like almonds and sesame tahini. Boiled
milk with ghee and cinnamon are good to take before
bed. Digestive herbs include ginger, cardamom, and
fennel. Triphalá is excellent, but castor oil (2 tsp. in a
cup of boiled water before bed) is stronger and may
be required if triphalá is not effective. Castor oil doses
need to be adjusted (more or less) according to
individual needs. Herbs to boost digestion are also
required; they include rock salt, hi´g, lavaò bháskar
chúròa. Í¤habgol (2 tsp.) taken in 1 cup of warm water
before bed also relieves constipation. Dry foods (e.g.,
cabbage family, chips, beans) increase gas and
constipation. Non-oily and oily enemas are also useful
(see Chapter 7).
Pitta: Pitta-reducing food, liquids, and life-style
are required. Triphalá, aloe vera, and fennel cleanse
the colon, small intestine, and liver (1/2 tsp. before
bed). Warm milk and ghee before bed is beneficial.
A rhubarb and fennel purgative is useful when
constipation is not resolved by the therapies just
mentioned. Before taking the rhubarb purgative, oil
abhyañga and sweating therapies are required to move
toxins in the body back to the small intestine where
they first originated.
Kapha: Kapha-reducing foods, liquids, and
lifestyle are required. Fasting, exercise, mental
stimulation, and less sleep help heal this condition.
Sweets, dairy, yeast products, salt, fried and fermented
foods aggravate this disorder. Triphalá, aloe, and
rhubarb are useful as a laxative and purgative. Hot

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
384
spices are also needed to reduce fat, mucus, and toxins
in the body (e.g., dry ginger, black pepper, pippalí,
t^ikatu). One or 2 tsp. of herbs in a cup of hot water
before sleep reverses this disorder. A non-oily enema
with the above herbs cleanses the colon.
Hemorrhoids (Arßhas)
Causes: Simultaneous vitiation of all three doßhas
weakens the skin, muscles, and fat, obstructing the
veins in the muscles of the rectum. The predominating
doßha will determine the main cause and symptoms.
Varieties: Two types of hemorrhoids exist: those
that are congenital or those acquired occurring during
one’s life. Their symptoms are either dry or bleeding.
Congenital (Sahaja): Due to improper or
unhealthy activities of the parents or fate. This
produces tridoßhic hemorrhoids that can be checked,
but not healed (as with all hereditary diseases). They
are dry, face inward or outward; some are round,
irregularly spread or matted together, yellowish-white,
usually small, and accompanied by secondary
diseases.
After Birth (Janmotta-raja): Five types of this
disease can occur: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, Tridoßhic, and
blood-induced. Váyu and Kapha cause dry (¤hußhka)
piles, while Pitta and blood cause bleeding
hemorrhoids.
Congenital Symptoms: Apána Váyu, being
obstructed from birth, moves the air upwards,
aggravating the other 4 Váyu sub-doßhas, Pitta, and
Kapha. This develops the following conditions.
Persons are born thin, lean, emaciated, and weak, with
excessive gas, urine, and feces that may be obstructed.
Other symptoms include poor complexion, urinary
tract stones, and gravel. Feces can vary, from
constipation or dryness to diarrhea, or may be normal.
Sometimes feces have toxins and mucus. They can
be white, pale, green, yellow, reddish, thin, dense,
and slimy.
Severe pain may develop in the navel, urinary
bladder, and pelvis areas. Other symptoms include
dysentery, hair standing on end, urinary disorders,
diabetes, intestinal gurgling, distention, a sensation
of stickiness in the heart and sensory organs. Persons
may experience excessive bitter and sour belching,
poor digestion, irritability, weakness, and small
amounts of seamen. Additional symptoms include
frequent coughs, difficult breathing, bronchial asthma,
thirst, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, indigestion, chronic
rhinitis, sneezing, fainting, and headaches. Persons
may develop low, weak, hoarse, and broken voices;
ear diseases, fevers, joint and bone pain associated
with general weakness. Stiffness in the side of the
chest and abdomen, urinary bladder, heart area, back
and lumbar regions can occur. Mentally, one is very
thoughtful, giddy, or lazy.
Acquired Hemorrhoids
Causes:
General: Hemorrhoids are caused by excess
aggravation of the doßhas through improper diet and
lifestyle that weaken the digestive fire. They may be
caused by excess sex, riding, straining, sitting for long
periods on uneven or hard seats, or on one’s heels.
Other causes include enema nozzles, rough surfaces,
washing with very cold water, straining during
defecation, and suppression or early release of gas,
urine, or feces. Emaciation caused by fever,
abdominal tumors, diarrhea, excess áma, duodenal
disorders, edema, anemia, and overexertion can also
cause this disease. For women this disorder can be
caused by abortion, miscarriage, and abnormal fetus
development. This leads to an accumulation of
undigested food (toxin waste or áma). Feces become
lodged in the folds of the rectum, hardening and
causing friction, thus developing hemorrhoids.
Premonitory Symptoms: Weak digestion, weak
thighs, twisting pain in calves, dizziness,
enfeeblement of parts of the body, swelling of eyes,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 385
diarrhea or constipation, gas with lower abdominal
pain, cutting pain in the anus; feces are difficult to
eliminate with accompanying noise. Other symptoms
include intestinal gurgling, abdominal distention,
emaciation, excess belching, excess urine, and insuf-
ficient feces, not feeling the need to defecate, hot
fumes, acidity, pain in the head, back, and chest, ex-
haustion, skin discoloration, stupor, weakened sense
organs, anger, and unhappiness.
Development:
General: Downward moving air (Apána Váyu)
moves upward because of obstructions of the rectum.
This aggravates the other four forms of Váyu (Práò,
Udán, Vyán, Samán) in the body, as well as the urine,
feces, Pitta, Kapha, the tissues (dhátus), and their sites.
Thus, digestion is weakened, and áma and feces
accumulate and sit in the folds of the rectum.
Poor digestion, accumulation of sweat, urine, and
feces can develop by eating too many heavy, sweet,
cold foods and liquids that block the channels of
circulation and cause burning sensations. Also, eating
mutually contradictory foods, eating before the last
meal is digested, eating too small portions, junk food
or stale food, animal products or excessive amounts
of pastries can cause trouble. Other causes include
dry or raw vegetables, vinegar, garlic, pickles, heavy
fruits, fermented wines, polluted water. External
causes include excessive oleation therapy, not
eliminating toxins, wrong use of enema therapy, lack
of exercise, excessive sexual acts, and day naps.
When Apána Váyu is excessive, it pushes feces to
the anal sphincter and aggravates it, developing
hemorrhoids. Apána Váyu is deranged from sitting
on rough, hard, or uneven seats, bumpy rides,
excessive sexual intercourse, enema nozzles
improperly inserted, too much cold water, and
scratching the anus. Other causes include straining
in life and in passing feces, suppressing the natural
urges, miscarriage, pressure of the uterus during
pregnancy, and abnormal delivery.
Váyu: Eating astringent, pungent, bitter, dry, cold,
and light food, eating too little food or fasting,
drinking sharp alcohol, sex, living in too cold an
environment, hard exercise, grief, and exposure to
the wind.
Pitta: Eating pungent, hot, salty, burning, and sharp
foods (e.g., onions, garlic, cayenne), straining
exercise, exposure to the sun and fire, living in very
hot places, drinking alcohol, envy, anger, and
impatience.
Kapha: Eating sweet, oily, cold, salty, sour, and
heavy foods, eastern winds, living in cold climates,
mental lethargy.
Tridoßhic: Caused by combinations of foods and
life-styles mentioned above.
Symptoms:
General: Severe emaciation, lack of enthusiasm,
helplessness, a weakened, broken voice, pale
complexion, weakened tissues, and pain in the vital
organs. Further symptoms include cough, thirst, bad
taste in the mouth, difficult breathing, nasal mucus,
exhaustion, faint body pains, vomiting, excessive
sneezing, edema, fever, impotence, deafness, and
blindness. Persons may develop urinary gravel or
stones, worry, spitting, loss of appetite, pains in all
the bones, joints, heart, navel, anus, and groin. Other
symptoms include oozing from the rectum,
hemorrhoids (either dry or bleeding—yellow, green,
red, or slimy) may occur.
Váyu: Dry, tingling, shriveled, bluish-red, uneven,
coarse and hard, sharp, cracked, associated with pain,
cramps and excessive itchiness, numbness, and
tingling sensations. Other symptoms include severe
pain in the head, ribs, shoulders, waist, thighs and
groin, sneezing, and belching. Further disorders
include food not moving through the digestive tract,
sudden heart pain, loss of taste or appetite, cough or
difficult breathing. Irregular digestion, ringing in the
ears, dizziness, blackened skin, nails, feces, urine,
eyes, and face may occur. Feces disorders include
small quantity with noises and straining, or dysentery
followed by painful release of frothy, slimy fluid. If
this is not healed, it will lead to abdominal tumors,
enlargement of the spleen, abdomen, and prostate.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
386
Oily and hot things relieve this condition.
Pitta: Thin, soft, flabby hemorrhoids are blue, red,
yellow, blue, or black in complexion, exuding thin
blood with a foul smell and burning sensation in the
body. Other symptoms include asthma, ulceration,
fever, perspiration, excessive sweating and discharge,
thirst, fainting, and loss of taste and appetite. Further
disorders are delusion, heavy stool, brown, green,
yellow or deep yellow complexion, eyes, and nails.
The stool becomes yellow or red, and bloody, burning,
and itching. Colic or pricking pain, yellow or green
loose stools or diarrhea develops. Copious, yellow
and malodorous urine and stool develop. Cold things
bring relief.
Kapha: Hemorrhoids are deeply rooted, large,
swollen, thick, hard, round, white, and bulging. They
may be oily, greasy, smooth, with dull pain (but
painless to the touch), stiff, and rigid. Other symptoms
include severe itching, cutting pain in the anus, urinary
bladder, and navel region. Further developments
include cough, difficult breathing, nausea, salivation,
anorexia with mucus, and urinary disorders (e.g.,
dysuria, diabetes, stones, gravel). Persons may
experience vomiting, excessive spitting, cough, cold,
impotence, dull head pain, and fever with shivering.
Feces symptoms include straining to eliminate,
containing mucus and excess elimination. The stool
can be reddish, white and sometimes with slimy
discharge. The urine and stool are heavy, slimy, and
white. Complexion becomes yellowish-white and
greasy; there is constant edema, and the organs feel
as though covered with sticky material. The mouth
has a sweet taste. Tuberculosis and poor digestion
associated with acute diseases caused by áma
(undigested food toxins) can develop. This is a chronic
condition. Dry and hot things bring relief.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas will
appear simultaneously.
Blood: Hemorrhoids caused by blood aggravation
have symptoms similar to Pitta and have the look of
Váyu. Feces are hard, and hemorrhoids may bleed
suddenly. This bleeding can lead to a greenish or pale
complexion and to other diseases associated with loss
of blood, strength, enthusiasm, and sensory abilities.
The most serious secondary complication to arise
along with hemorrhoids is constipation.
The most serious forms of hemorrhoids occur with
cardiac and/or rib pain, limb pain, fainting, vomiting,
thirst, and inflammation of the anus. Almost as serious
are symptoms of hand, leg, face, navel, anal, or testicle
edema. In these cases, hemorrhoids can only be
controlled, but they cannot healed. Also in this
category are hereditary symptoms due to tridoßhic
causes, when found in the internal anal sphincter.
If persons are strong and have good digestion, their
hemorrhoids can be healed. Hemorrhoids may last
for a long time when they are caused by the
simultaneous imbalance of two doßhas, when they
are congenital, when they are tridoßhic, or when they
are found in the innermost folds of the rectum.
However, they can be controlled if the digestive fire
is adequately strengthened. Those hemorrhoids
caused by two doßhas found in the second rectal fold
or those that have existed more than one year (chronic)
are difficult to heal. Those caused by only one doßha,
found in the outer folds and that are non-chronic, are
easily healed. Some suggest surgery or cauterization
with alkalis.
There are 3 additional places where piles may
occur: in the male organ (discussed later), at the navel
(being slippery and soft), and on the skin as warts.
Therapies
General: Herbs of neem, triphalá, guæúchí,
licorice, chitrak, viæa´ga, and pittapapra are most
effective.
Hemorrhoids are classified into 2 main categories,
dry and wet. Those caused by Váyu and Kapha fall
into the former category, those caused by Pitta and
blood aggravation fall into the latter. Here blood is
considered wet, and although Kapha hemorrhoids are
oily, greasy, slimy, etc., they are considered dry.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 387
     Dry Symptoms and Therapies: With numbness,
edema, and painful lumps, the mass is first smeared
with triphalá, bilwa, or chitrak medicated oils. Af-
terwards, warm or oily compresses (fomentation) of
barley, or sesame seed powder, lukewarm compresses
of vachá powder, corn flour with sesame oil or ghee,
dry radish pulp are applied.
Next, herbal water made from herbs of bilwa,
vásák, arka, and castor oil may be sprinkled on the
areas of the navel and anus. Persons may take sitz
baths with water decoctions made from triphalá,
bilwa, yogurt-water, whey, or radish leaves. One
prepares for the sitz bath by smearing warm triphalá
oil or ghee on the hemorrhoids.
Aromatherapy includes burning and inhaling arka
root, viæa´ga, barley, a¤hwagandhá, or Pippalí mixed
with ghee. Ointments are also used, mixing sesame
oil, ghee, or warm water with herbs until the mixture
becomes a paste. The paste is smeared on the masses.
Herbs used include pippalí, chitrak, turmeric,
triphalá, and cane sugar. Ointments are specifically
useful when there is edema, stiffness, itching, and
pain.
Herbs that reduce the various doßha-caused
hemorrhoids are also used in the above therapies (i.e.,
cold, bitter herbs for Pitta; warm, oily herbs for Váyu;
bitter and warm herbs for Kapha). Bloodletting is
administered (by qualified practitioners) when the
above therapies do not work.
Herbal powder mixtures (chúròas) are also
ingested; the mixture depends on the prevailing doßha
causing the hemorrhoids. Triphalá is a good general
chúròa. Hot spices like ginger, pippalí, and black
pepper (t^ikatu) are used for Váyu and Kapha
conditions. These also help improve the digestive
power, improve appetite, stimulate the downward
movement of air (Apána Váyu), reduce swelling,
itching and pain, promote strength and complexion.
Barley, turmeric, triphalá, and viæa´ga are useful for
Pitta conditions.
When the patient suffers from both hemorrhoids
and constipation, recipes include triphalá decoction,
triphalá with yogurt-water (lassi), or just harítakí with
lassi. Lassi (buttermilk) is considered the best
medicine for healing hemorrhoids caused by Váyu
and Kapha (a teaspoon of ghee or sesame oil may be
added for Váyu conditions). Depending upon the
person’s strength and the season, they may take
buttermilk (lassi) from 1 week to 1 month, gradually
increasing and decreasing the number of glasses per
day. [1 month example: 1 lassi—first day. 2 lassis—
second day...adding 1 lassi per day until 15 lassis on
the 15th day. On the 16th day—14 lassis, the 17th
day—13 lassis...reducing the amount by 1 each day
until 1 lassi on the 30th day.
If the person is weak, then lassi is given mornings
and evenings. When persons are strong, they may
mix fried barley flour with lassi for evening drinks.
Rock salt (saindav namak), found in any Indian
grocery store, may be added to the drink. Meals are
eaten using foods that balance the person’s doßha.
After meals lassi with ghee or oil, mixed with basmati
rice is taken.
There are 3 types of lassi: (one for each doßha),
Váyu’s lassi is made with whole milk. Pitta’s lassi is
made with skim milk. Kapha’s lassi is made with
fat-free milk. Lassi cleanses the circulatory channels,
enabling the plasma (rasa) to reach and nourish all 7
tissue layers (dhátus). It is said that hemorrhoids
healed with lassi will not develop again.
Other useful foods and drinks:
1) Thin gruel (peyá)—rice flour, pippalí, chitrak,
bilwa, lassi, fried in ghee or oil for Váyu hemorrhoids.
A peyá mix is 50 gms. (1.76 oz) basmati rice cooked
with 8 times as much water.
2) Thick gruel (yavágú)—Basmati rice with
pippalí, lassi, black pepper for Váyu and Kapha. A
yavágú mix is 50 gms. basmati rice cooked with 2 to
4 times as much water.
3) Vegetable soup—boiled and dry paßhana
bedha, dried radish, bilwa, lassi, any astringent herbs
(e.g., raspberry) for Pitta.
4) For hemorrhoids with constipation—drinks
consisting of cane sugar, ghee, barley, gokßhura, and
lassi are for all doßhas.
     Cane sugar, barley flour, pomegranate juice,
boiled water, and black salt for Váyu.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
388
     Barley, honey, pippalí, dry ginger, black pepper,
rock salt, and lassi for Kapha and Váyu.
5) Green leafy vegetables are especially good for
Pitta.
6) Fresh white unsalted butter with sugar and
sesame seeds also heals this disease if taken for a
long time.
Enemas:
1) For gastritis (upward moving air [Upána
Váyu]—chitrak, pippalí, bilwa, licorice decoction).
This is an anuvásana enema.
2) Medicated enema for Váyu—milk, decoction
of da¤hmúl, castor oil, and black salt. This is a nirúha
enema.
Bleeding Hemorrhoid Therapy: Two types of this
therapy exist: when Pitta is predominant, and when
Kapha or Váyu are secondarily aggravated.
Signs of Váyu as a secondary cause—grayish
color, hard and dry stool, not releasing gas through
the anus, blood from hemorrhoids is thin, reddish,
and foamy, pain in lumbar, thighs, and anus, great
weakness. This is caused by drying foods and life-
styles. [Váyu predominance—develops even in Pitta
and Kapha excesses if bleeding is excessive.]
Therapies include oily and cold foods and life-
styles.
Signs of Kapha as a secondary cause—stool is
loose, yellow, white, dry, heavy and cold; blood from
hemorrhoids is dense, thready, pale yellow, and slimy.
There is sliminess and numbness in the region of the
anus. This is caused by heavy and dry foods and life-
styles.
Therapies include dry and warm foods and life-
styles. First, detoxifying or elimination therapies (e.g.,
fasting, purgation, emesis) are recommended, then
herbs are taken.
Hemostatic Therapies (stopping bleeding): When
toxic blood is exuded, continued bleeding is necessary
to release the toxins. Should bleeding be stopped too
soon, it can lead to various other diseases of Rakta
Pitta. Examples include bleeding from other parts of
the body, fever, morbid thirst, weakening digestion,
anorexia and, jaundice. Other disorders include
edema, colic pain in the anus and pelvic areas, skin
diseases in the lumbar region and thighs, anemia,
retention of gas, urine, and stool, headache, and
heaviness.
Bitter drugs stimulate the digestion, metabolism,
and stoppage of bleeding. If Váyu is predominant even
after the toxins are eliminated, then oily liquids,
massage, and anuvásana enemas are suggested. If
Pitta is the only cause of the illness, and bleeding
occurs in the summer, then hemostatic therapies are
immediately given to stop the bleeding.
Hemostatic herbal decoctions: Kuþaj, ginger
(coagulates blood), sandalwood, neem, musta, bilwa,
nágkehar, pittapapra, red lotus, white lotus, balá, and
cinnamon.
Recipes: Fried barley flour with any of the above
herbs, onions taken alone or with barley and sugar
(or with lassi, butter, and sesame seeds).
Sprinkling water, sitz baths, and ointments made
from the above herbs also help stop bleeding. Water
decoctions include licorice, arjuna, neem, and vásák.
Bath herbs include sandalwood and licorice.
Ointments include ghee with sandalwood and neem
oils.
If rectum prolapse (determined by feeling a Pitta/
Váyu pulse) or burning or stickiness in the anus
occurs, then it is rubbed with sesame oil or ghee and
mañjißhþhá, licorice, sandalwood and neem, honey,
and ghee, red and white sandalwood.
Continuous Bleeding Therapy: Forehead paste and
soup made of dúrba (the best blood coagulative),
sandalwood, and ghee. Also, anuvásana enemas with
the luke-warm upper portion of ghee, dúrba, and
sandalwood.
Summary: Váyu uses oily, sour and sweet
therapies, Pitta uses bitter, dry and cool therapies,
Kapha uses hot therapies.
Either hemorrhoids, diarrhea, and sprue (grahaní—
malabsorption, anemia, and gastrointestinal disorders)

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 389
can cause the development of the other 2 diseases.
They develop from poor digestion and are healed by
strengthening the digestive power. Generally
hemorrhoids are healed by eating fried vegetables,
thick barley gruel, vegetable/ghee soup, milk, and
lassi.
Bloating
Due to Hemorrhoids (Udávarta)
Causes: Váyu is aggravated in the colon by eating
air-increasing foods and drinks, i.e., foods that are
bitter, astringent, and dry (e.g., broccoli, barley, apples,
most beans, and dry cereals).
Developmental Symptoms: The accumulated air
then becomes aggravated, blocking the downward
movement of Váyu (Apána). This dries the moisture
in these channels, obstructing the movement of feces,
gas, and urine.
Following this, severe pain develops in the lower
abdomen, ribs, back, and heart area, along with
gripping abdominal pain, nausea, cutting pain in the
rectum, severe and constant pain in the urinary
bladder; cheeks may swell. Váyu moves upward.
The next stage of symptoms includes vomiting,
anorexia, fever, other Váyu diseases of the heart,
duodenum, and urine suppression. Other disorders
include dysentery, deafness, blindness, difficult
breathing, headache, cough, nasal mucus, mental
anxiety, worry or fear, thirst, bleeding, abdominal
tumors, and enlarged abdomen. Being secondary
complications, these diseases—when associated with
hemorrhoids—are difficult to heal. Therefore,
constipation is the main complication to heal before
these other symptoms appear.
Therapies:
Triphalá—Váyu
Castor oil—Pitta, Pitta/Váyu—2 teaspoons in
a cup of hot water before bed.
Rhubarb—for stronger measures Senna—the
strongest therapy.
Therapies include oil massage (oleation) followed
by sudation (sweating). Afterwards, oleation and
sudation herbal suppositories are given, made of
pippalí, madanphal, charcoal ash, mustard, and
jaggery. In difficult cases castor oil purgation and
nirúha basti (enema) (mainly using castor oil) are
used.
Obesity
Causes: Generally, acceptable weight levels
depend on cultural beliefs. Westerners aim at the slim,
Pitta form. More ancient cultures praise Kapha forms
(where physical activity is also more prevalent). Thus
the definition of over-weight may be determined by
whether it causes health problems.
Causes of overweight include overeating, exces-
sive eating of heavy or cold things, and oversleeping
and lack of exercise. Other causes include hormone
imbalance, emotional sentimentality, clinging, loss
of love or low self-worth, insecurity, and poor diges-
tion. Weight-reducing and appetite-suppressing drugs
can weaken the digestion and increase air (thereby
aggravating Váyu). When overweight causes poor
digestion, nutrients are not absorbed. Even after eat-
ing, the body does not receive the nutrients. So it sends
a message to the brain to eat again. Even still, the
digestive fire is unable to extract nutrients from the
food. Thus, a vicious cycle of eating and overeating
develops (absorbing little or no nutrition).
Váyu: Sudden and fluctuating weight: (over, under,
normal), variable hunger, eating lots of sugar to calm
the nerves. Eating offers a feeling of security.
Váyu/Kapha: This constitution reflects a nervous
mind and weak digestion. Pitta: Overeating is their
main cause because appetite is strong. There may be
addiction to sugar and red meat. Weight develops
muscle and flabbiness.
Kapha: This is the most common doßha that develops
obesity, slow metabolism, easy weight gain,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
390
continuous appetite (addicted to eating), hypothyroid
or other hormonal conditions that cause retention of
weight, mainly water and fat retention, weak pancreas
and kidneys, low pulse and energy, flabbiness, pallor,
moist complexion and skin, excess phlegm or saliva,
subcutaneous fat deposits and benign tumors may
develop.
Therapies:
General: A mild, long-term reducing plan is more
natural than crash diets. Winter is not a good time to
begin dieting because the cold can lower one’s
resistance and body heat. Reducing or lightening
therapy is needed, with a light diet, fasting, digestive
(spicy) herbs, mild laxatives, and tonics like guggul
(1 gram 3 times daily) or ¤hilájit (1/2 gram twice
daily). This reduces obesity in a few months. Bráhmí
calms the mind for conditions of excessive eating.
Váyu: Váyu-reducing herbs, diet, and lifestyle,
complex carbohydrates (whole grains and starchy
vegetables), avoidance of refined sugar, fewer hot
spices and more sweet digestives like cardamom,
coriander, bráhmí, jaóámáò¤hí, and a¤hwagandhá
calm the mind. Guggul helps cleanse and warm the
body.
Pitta: Pitta-reducing foods, avoiding meat, fish,
oily, greasy, or fried foods, sugars, and desserts. Raw
salads, green herbs, and chlorophyll, digestive bitters
and bitter laxatives are the best foods to reduce weight
and counter sugar addiction. Herbs include aloe vera
gel, kaóuká, turmeric, bhúámalakí.
Kapha: Kapha-reducing foods, avoiding refined
sugars, salt, dairy, sweet fruit, bread, pastry, meat,
fish, fruit juices, cold liquids, and oils. The best foods
for digestion are sprouts: their enzymatic properties
help digestion. Meals are eaten after 10:00 a.m. and
before 6:00 p.m. Hot spices and fasting (if one is
strong) help raise the metabolism. Spice teas,
vegetable juices, steamed vegetables, beans, and
whole grains are also advised. Suggestions include
less sleep, no naps, and strong, aerobic exercise. Hot
digestive herbs like black pepper, ginger, turmeric,
and t^ikatu burn up fat and raise the digestive fire.
Bitter herbs reduce fat and dry water. Bitters include
kaóuká, myrrh, triphalá, and guggul. Gokßhura is a
gentle diuretic. £hilájit helps the kidneys. bráhmí is
a useful nervine to calm the mind.
Candida (Yeast)
Cause: Usually starts in GI tract, then moves to
the blood and other organs. Candida is generally
caused by weak digestion due to áma (toxin). It is
usually due to high Váyu or Kapha, but it can also be
caused by Pitta. Excessive use of sugars, drugs,
antibiotics, frequent colds and flu, weak nervous
system, worry, fear, grief, and anger can also cause
candida.
Symptoms:
General: Chronic low energy, low-grade fevers,
variable digestion, poor immune functioning, and
food allergies.
Váyu: Insomnia, lower back pain, dry skin,
nervous, restless, light-headedness, ringing ears,
depression, gas, bloating, constipation, and variable
energy.
Pitta: Fever, thirst, burning, hyperacidity, and
infections.
Kapha: Phlegm, frequent colds and flu, swollen
glands, edema, heaviness, dullness, and excess
sleeping.
Dual and Tridoßha: Symptoms of 2 or all 3 doßhas.
Therapies:
General: This condition is treated similarly to
parasites. The goal is to destroy the yeast and boost
the immune system. This is achieved through
restoring digestive and immune strength.
Refined sugars, white bread, yeast products, dairy,
sweet fruit, raw foods, and cold drinks are avoided.
Váyu: Antifungal herbs include asafoetida, garlic,
ginger, pippalí, t^ikatu, triphalá, viæa´ga, musta.
Viæa´ga and musta are antifungal but deplete the
immune system, so they are best used for only 1 or 2
weeks. Digestive herbs include cardamom, cumin,
ginger. Immune herbs include bráhmí, guæúchí, balá,
yogaraj guggul, and saffron. Later, ¤hatávarí and
a¤hwagandhá are taken.
Pitta: Viæa´ga and musta are used as antifungal herbs.
Digestives include coriander, fennel, and turmeric.
Immune herbs include bráhmí, guæúchí, balá,
kaißhore guggul, saffron, and neem. Later, ¤hatávarí
is used.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 15: Digestive System
 391
Kapha: Viæa´ga and musta as antifungal herbs:
cardamom, ginger, asafoetida, t^ikatu, and triphalá
as digestive herbs. Immune-boosting herbs include
gokßhura, bráhmí, guæúchí, balá, saffron. Also guggul
and neem are used.
Lyme disease has been helped by Pitta-type
candida therapies and antibacterial herbs. We have
found this therapy to be helpful in all lyme disease
cases at our center.
Ulcers
Inflamed ulcers are discussed in the next chapter.
Here stomach ulcers are reviewed. When the mucus
lining of the stomach becomes inflamed, one
experiences pain, burning sensation, and eventual
bleeding. The current Western view of ulcers is that
they are caused by bacteria. Both viewpoints are
discussed below.
Bacterial Therapies:
Áyurvedic therapies include antibacterial
therapies.
Váyu: Garlic, sandalwood, jasmine, turmeric.
Pitta: Chiráyatá, golden seal, aloe, sandalwood,
jasmine, turmeric.
Kapha: Garlic, golden seal, aloe, sandalwood,
turmeric.
Inflammation Therapies:
Usually these conditions develop from mental
stress, worry, overwork, nervous sensitivity, etc. Foods
also can play a part in this condition: for example,
eating overly hot and spicy foods and drinking ex-
cessive amounts of alcohol.
General: It is best to follow a bland food plan with
easily digestible items. A milk fast is beneficial. Al-
cohol and smoking aggravates ulcers, as do garlic,
onions, pickles, vinegar, and salt. Bananas and the
nightshade family of vegetables and fruit can also
cause trouble. Therapies for hyperacidity are recom-
mended here. Herbs to protect the mucus lining of
the stomach are useful, and include aloe gel,
¤hatávarí, and licorice.
Váyu: Symptoms include more pain than burn-
ing, feeling cold, light-headedness, anxiety, with in-
somnia, gas, constipation, abdominal distention, and
palpitations. Heat applied to the stomach brings re-
lief. Excessive meals of dry and light foods can dry
up the mucus secretions causing an ulcer. Thus a
Váyu-reducing diet is recommended. After a bland
diet is followed for some time, spices can be safely
used, such as hi´gwasták, lavaò bháskar chúròa, and
t^ikatu (unless the tongue is dry, cracked or reddish).
These herbs are taken with warm milk or ghee.
Pitta: Burning sensation is the predominant
symptom. Anger and impatience are mental causes
of Pitta ulcers. A Pitta-reduction diet is advised, along
with bitter herbs like aloe, barberry, chiráyatá, kaóuká,
and mahásudarßhan chúròa; also demulcents like
¤hatávarí.
Kapha: Ulcers are rare for this doßha. Physi-
cal symptoms include white or clear phlegm, nau-
sea, lack of appetite, dull pain, and heaviness. Men-
tal causes include greediness, grief, or emotional at-
tachment. Herbs to digest mucus are recommended
(e.g., t^ikatu, pippalí, black pepper, and dry ginger).
Áma
Áma has been discussed throughout this book.
When áma (undigested food toxin) is present it can
cause many diseases. Thus, one can follow a special
áma-reducing diet that mainly decreases excess
Kapha (because foods that increase Kapha increase
áma). An anti-áma diet is depleting, so the length of
time persons should adhere to this diet depends upon
their physical strength. Kapha doßhas can stay on this
plan for  long periods of time. Pitta doßhas eventu-
ally need to introduce rejuvenation therapies. Váyu
doßhas, the weakest of the constitutions, are advised
to stay on this diet for only 1 week before adding
rejuvenating herbs and foods.  The chart below lists
áma-reducing foods. Foods are chosen from the áma-
reducing column, according to one’s doßha.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
392
a
m
Ã
tei
D
g
n
ic
u
d
e
R
-
a
m
Ã
g
n
ic
u
d
e
R
a
m
Ã
g
n
is
a
e
r
c
n
I
y
rre
b
n
arc
,eta
n
ar
g
e
m
o
p
,tiu
rfe
p
ar
g
,e
m
il
,n
o
m
e
L
stiu
rf
te
e
w
S
ts
e
B
.)atti
P
(
w
a
R
/)a
h
p
a
K
d
n
a
u
y
á
V
(
s
eig
g
e
v
d
e
m
a
et
S
s
e
ciuj
elb
ate
g
e
v
,stu
o
r
p
s
:s
e
cr
u
o
s
r
o
er
u
p
(
e
ciuj
to
rra
c
,s
m
o
o
r
h
s
u
m
,s
e
otato
P
)te
e
w
s
o
ot
si
d
e
xi
m
n
u
;)
n
oitare
d
o
m
ni
ta
e
h
w
d
n
a
sta
o
(
s
niar
g
elo
h
W
ír
a
h
cik
stc
u
d
o
r
p
r
u
olf
etih
w
,s
eirts
a
p
,s
d
a
er
B
ts
a
e
y
g
niniatn
o
c
g
n
ú
M
(
s
n
a
e
b
la
d )
s
n
a
e
b
re
hto
ll
A
n
oitare
d
o
m
ni
s
d
e
e
s
nik
p
m
u
P
s
d
e
e
s
d
n
a
stu
N
-
n
e
k
a
h
s(
reta
w
tr
u
g
o
y
,s
ulih
p
o
dic
A
a
r
k
a
T
)
y
ria
D
-
-
-
d
ral
,s
g
g
e
,y
rtlu
o
p
,h
sif
,ta
e
m
,k
r
o
P
slio
x
alf
d
n
a
d
rats
u
m
,)
n
oitare
d
o
m
(
e
e
h
G
sli
O
y
e
m
o
h
w
a
R
sra
g
u
S
s
e
cip
S
tla
S
)a
et
b
re
h
g.e(
s
diu
qil
m
ra
W
e
eff
o
c
,s
diu
qil
dlo
C

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                             Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds
 393
Thinking of sense objects causes attachment.
From attachment arises longing and from longing anger is born [anger causes fever].
From anger arises delusion; from delusion, loss of memory is caused. From loss of memory, the
discriminative faculty is ruined, and from the ruin of discrimination, one perishes.
Bhagavad Gita Chapter 2; verse 62-63
It is desire, it is anger, born of Rajas Guòa (passion); of unappeasable craving and great sin;
know this as the foe in the world. - Bhagavad Gita Chapter 3; verse 37
Chapter 16
Infections or Wounds
Fever, Abscess, Sinus, Wounds, Inflamed Ulcers,
Fractures/Dislocations
Fever (Jwara)
ever, known as the lord of diseases, is said
to be the most painful of all diseases. Its heat
destroys the ojas (life sap) and afflicts the body,
senses and the mind. It was the first disease of hu-
mans and is the first illness to develop among all dis-
eases. Fevers afflict the entire mind and body. It is
considered the most powerful of all diseases because
it produces various forms of death and is also present
during birth.
The Vedic mythology of fever states that it origi-
nated in Lord Rudra (£hiva—the destroyer of igno-
rance) who unleashed his wrath on the asuras (de-
mons). In the process, the gods (elements of nature)
became afflicted with burning sensations and pain,
and all creatures became unconscious. The gods pro-
pitiated £hiva who restored them to health. He said
that anger will take the form of fever, afflicting people
at birth, death, and when they do not follow their pre-
scribed Áyurvedic life-styles. In short, people living
virtuously will not suffer from fever. Fever causes
emaciation, delusion, and heat discomfort, caused by
unhealthy lifestyle habits and improper conduct.
In conventional medicine (allopathic) fever is also
the predominant and common symptom of all illness.
Fever is seen as the first warning the body gives in
response to any imbalance or infection.
Eight Fever Types
There are 8 major forms of fever: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, Tri-
doßha (Sannipátika 13 types), and external causes
(five types). Both tridoßha fevers and external causes
can be provoked by one or two predominating doßhas,
and the blockage of life sap (ojas). Five varieties of
recurring fevers (vißhamsa jwara) also exist (malaria-
related). Fevers have three stages, which will be de-
tailed later.
Cause and Development of Fever
Improper or excessive use of oil, inflammation, over
fatigue, wasting, indigestion, intake of bad, toxic or
poisonous substances, poor diet, sudden change of
diet or weather, poor conduct, grief, anger, passion,
toxic fumes, malefic planets and stars at birth, spells,
curses, or factors related to child birth (i.e., miscar-
riage, untimely delivery, improper self-care after de-
livery or during the first accumulation of breast milk
after delivery).
Development: The doßhas thus becoming vitiated
and
     1. Enter the stomach and intestines (ámáßhaya)
[each respective doßha, Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, when

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
394
entering the ámáßhaya will aggravate and develop
into its respective doßha fever]
2. Mix with áma (undigested food toxins)
3. Lodge in the plasma or lymph chyle (rasa) due to
their inherent heat.
4. Then, they mix with the plasma, obstructing the
plasma (rasa), hemoglobin (rakta), muscle (máμsa)
and sweat channels (sweda srotas).
5. Next, it pushes the agni digestive fire enzymes
out of the GI tract. The agni then spreads throughout
the body (i.e., into all of the tissues, organs, etc.),
pushing the heat to the skin. This raises the body’s
temperature and stops perspiration. The parallel of
this process in modern science is known as the
increase of metabolic activity. This in turn increases
body temperature.
To learn all necessary information about fever, the
Áyurvedic practitioner (vaidya) must analyze the,
Further, the vaidya needs to have an understand-
ing of fever caused by alcohol, the seven dhátus,
knowledge of the first and later stages of fever and
chronic fevers.
Causes of Fever
 Either the mind or the body can be the cause of a
fever. Mythologically, it is said that the Soma god
causes cold fevers and the Agni god causes hot fe-
vers. Fevers occurring in their respective season are
healed in their respective season. Fevers are easily
healed, difficult to heal, or incurable.
1. Nature of the
disease
9. Symptoms and
signs
2. Precipitating
factors
10. Doßhas involved
3. Origin
11. Features
4. Cause
12. Healing signs
and symptoms
5. Premonitory or
incubatory signs and
symptoms
13. Preventing
relapse
6. Location
14. Reasons for
relapse
7. Strength of the
disease
15. Healing the
relapse
8. Time of
occurrence
Incubatory or Premonitory
Signs and Symptoms
listless
indifference
sluggish
heaviness
lassitude
fainting
low
spirit
distaste
no appetite
teary eyes
body aches
tires easily
indigestion
low strength
excess sleep
drooping
great thirst
tingling teeth
calf pain
forgetfulness
depression
dark vision
moody
hair stands
on end
pale
complexion
excess
yawning
desire hot/
cold things
alternately
desire
pungent,
sour and
salty tastes
impatience
for good
advice
strongly dislike sweets, music, children,
cold water, shade and sun
mental/physical
cold/heat
internal/external
seasonal/unseasonal
curable/incurable

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                             Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds
 395
Symptoms of Air Caused Fevers
(Váyu Jwara)
The general words to describe Váyu fever
symptoms are sharp, cutting, shifting pain,
coldness, and dryness.
Premonitory Doßha Symptoms
Váyu
constant yawning
Pitta
burning eyes
Kapha
loss of hunger
Tridoßha
all symptom
Dual-Doßha
symptoms of both
twisting calf
pain
loss of
sensation
and rigidity
of the feet
contracting
abdominal
or shoulder
pain
loose joints
weak thighs
ringing ears
no
elimination
of sweat,
feces or urine
sharp,
cutting pain
in upper
body
reddish face,
eyes, nails,
urine, throat,
lips, skin,
feces
splitting
back or bone
(and rib)
pain, dry skin
astringent or
bad taste in
the mouth
loss of taste
and lack of
hunger
chest pain
anorexia
desiring sun
headache
dizziness
insomnia
dry cough or
dry heaves
hair stands
on end
dry lips,
mouth, throat
sorrow
dry skin
indigestion
drooping
body parts
intermittent
temple pain
rambling
speech
desiring hot
things
irregular
temperature
irregularity-
acute/mild
shivering
stiff jaw
tingling teeth
irregularity
in onset and
alleviation
occuring after digestion in
the afternoon, dawn, end of
summer
Causes Aggravating Air Fevers (Váyu Jwara)
snuff
assault
fasting
anxiety
grief
excess
exercise
suppression
of natural
urges
staying up
late
poor posture
excess emesis, purgation or
drying enemas
excess sex
Over indulgence of oily,
light, cold foods
excess
blood- letting

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
396
In short, the key words for Pitta fevers include,
heat, sweat, red, yellow, or green, blood, bile,
impatience.
The key words for Kapha fevers are white, cold,
slow minded.
Causes of Multiple Doßha Fevers
Four types of multiple fevers exist.
1. Váyu/Pitta
2. Váyu/Kapha
3. Pitta/Kapha
4. Váyu/Pitta/Kapha
Again, these fevers have 12 subdivisions, when
one, two or all three doßhas are predominant (e.g.,
Váyu/Pitta equal predominance, Váyu/Pitta with
Váyu predominance, Váyu/Pitta/ Kapha with Pitta
and Kapha predominance, etc.)
Causes Aggravating Fire Fevers (Pitta Jwara)
irregular diet
eating with
indigestion
exposure to
hot sun and
fires
exhaustion
excessive hot, salty, sour
and pungent foods
Symptoms of Fire Caused Fevers
(Pitta Jwara)
dizzy
fainting
toxicity
diarrhea
acidity
great thirst
red skin
rashes
burning
sensations
rambling
speech
perspiration
high fever
bile in vomit
expectorating
blood
desiring cold
things
malodorous
breath
delirium
restlessness
naps
hives
giddiness
intoxication
occurs
during
digestion
occurs at noon, midnight,
autumn
pungent
taste
green/yellow
skin, nails,
eyes, urine,
stool
liking cold
things
Causes Aggravating Kapha Fevers
lack of
discipline
lack of
exercise
naps
excess intake of oily, heavy, sweet, slimy,
cold, sour and salty foods
Symptoms of Water Caused Fevers
(Kapha Jwara)
lassitude
nausea
mild fever
sweet taste
running nose
heaviness
glassy/white
eyes
cold
swellings
no hunger or
taste
drowsiness
slight heat
acid belching
obstructed
channels
(srotas)
no
assimilation
of foods
obstructed
feces, urine,
sweat
difficult
breathing
fever after
eating
desiring hot
things
goose bumps
cough
shivering
fainting
stupor
heart coating
slight limb
pain
increased
salivation
cold skin
eruptions
heavy chest
vomiting
poor
digestion
whitish skin,
nails, mucus,
urine, stool
fever during
morning,
evening,
spring
desiring hot
things

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                             Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds
 397
Fevers of all three doßhas begin during their
respective times of day (or night), season, and
digestion (as discussed earlier). The rainy season (mid
July- mid September) is most likely to cause Váyu
fevers. The autumn season (mid September- mid
November) is most likely to produce Pitta fevers. The
spring season (mid March- mid May) is when Kapha
fevers are most likely to occur. When doßha fevers
arise outside their respective season they are more
difficult to heal, unseasonal Váyu fevers are the most
difficult. All Váyu fevers are usually difficult to heal.
During the seasonal fevers, food may be taken (i.e.,
fasting is not necessary). Fasting is advised when
persons are strong and the Sun is weak (rainy, autumn
and winter seasons). It is also necessary for
practitioners to remember that Váyu and Pitta are
weak at the beginning of spring. They are moderately
strong in the middle of the season and strong at the
end of this time. Similarly, Kapha is weak at the
beginning of autumn, moderate in the middle and
strong at the end of this season. Thus, the strength of
the patient with fever is known at these times.
Other causes include combinations of these
factors, or due to,
Two Doßha Fevers (Dwandvaja Jwara)
Fevers caused by two doßhas exhibit symptoms
of both doßhas. Váyu/Pitta fevers cause a desire for
cold things (i.e., Pitta heat predominates). Váyu/
Kapha fevers cause a desire for hot things.
Tridoßha Fevers (Sannipáta Jwara)
Sannipáta Jwaras are caused by the same actions
described above for each doßha. Thus, fevers caused
by all three doßhas exhibit symptoms of all three
doßhas.
During dual or tridoßha fevers, one doßha is
predominant. Thus, the predominant doßha is mainly
focused on when healing the illness.
Difficult to Heal or Incurable Sannipáta
Doßha obstruction or non-elimination, destroyed
agni enzymes, fully manifested signs and symptoms.
Externally Caused Fevers (Ágantu)
Four types of externally caused fevers exist.
1. Trauma or Injuries are associated with Váyu
within vitiated blood (rakta) [and sometimes the other
tissues (dhátus)]. Symptoms include pain, swelling
and discoloration. According to modern science, these
symptoms are explained as inflammations caused by
infections or injuries.
2. Emotions, Infections (e.g., bacteria,
virus, poisons), Evil Spirits
Emotions are caused by vitiated Váyu and Pitta.
They first occur in the mind, then fever develops
during the times and seasons of the respective doßhas.
Modern Psychology calls these events
psychosomatic; the mind affects the health of the
body.
Anger is due to excess Pitta (and sometimes the
other doßhas). Its symptoms include wrath, tremors,
and headache.
Fear is aggravated by Váyu. Its symptoms are
delirium and apprehension.
Grief is aggravated by Váyu. Its symptoms are
excessive crying or heavy breathing.
Lust is caused by excess Pitta, and produces loss
of appetite, burning sensations, frequent breaths,
absence of shame, sleep, intelligence and courage.
Pollen, Dust causes fainting, headaches, vomiting,
intoxicating, wetness and sneezing, and is
irregular diet
fast
poison intake
improper oleation, fomentation, emesis,
purgation, or enema; improper diet or
lifestyle after pañcha karma
improper child deliver or poor diet after
delivery
sudden change in diettoxic fumes or
materials

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
398
caused by all doßhas. This is easily healed.
Poison symptoms include blackened face,
burning sensations, diarrhea, heart pain, disliking
food, thirst, limb pain, extreme weakness, wetness,
epilepsy, caused by all doßhas. This is easily healed
with their antidotes.
Evil spirit’s symptoms include laughing or crying
without reason, and are caused by all three doßhas.
These occur rarely, but are hard to heal.
3. Curses (are caused by all three doßhas).
4. Sorcery or Witchcraft (are caused by all three
doßhas).
The last two types of spells rarely occur. Their
symptoms include thirst and fainting, all signs of
tridoßhic fever and are hard to bear. The Áyurvedic
practitioner (vaidya) determines these last two fevers
by,
1. Observing the deed
2. Hearing about the deed
3. Through inference
4. By healing the fever
Sometimes eternal fevers remain exogenous.
Sometimes they later become associated with the
doßhas. Its premonitory symptom is pain. Fever may
occur first, then the symptoms, or vice versa.
External Fever Therapies
Spiritual therapies are used for externally caused
fevers. These therapies include rites, rituals, good
deeds, fasting, light meals, and herbal decoctions.
Three Stages of Fever
Three stages of a fever include,
1. Association with áma (undigested foods)
2. Metabolic transformation
3. Non-association with áma.
During this stage, one is not to take naps,
bath, massage, heavy foods, sexual intercourse,
anger, wind, exercise, or astringent tastes.
These symptoms will generally
appear by the eighth day
Recovery From Fever
Healing from fevers is easy when persons are
strong, the doßha is mildly increased and there are no
secondary complications (áma fevers). Symptoms of
fevers with áma include excess urine, constipation
or diarrhea, and loss of hunger. Fever, thirst, delirium,
difficult breathing, dizziness, and nausea are
symptoms of fever with heated doßhas. Fevers that
are long lasting, recurring after seven days or appear
after fasts are fevers without áma.
First Stage Fever Symptoms (With Áma)
emaciation
indigestion
drowsiness
body and
abdominal
heaviness
heart feels
impure/heavy
constant
temperature
laziness
salivation
nausea
acute attack
rigidity
numbness
no
hunger/taste-
lessness
unformed
stool
heavy
stomach
excessive
urine
no elimination of wastes,
doßhas, sweat
Second Stage Fever Symptoms (Pachyamána)
excess
fever/thirst
mucus in
feces
difficult
breathing
delirium
giddiness
Third Stage Fever Symptoms (Niráma)
reduced temperature
appetite
elimination of
doßhas and wastes
lightness

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                             Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds
 399
Remittent/Intermittent Fevers
(Viähama Jwara)
Doßhas and Dhátus Fevers - Malarial Fevers
Fevers are generally caused by all three doßhas.
However, due to one’s doßha, the fevers may manifest
as described above in the various tissues (dhátus).
After tridoßhic fevers subside a slight residue of the
deranged doßhas and weakness exists. Through
improper healing measures and poor diet, Váyu
becomes vitiated and re-aggravated. Further, this can
cause five fevers lodged in any or all of the five Kapha
sites (stomach and intestines, the chest, throat, head,
and joints).
Modern medicine sees remittent fevers as different
types of malarias caused by mosquitos (various
species of plasmodium). The mosquitos infect the
blood and act upon the red blood cells. These blood
infections affect the various supporting elements of
the tissues (dhátus). Malaria is considered a parasitic
infection, while typhoid is classified as a bacterial
infection.
Fevers of plasma, hemoglobin, muscle and fat are
easy to heal. Bone and marrow fevers are more
difficult to heal. The six fevers are
1. Santata Jwara/Plasma (Rasa) Fevers: This fever
starts in the plasma (and sometimes in the other
dhátus), quickly spreading to the three doßhas, seven
dhátus, urine and feces. The fever is continuous and
hard to tolerate. They are caused by rasa spreading
the aggravated doßhas throughout the body and are
difficult to bear. If purified, Váyu fevers last for 7 or
14 days, Pitta fevers last for 9 or 10 days and Kapha
fevers last for 11 or 12 days. This fever is continuous
due to the vitiated rasa spreading throughout the body.
For all fevers of plasma origin, fasting is the first
healing therapy. Various forms of this fever disappear
for a day or two, then recur during their aggravating
time of day and season. They last for another seven
or 14 days. Recurrence is caused by improper
convalescing and diet.
Symptoms include heaviness, misery, anxiety,
prostration, vomiting, anorexia, malaise, and
yawning.
2. Satata Jwara/Hemoglobin (Rakta) Fevers:
Vitiated doßhas reside in the blood or hemoglobin,
deranging the blood. These fevers are caused and
develop according to the time of day or season. They
appear twice within 24 hours; they can develop and
become healed merely by the time of day or season,
or by attending to the aggravated dhátu or one’s
prak^iti (constitution) with appropriate therapies.
(Sometimes called Santataka Jwara)
Symptoms include blood, pimples, thirst,
burning, discoloration, giddiness, intoxication,
delirium.
3. Anyeduähka Jwara/Muscle (Máåsa) Fevers:
     One’s prak^iti, dhátus, the doßhas, or seasons can
cause the muscle channel (máåsavaha srota)
obstructions. These fevers occur once a day.
Symptoms 
include 
burning 
thirst,
unconsciousness, wetness, diarrhea, foul smell, body
spasms.
4. Trtíyaka Jwara/Fat (Medas) Fevers: These are
Váyu-caused fevers, which manifest every other day.
(Symptoms of Váyu/Pitta predominant—sudden head
pain, Váyu/Kapha predominate—sudden pain in the
entire back, Kapha/Pitta predominant—sudden pain
in the upper back or lumbo-sacral joint).
Symptoms include excess sweat, thirst, delirium,
frequent vomiting, dislike of one’s own body odor,
wetness, anorexia.
5. Chaturthaka Jwara/Marrow (Majjá), Bone
(Asthi) and Fat (Medas): When the doßhas are in the
fat, marrow, and bones, fever occurs every fourth day,
manifesting either with Váyu excess (beginning in
the head), or Kapha excess (beginning in the calves).
Some say only when doßhas are in the marrow does
fever occur every fourth day.
Fevers caused by doßhas simultaneously in bone
and marrow are called Viparyaya Jwara, which is of
three kinds (one for each doßha). These fevers last
for 2 days, disappear for a day and then reappear,
continuing this cycle.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
400
     Some authorities believe these three fevers are
caused by afflictions of the previous alternate dhátus
(i.e., afflicted rakta dhátu causes anyedyußhka (fat)
jwara; muscle afflictions cause t^itíyaka (bone
fevers); doßhas in the fat (medas) tissue cause
chaturthaka (marrow) fever.
Symptoms of bone fevers include diarrhea and
vomiting, bone pains, unusual sounds, and body
spasms. Symptoms of marrow fever include hiccup,
asthma, bronchitis, dark vision, vital organ pains,
outer coldness, and internal burning.
6. Ojas Nirodhaja: The life sap or ojas tissue
(¤hukra dhátu) may also be blocked by Váyu and
Pitta. Symptoms include shivering, numbness,
unconsciousness, drowsiness, delirium, slight pain,
and ejaculation. Váyu fevers appear every 7 days, Pitta
fevers arise every 10 days, Kapha excess fevers appear
every 12 days.
Symptoms of Relief From Fever
When fevers begin to be relieved, the doßhas in
the dhátus (tissues) create abnormalities and become
liquefied. Persons begin to breathe heavily, sweat
profusely, moan, vomit, and shake. They become
delirious, have unusual body movements, experience
heat and cold, become angry, have noisy, malodorous
diarrhea, become pale, and lose consciousness. Fevers
may leave suddenly or gradually. Certain fevers can
produce anxiety, so persons must be treated with care.
After the fever is healed the person gradually returns
to a normal state of health.
Fevers that heal suddenly are termed “healed by
crises” in modern medicine. When persons take
antibiotics to kill bacteria, viruses, etc., these
pathogens are suddenly killed. When they die, they
release various toxins into the bodily systems. The
body reacts to this sudden release of toxins, and
develops various disorders. (When fever is healed
gradually the toxins are slowly released into the body,
giving it time to adapt and excrete them).
Symptoms of Healed Fever
Lightness, normal functioning of the mind and
senses, normal sweating, appetite, itching head,
absence of exhaustion, delusion and heat, mouth
ulcers, and discomfort.
Therapies
Remedy for All Fevers:
Sudarßhan Chúròa
The Áyurvedic seers have created this formula for
all fevers (intermittent and other doßha and dhátu
fevers). This formula is a combination of 48 herbs
(the main herb used is chiráyatá). Sudarßhan chúròa
is taken with cold water. On the right index finger of
Lord Vißhnu resides a powerful discus that destroys
all kinds of enemies. It is called Sudarßhan Chakra.
Because this herbal remedy destroys all kinds of
fevers, it was named after this discus or chakra.
Sudarßhan chúròa can even be used during the first
stages of fevers. According to the experience of some
modern Áyurvedic doctors, sudarßhan chúròa works
best for the malarial (remittent) fevers; others prefer
sitopaladi.
Sitopaladi Chúròa
For fevers associated with flus and respiratory
disorders, sitopaladi chúròa works best. It is up to
each modern practitioner to decide whether
sudarßhan or sitopaladi chúròa works better for the
client. A recipe for typhoid or malaria (recurring
fevers) is 1/2 tsp. sitopaladi chúròa with warm
water—3 times daily for 8 weeks. The first 10 days
one follows a liquid fast. Within 3 to 4 days, persons
should feel better. After the 8-week program the fever
will not occur.
Thus, regardless of the type of fever (i.e., Váyu,
Pitta, remittent, etc.), sudarßhan and sitopaladi
chúròas are the only herbal therapies needed. De-
pending on the doßha(s) causing the fever, persons
are advised to follow the corresponding food and
lifestyle guidelines that balance and maintain their
health.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                             Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds
 401
Abscesses (Vidradhi)
Causes: Eating stale, very hot, and dry foods, (caus-
ing burning during digestion); lying on an uneven
bed, foods and life-styles that vitiate the blood. The
doßhas become aggravated and weaken the skin,
muscles, fat, bones, ligaments, blood, and tendons,
producing swelling in any one or several of them.
This occurs either inside the body (with severe pain)
or on the outer body. Abscesses are either round or
wide. Six forms of abscesses exist: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, Tridoßha, blood, or trauma caused.
Symptoms:
External: Forming anywhere on the body, being
difficult to bear, they are hard and raised.
Internal: More difficult to bear, deep seated, hard,
growing upwards (like an anthill), near the navel,
urinary bladder, liver, spleen, heart, abdomen, groin,
kidneys, or rectum. It is very serious.
Váyu: Severe pain, blackish-red, takes a long time
to grow, forming and discharging pus, irregularly
placed, unevenly shaped, painful, cutting, rotating,
spreading easily, gaseous, throbbing, and producing
sounds.
Pitta: Red, coppery or black, causing thirst,
delusion, fever, burning, quick to grow, form, and
discharge pus.
Kapha: White, itching, with nausea, cold, stiffness
of the body, excessive yawning, loss of taste,
heaviness of the body, slow to grow, form, and
discharge pus.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all the doßhas simulta-
neously.
Blood: Surrounded by black eruptions, blue
colored, severe burning, pain, fever, and other
symptoms of aggravated Pitta. It is external in all cases
except those developing in the uterus.
Trauma: Váyu becomes aggravated from the force
of assault, unsuitable foods or lifestyle. It displaces
the heat at the trauma site, aggravating Pitta, and
causing symptoms of Pitta and blood. This causes
the severest secondary complications.
Depending upon the site of the abscess will de-
termine the secondary symptoms.
The early, middle, and advanced stages of abscess
development are similar to inflammatory edema. In
the advanced stages of abscesses localized above the
navel, they expel pus or blood through the mouth,
and when present below the navel, discharges are
through the rectum.
The features of the doßhas and of that which is
exuded is similar to ulcers (rather than from trauma).
Tridoßhic abscesses in the heart, navel, urinary bladder
and those that have burst after maturing (either inside
or outside), are unable to be healed. Also, those that
burst inside and expel their contents, those arising in
debilitated persons, and those that have secondary
complications cannot be healed.
Therapies: These therapies are the same as for sinus
(next section).
Abscess
Complication
near navel
hiccup
in bladder
difficulty eliminating/foul
smell
in liver
difficult breathing
in spleen
difficulty exhaling
in pancreas
thirst
all over
body
sharp pain/ rigidity
in heart
great delusion,
unconsciousness, cough,
friction/pain in the heart
on
front/top
of stomach
pain/gurgling in upper
abdomen, pain in ribs and
shoulders
in groin
stiff thighs
in kidneys
sharp pain in waist and back,
rib pain
in rectum
obstruction of gas

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
402
Sinus (Náæí-Vraòa)
If persons neglect abscesses or swellings sinus
problems can develop. Five forms of náæí exist: Váyu,
Pitta, Kapha, Tridoßha, and £halyaja.
Causes and Symptoms:
Váyu: Rough, short-mouthed size, aching pain
within the sinus, secreting a frothy matter, increasing
by night with aching pain, thirst.
Pitta: Lethargy, heat, piercing pain. Fever occurs
at the beginning and there are large amounts of hot,
yellow sinus secretions. Secretions develop more
frequently during the night.
Kapha: The sinus is hard, itching, and slightly
painful or numb. An excess of thick, shiny, white
colored pus secretions exist, and is expelled more at
night.
Dual and Tridoßha: Symptoms of two or three
doßhas. Tridoßhic symptoms are considered severe.
£hlayaja: Foreign matter (e.g., dirt, bone, splinter,
etc.) becoming fixed in a body part and still visible,
opens the skin and creates a form of a sinus.
Symptoms include constant pain, instant secretion
of a sort of hot, bloody, frothy liquid matter.
Therapies:
General: In each case the therapy is three-fold.
First antiseptics are used to wash the wound, then
antibiotics cleanse and balance the doßhas and finally
healing measures are applied.
Váyu: Constantly wash the ulcer with an herbal
decoction of da¤hmúl (i.e., an antiseptic). Sesame oil
cooked with turmeric, kaóuká, balá, rock salt, myrrh,
and bilwa are used to purify the ulcer by filling it
with the medicated oil (i.e., antibiotic and doßha
balancing). The lesion is constantly washed with a
decoction of triphalá, amaltas, and milk. Finally oil
cooked in neem, viæa´ga, chitrak, pippalí, vachá, and
mustard are applied to promote healing. [Aßhþáñga
H^idayam therapy]
Charak first uses herb poultices including garlic,
cloves, chitrak, and pañchmúla. Then the channels
with pus are cut opened with a knife and bandaged
with sesame paste and turmeric. A poultice is then
applied of licorice, sesame, salt, and devadaru,
da¤hmúl, garlic, cloves, and chitrak.
Pitta: According to Aßhóáñga, first the sinus is
washed with herbal decoction of mañjißhþhá, arjuna,
mango, and licorice for antiseptic purposes. Then a
poultice of guæúchí, licorice, and sesame paste is
applied as an antibiotic and to heal the excess doßha.
Finally, healing is effected by medicated ghee cooked
in milk with herbs of mañjißhþhá, poppy seeds, vidárí
kand, turmeric triphalá, and licorice. [16 parts milk,
to 4 parts ghee, to 1 part herbs (all combined)]
Kapha: First, antiseptics are used in a decoction
form. Herbs include neem, guæúchí, mango leaves,
and chitrak. Next, antibiotic therapy includes barley
flour, turmeric, and sesame paste applied as a
poultice. This purifies or balances the doßhas. Finally,
healing is achieved through a medicated oil of myrrh,
chiráyatá, danti, black or sea salt, and triv^it.
Tridoßha: Will not respond to therapies.
Shlayaja: First the foreign matter is removed, then
the sinus is cleansed and purified with a plaster of
sesame paste, raw honey, and ghee. Herbs are cooked
into the oil (bilwa, musta, and other herbs used in
the above Pitta therapy).
Breast Abscess (Stana Vidradhi)
In the same manner as described above, the
doßhas enter the open channels of the female breast
during pregnancy or after delivery. They produce a
hard swelling in the breasts (having features of
external abscesses). This generally does not happen
in young girls because the channels in their breasts
are still small.
Therapies are treated like vraòa (ulcer), but
without applying the warm poultice. Incision may
be applied by qualified persons, being careful not to
injure the milk ducts.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                             Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds
 403
Wounds (Vraòa)
Causes: Two types of wounds exist: internal and ex-
ternal. Internal wounds are caused by excesses of the
doßhas. When Váyu, Pitta or Kapha becomes
excessed and move to the external passages, they
cause innate wounds. When external wounds are not
able to be healed and have internal symptoms the
same therapies as innate wounds are applied.
Symptoms:
Váyu: These wounds cause stiffness, are hard to the
touch, slow to develop pus, have great and piercing
pain, throbbing, and are black in color.
Pitta: Thirst, confusion, fever, sweating, burning,
impurity, tearing, malodorous, and pus-filled.
Kapha: Slimy, heavy, oily, wet, with mild pain,
pale, with slight fluid, and chronic.
These two forms of wounds have 20 varieties, in-
cisable/unincisable, defective/undefective, in vital
parts/not in vital parts, open/closed, severe/mild, ooz-
ing/non-oozing, poisoned/non-poisoned, even/uneven
location, with/without pouch, and raised/depressed.
Five variations of wounds exist:
Defective wounds: Twelve types exist: white, nar-
row or depressed passages, very wide passages, gray-
ish, blue, black, red, numerous boils, difficult to heal,
bottleneck shaped, and malodorous.
Locations: Eight types, in the skin, blood vessels,
flesh, fat, bone, ligaments, vital parts, and viscera.
Discharges: Fourteen types, lymph, water, pus, blood,
yellow oozing, reddish, brownish, ochre, blue, green,
oily, rough, black, and white.
 Complications: Sixteen types, visarpa (erysipelas),
paralysis, blood vessel blockages, tetanus, confusion,
insanity, wound pain, fever, thirst, lockjaw, cough,
vomiting, diarrhea, hiccup, difficult breathing, and
trembling.
Defects: Twenty types, preventing healing, moist
ligaments, excess blood vessel fluid, deepness, with
maggots, bone cracking, with foreign bodies, toxic,
spreading, and scratches that produce tearing. Other
types include, skin friction, hair friction, faulty
bandage, over oiling, and emaciation from excess
reduction therapy. Further types are, indigestion, over
eating, eating incompatible foods, unsuitable foods,
grief, anger, naps, excess exercise, insufficient
exercise, and sex.
Examination falls into three categories,
Inspection: Noticing client’s age, complexion, body
parts, sense organs, and touch.
Questions: Asking about the cause of wounds,
development, pain, and digestive power.
Touch: Noting softness/hardness and coldness/
warmth.
Healing is possible if the wound is in the skin or
muscle when in an easy place to treat, when young,
without complications, due to a wise patient, and if it
is immediately tended to. Herbs include licorice,
tagar, red sandalwood, jaóámáòçhí, turmeric, barberry,
and kút.
Therapies:
General: First, emesis, purgation, enema, and
surgery are used depending upon the doßhas involved
and the strength of the person. Wounds become
quickly healed from these cleansing measures.
Thirty-six Measures: These measures include anti-
swelling, six surgeries, pressing, cooling, uniting,
fomenting, pacifying, probing, cleansing, healing,
detox paste, healing paste, cleaning oil, healing oil,
leaves, bandages, diet, elevation/depression,
cauterization, hard and soft aromas, hard and soft
pastes, powders, colors, and healing.
Inflammation—when seen as an initial sign,
blood-letting prevents the wound from developing.
Toxins are cleansed first (except Váyu caused wounds,
which one needs to eat ghee and Váyu- reducing de-
coctions) using the appropriate pañcha karma therapy.
Paste of ¤hatávarí, sandalwood, parched barley flour

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
404
mixed with ghee are useful to cool inflammations. If
this is ineffective then the herbs are applied as a warm
poultice (of parched barley flour and ghee), that rip-
ens the wound. When it is ripe, it is pierced. If one
has a delicate condition, then instead of piercing, lin-
seed oil and guggul are applied to the wound to al-
low it to open on its own.
Operations—Six types of operations exist:
incisions, puncturing, excision, scraping, scarification,
and suturing. Incisions are used for sinuses, ripened
inflammations, intestinal wounds or obstructions,
swellings with foreign bodies inside. Puncture is
useful for ascites, ripe and blood tumors, blood
disorders, boils. Excision is applied to protruded
wounds with thick margins, raised and hard,
hemorrhoids. Scraping is done on leukoderma and
other skin diseases. Scarification is performed on
Váyu blood disorders, glands, pimples, urticarial
rashes (i.e., burning, itching, stinging, smooth
patches), red patches, skin diseases, injured parts, and
swellings. Suturing is needed for bowels, abdomen,
and other deep or invasive surgery.
Pressing—any wound with a pouch or small
opening is pressed with a paste of wheat flour and
peas. Herbs include onion, archu, turmeric, guggul,
and licorice.
Cooling—balá paste or balá—water sprinkling
is used when heat is present. For blood-related
wounds, cold ghee or cold milk is applied.
Long Wounds—paste of honey and ghee is evenly
applied. Then mañjißhþhá, turmeric, neem, tulsí (holy
basil), harítakí bark, and guggul are placed over this.
A bandage is then wrapped over the wound.
Small Wounds, Much Oozing, Pouchy—(not
within vital parts), soft or hard probing is advised.
Soft probes are soft plant stalks, hard probes are iron
rods. Deep muscle probing also needs hot iron rods
for cauterization.
Odorous, Discolored, Much Oozing & Pain—
These are said to be caused by uncleanliness. They
need to be cleansed and kept clean with decoctions
of triphalá, balá and neem. Paste of sesame, salt,
turmeric, and neem are also good cleansers. [Black,
pale, painful, raised, and protruded (and not very red)
wounds are considered already clean and not in need
of cleansing.]
Leaves & Bandages—arjuna, neem, and pippalí
leaves or sterile bandages are used to cover wounds.
   Depressed Wounds—galactogogues, vitalizers,
and bulk promoting herbs (e.g., ¤hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá, and ¤hweta musali) are used to raise
depressions. To depress raised wounds guggul,
triphalá, and castor oil are used.
   Excess Hemorrhaging—(after excision) tumors,
Kapha nodules, glands, stiffness and Váyu disorders,
wounds with pus or lymph, deep and firm,
cauterization is needed.
  Fractured Bones/Dislocated Joints—after the
bone or joint is set, herbs of aloe, guggul, and lodhra
are applied as a paste and bandaged (dipped in ghee).
Then the bone or joint is immobilized with splints,
casts, etc. Pitta-reducing foods are eaten. Other
complications are also to be tended to.
Váyu (Dry, Pain, Stiff): Massage, fomentation, bolus,
poultices, and ointments with ghee, milk, and balá,
guæúchí, and ¤hatávarí, sprinkling with da¤hmúl,
ingesting ghee and sesame oil.
Váyu with Burning and Pain: Warm paste of linseed
and sesame oil, dipped in milk, roasted barley flour.
Herbs used include mañjißhþhá, neem, and onion.
Pitta: Oils, paste and water sprinkling using cold,
sweet and bitter herbs (sandalwood, licorice, balá,
viæa´ga, kuþaj, triphalá, musta, cardamom), sesame
oil and ghee, ingesting ghee and purgation. A Pitta-
reduction diet (i.e., no salt, hot, sour, pungent, heavy
or burning foods or drinks) and no sexual intercourse,
in order to heal these disorders. Cool foods and drinks,
naps, and rest are also useful healers.
Kapha: Oil and water sprinkling with astringent,
pungent, hot, and rough herbs; emesis and other
reduction therapies, digestive herbs.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                             Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds
 405
Inflamed Ulcers (Dvivraniya)
Causes: Ulcers fall under two categories, internal and
external.
Internal: Causes may be due to excesses of blood,
Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, or Tridoßha.
External: Causes are due to bites from animals,
accidents, and injuries, poisons, etc. Cooling therapies
are immediately used to cool the expanding heat of
the ulcer. This heat is Pitta related and may be pacified
with a mixture of honey and ghee applied directly on
the wound for 1 week. After that, the appropriate
internal therapies are followed.
Symptoms: Sixteen forms of ulcers exist. Pain is
associated with each, while specific symptoms vary
from form to form.
Váyu: Brown or bright red, cold, thin, and slimy
secretions, tension, throbbing, pricking, and piercing
pain inside the ulcer, and feeling of expansion.
Pitta: Bluish-yellow, grows quickly, burning, oozing,
redness, and surrounded by small yellow pustule
eruptions.
Kapha: Gray, extended, raised around the
circumference, itching, thick, compact, covered by
vessels and membranes, slightly painful, hard, cold,
thick, white, and slimy secretions.
Blood: Looks like a lump of red coral, surrounded
by black vesicles and pustules, malodorous, painful,
feels like fumes rise from it, bleeding, and other Pitta
symptoms.
Váyu/Pitta: Red or bright red, pricking and burning
pain, feels like fumes rise from it, bright red or bluish
yellow secretions.
Váyu/Kapha: Itching, piercing pain, heavy, hard or
callused, constant exuding of cold, slimy secretions.
Pitta/Kapha: Heavy, hot, yellow, burning, pale, or
yellow secretion.
Váyu/Blood: Dry, thin, piercing pain, loss of sensation,
blood, or bright red secretions.
Pitta/Blood: The color of the surface cream of ghee,
fishy smell, spreads, hot, and blackish secretions.
Kapha/Blood: Red, heavy, slimy, glossy, hard or cal-
lused, itching, or bloody yellow secretions.
Váyu/Pitta/Blood: Throbbing, pricking and burning
pain, thin yellowish bloody secretions, with sensa-
tion, and feeling like fumes arise.
Váyu/Kapha/Blood: Itching, throbbing, tingling, thick,
gray, and blood-streaked secretions.
Pitta/Kapha/Blood: Redness, itching, pus forming,
burning, thick, gray,1 and bloody secretions.
Tridoßha: Various pains, secretions, and colors asso-
ciated with all three doßhas.
Váyu/Pitta/Kapha/Blood: Burning and piercing pains,
throbbing, itching, complete loss of sensation, red-
ness, pus forming, various colors, pains, and secre-
tions common to all doßhas and the blood.
Shuddha-vrana: (clean ulcer) Ulcers that are the same
color as the back of the tongue, smooth, painless,
soft, shiny, well shaped, and without secretions.
Therapies: Sixty therapies and surgical methods exist,
including fasting and light meals, plastering, irrigation
or spraying, anointing, fomentation, massage, large
and small poultices, inducing oozing, draining. Other
therapies are internal intake of oils and ghee, emesis,
and purgatives. Surgical methods include excision,
opening abscesses, bursting, scraping, extraction,
probing, vein puncturing, inducing discharge, suturing
adhesion, and pressing.
    Further methods include stopping bleeding,
cooling, suturing, decoction washes, plugs, pastes,
external ghee and oils, internal herbal use, dusting
and rubbing with herbs. Other methods are, growing
hairs, fumigation, raisings, destroying, softening,
hardening, caustics, cauterization, blackening, and
healing with scars. Additional methods include
burning (cauterization), enemas, urethral and vaginal
injections, bandaging, leaf application, vermifuges,
rejuvenatives, disinfectants, and ¤hiro virechana
(nasal evacuation). Further therapies are, snuff,
gargling or holding herbs in the mouth, smoking,
honey/ghee, yantras (physical therapy machines),
nutrition, and protection from malicious spirits.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
406
Discussed here are the more common internal ulcers
that inflame the stomach’s tissue lining. Usually they
are Pitta disorders causing pain, burning, or bleeding.
They are most commonly caused by stress, worry,
working too hard, spicy and sour foods, alcohol, and
smoking.
General: Bland diet, whole grains, digestible foods,
milk fast (if one is strong). Nightshades (e.g., toma-
toes, eggplants, white potatoes), citrus fruit (lemons,
limes and grapefruits), and bananas are avoided.
Herbs to soothe the mucus lining include aloe gel,
¤hatávarí, and balá. Also useful is pravál pißhti,
¤ha´kh bhasma (conch shell ash), and súktí bhasma
(sea shell ash).
Váyu: Váyu-reducing foods, liquids, herbs and spices.
Pitta: Pitta-reducing foods, aloe, barberry, kaóuká,
ámalakí, and chiráyatá.
Kapha: These conditions may be caused by emo-
tional issues like sadness, greediness, or attachment.
Herbs include hot and pungents like t^ikatu and
cloves.
Bone Fractures and Joint Dislocations
(Bhagnam and Sandhi Mukti)
Causes: This is due to falling, pres-
sure, blow, violent jerking, or bites.
Six forms of dislocations exist: fric-
tion, looseness, abnormal projection,
lateral and oblique dislocation.
Twelve types of fractures exist.
Dislocation Symptoms:
General: Persons experience loss of movement,
extension, flexibility, rotation, and painful when
moved or touched.
Joint Friction: (utplißhtam) This is due to two joint
extremities causing swelling on either side of the joint.
Various pains are felt at night.
Looseness: (vi¤hlißhtam) Symptoms include slight
swelling with constant pain, and poor functioning of
the joint.
Lateral displacement: (vivartitam) Symptoms are pain
and uneven joint setting.
Dislodged Bone: (adha-kßhiptam) Excruciating pain,
dislocated bone looseness, and hanging from the joint
can develop.
Abnormal Projection: (ati-kßhiptam) The dislocated
bone moves away from the joint and is very painful.
Oblique Dislocation: (tiryak-kßhiptam) Projection or
displacement of bone on one side causes unbearable
pain.
Fracture Symptoms: (Kánda-bhagnam)
General: Symptoms include violent swelling around
the seat of the fracture, throbbing, pulsation, abnormal
position of the fractured limb with unbearable pain
when touched. Other experiences include cracking
sounds when pressure is applied, looseness of limb,
various pains, and discomfort in all positions.
The most difficult to heal are impacted, drooping,
severed, and shattered fractures. Also, displacement
or looseness in children or in very old or weak persons,
those suffering from asthma, skin problems, or
kßhata-kßhíòa (lung abscess or injury) are difficult to
heal.
Symptoms that cannot be healed include pelvic
bone fracture or dislocation, compound fracture of
thigh or skull flat bones. Other unhealable symptoms
include frontal bone fractures (into small pieces) or
dislocation, simple breast bone, back bone, temporal
and cranial bone fractures.
Bulging: (Karkatam) Pressing or bending the
fractured bone at its two joint extremities causes
bulging at the middle of the fracture, resembling a
knot.
Upward Projection: (a¤hvakaròam) Symptoms
include an upward protrusion and looks like the ear
of a horse.
Shattered Fragments: (churnitam) Palpitations and
cracking sounds develop.
Smashed Bones: (pichitam) Large swellings appear.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                             Chapter 16: Infections/Wounds
 407
Splintered: (asthi-challitam) The bone covering or skin
(periosteum) is splintered off.
Compound Fracture: (kánda-bhagnam) Bones that
are completely broken, broken in several places, or
several bones projecting through the skin are these
symptoms.
Impacted Fracture: (majjánugatam) A fragment or
broken bone pierces the bone, digging out the marrow.
Drooping: (ati-pátitam) The fractured bone droops
or hangs.
Arched: (vakram) The unloosened bone is bent,
forming an arch.
Severed: (chinnam) One joint extremity of the bone
is severed.
Holes: (pátitam) A slight fracture is pierced with many
holes with excruciating pain.
Greenstick Fracture: (sphutitam) Cracked, swollen,
pain, and prickliness develop.
Bending of gristle or cartilage is called a fracture,
long bones are usually severed, skull bones are
generally cracked, teeth are usually splintered off.
Therapies:
All dislocations or fractures are manually
manipulated to replace bones in their proper position
and then bandaged.
Bandaging: Fractures are dressed and bandaged
weekly during the winter, every fifth day during spring
and autumn, and every fourth day in the summer. The
affected area is first covered with a piece of linen
soaked in ghee, then the splint is applied and properly
bandaged. Bandages are made neither too loose nor
too tight.
Healing fractures or dislocations is difficult when
they occur in Váyu doßhas, in the over-indulging
person and in one who eats too little. Fractures are
also difficult to heal in those who have fever,
abdominal distention, suppress urine or stool (and
similar disorders). Fractures in young persons, those
with only slight imbalances of the doßhas or in the
winter are easily healed within 1 month. Healing in
mid-life takes 2 months, while elderly people require
3 months to heal.
Salt, acidic, pungent and alkaline foods and spices
need to be avoided. Rest, shade oily foods and drinks,
and other Váyu-decreasing foods and habits need to
be followed. Foods include rice, ghee, or boiled milk.
Herbs include mañjißhþhá, red sandalwood, ¤hatávarí,
flaxseed, horsetail, solomon’s seal, and comfrey, and
may be taken internally (every morning with ghee)
and used as an external plaster.
Herbs of the nyagrodhádi group are used for
bandaging and washing. Herbs in this group include
licorice, lodhra, pípal tree, guggul (salai tree), Indian
persimmon (tinduka/temru), mango, arjuna, and
harítakí. The tree bark of each of these herbs is used.
Washing: A cold decoction of the above herbs is used
to wash the fractured part. When pain is great,
da¤hmúl or mahánáráyan oil (oil is warmed in the
winter) are applied to the fracture. If the fracture has
ulcerated complications, astringent herbs mixed with
honey and ghee are also used (such as raspberry,
ámalakí, arjuna, and musta). Crushed or dislocated
joints are not shaken. Cold washes, plasters and oils
are used.
Ghee: Is first used on fractures and dislocations
before they are reset.
Discrimination, courage, strong will and knowledge of the soul etc. are the ideal therapies for the mind.
Aßhóáñga H^idayam Sú. Ch. 1: ver. 26

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
408

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                           Chapter 17: Respiratory System
 409
Modern science is based on the study of physical principles to conquer nature.
Ãyurveda requires deep spiritual insight in order to live in harmony with natures.
Anonymous
Chapter 17: Respiratory System
Cough, Breathing Disorders, Asthma, Hiccup, TB, Cold
Cough (Kása)
Introduction:
here are 5 kinds of coughs: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, those caused by lung injury, and
those caused by wasting (i.e., pulmonary
tuberculosis).
Premonitory Signs: Throat irritation, loss of taste or
appetite, thorny feeling in the throat.
Development: When the downward movement of
Váyu (Apána) is obstructed, it begins to move up-
ward to the chest and throat, and eventually to the
head. This affects the eyes, back, chest, ribs, and even-
tually comes out the mouth as a cough.
Váyu Cough: As the accumulation of Váyu in-
creases into aggravation, dryness is produced in the
chest, throat, mouth, ribs, heart, and head. The dry
air also causes delusion, mental agitation, loss of
voice, and results in a dry cough with violent bouts,
great pain, noise, and hair standing on end. A dry spit
may be coughed out, which reduces the coughing
fits.
Pitta Cough: Yellow color in the eyes and mu-
cus, a bitter taste in the mouth, fever, dizziness, vom-
iting of bile and blood, thirst, hoarseness, fumes emit-
ted from the mouth, acidity, and continuous cough-
ing that makes persons stare upwards.
Kapha Cough: Mild pain in the chest, head, and
heart region; heaviness, throat coating, debility, runny
nose, vomiting, loss of appetite and taste, hair stand-
ing on end; thick, sticky, white, or clear mucus is ex-
pelled.
Lung Injury Cough: From trauma caused by fight-
ing, or strenuous activities. Váyu becomes increased,
mixes with Pitta, and produces coughs. Symptoms
include large amounts of yellow or black blood mixed
with mucus. It is dry, nodular, and foul smelling.
     Severe pain is present in the throat, chest (i.e.,
feeling like pricking needles), joints, and ribs. Other
symptoms include fever, difficult breathing, thirst,
hoarseness, tremors, and cooing sounds. Strength or
vigor steadily diminishes. One’s digestion and de-
sire for eating is reduced, and poor complexion de-
velops. Persons become emaciated, and there is blood
in the urine, with sharp back and waist pains.
Wasting Cough: This is caused by all the doßhas,
but mainly Váyu. Mucus is putrefied, pus-like, yel-
low, foul smelling, and is green or red. The ribs and
heart feel as though sliding and falling down, and an
unreasonable desire for hot or cold comforts devel-
ops. Persons overeat but still lose strength. The face
is oily, yet has a pleasing radiant look and glittering
eyes. Once this symptom appears, tuberculosis gradu-
ally begins to develop. If a person is emaciated, or if
tuberculosis (k¤hayaja) lingers for a long time, it is
considered harmful. If aggressively treated with all
the appropriate measures during the early stages, a
person can be completely cured.
If one doßha is the cause of any of these 3 types of
coughs, the illness can be healed. If two doßhas cause
any of these coughs, the illness can be controlled. If
unattended, doßha-caused coughs lead to lung injury
resulting in TB.
Therapies
Váyu: When persons are undernourished,
excess Váyu is reduced with ghee, oil enemas, a

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
410
wholesome diet including basmati rice, whole wheat,
barley gruel (with bilwa, ginger, da¤hmúl, chitrak,
jaggery, and black salt), warm and moist vegetables,
and sesame oil. Persons should drink boiled milk,
lassi (1/2 yogurt to 1/2 water), or sour fruit juices—
all mixed with sugar cane.
Ghee should be mixed with Váyu-reducing herbs
including a¤hwagandhá, ginger, pippalí, licorice,
calamus, viæa´ga, black salt, chitrak, da¤hmúl,
kapikachhú, balá, guæúchí, triphalá, t^ikatu,
gokßhura, and ¤hatávarí. These herbs promote
digestion and reduce coughs. Raw honey and cane
sugar can also be mixed with the herbs and barley.
[Traditional texts speak of barley as reducing Váyu;
however, modern experience indicates most Váyu
doßhas find that barley causes gas. If needed white
basmati rice is an easily digested and nutritious
substitute.]
Other therapies include massage, water sprinkling,
oil fomentations, snuff, and smoking Váyu- and
Kapha-reducing herbs. For constipation and gas
retention, enemas should be administered. Ghee
should be taken before meals if there is upper body
dryness.
Smoking (Herbs): Relieves coughs that cannot be
helped by ingesting herbs and foods. Herbal smoke
includes musta, balá, black pepper, cardamom,
vaå¤ha lochana, ginger, a¤hwagandhá, and harítakí.
This also relieves Kapha-caused coughs.
Váyu with phlegm: Viæa´ga, ginger, pippalí, asa-
foetida, black salt, barley powder, with ghee.
Pitta: Castor oil purgation is useful.
Pitta with phlegm: Emesis with ghee, licorice, and
sugar cane. After the doßhas are cleansed and
balanced, one takes Pitta-reducing foods and liquids
(cold and sweet properties).
Thin phlegm: Sugar cane is mixed with emesis
formula. Foods and liquids are oily and cold, including
barley, green dal, and ghee. Herbs include lotus seeds,
pippalí, musta, licorice, fresh ginger, dry ginger,
ámalakí, sandalwood, bibhítakí, vaå¤ha lochana,
gokßhura, mixed with ghee, sugar cane, and honey.
     Thick phlegm: Bitter herbs and vegetables are
mixed with emesis formula. Dry and cold foods and
drinks are recommended. Neem and raw honey are
added to the above herbs. Grape juice mixed with
sugar cane, sugar cane water, and milk, should be
drunk.
Chest Wound and Wasting Cough with burning
and fever: Boiled milk with ¤hatávarí, balá, and
licorice.
Chest Wound, Wasting: Ghee with boiled milk,
¤hatávarí, cane sugar, pippalí, vaå¤ha lochana, black
pepper, turmeric, karkata ¤hringi, and chabchini.
Kapha: First, administer an emetic (if persons are
strong) with barley and pungent herbs like pippalí;
then, a castor oil purgation. Foods should be light,
including vegetable soup, radish, and pippalí, and a
little ghee, sesame oil, mustard oil, and bilwa fruit.
After eating, drink raw honey, sour drinks (e.g.,
ámalakí juice), hot water, or lassi (1/4 yogurt to 3/4
water). Herbs should include sugar cane, sandalwood,
vásák, tulsí, apámárga, ámalakí, musta, harítakí,
calamus, balá, t^ikatu, viæa´ga, chitrak, punarnavá,
ámlavetasa, gokßhura, ginger, and black pepper
mixed with raw honey.
Another recipe includes 10 gms. (.35 oz.) of
pippalí fried in canola oil mixed with cane sugar or
rock candy.
Smoking: Herbs are the same as for Váyu (musta,
balá, black pepper, cardamom, vaå¤ha lochana,
ginger, a¤hwagandhá, harítakí, chakramarda).
Kapha/Váyu: Pippalí, ginger, musta, harítakí,
ámalakí, and rock candy, made with honey and ghee.
(Sesame oil can be used for Pitta cough.) Dry and
oily foods and drinks are used for wet and dry
symptoms, respectively, to balance these conditions.
Kapha/Pitta: Pitta-reducing herbs (i.e., bitters)
and vásák, turmeric, vaå¤ha lochana, cardamom, and
honey are recommended.
Chest Wounds: Sweet and vitalizing herbs such
as ¤hatávarí and sugar cane. Also pippalí, boiled milk,
barley and wheat flours, ámalakí, sesame oil, ghee,
and honey are helpful. Therapies for chest wounds
generally follow the Pitta-pacifying regime.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                           Chapter 17: Respiratory System
 411
If physical pain from Váyu and Pitta exists, ghee
massage is useful. The chest is warmed with a hot,
dry cloth, and massaged with medicated oil.
Should Váyu cause the spitting of blood with burn-
ing sensation, along with heart or side pain, ghee,
mixed with rejuvenatives (e.g., ¤hatávarí), vásák, and
dúrba, is recommended. For any bleeding complica-
tions, ghee is ingested and used as nasal oil (Tuber-
culosis is usually accompanied by bleeding.).
When the wound is healed but Kapha remains in
the chest and head, causing coughing fits, one smokes
a¤hwagandhá, balá, and ginger with sugar cane juice.
Emaciation: Wholesome, restorative foods (e.g.,
basmati rice gruel) and herbs include triphalá, chitrak,
pippalí, ginger, guæúchí, calamus, ¤hatávarí, with
black salt, and ghee. Grape juice is also advised. Herbs
like cardamom are also used to strengthen digestion.
When one is strong, but still has excesses of the
doßhas, mild oil purgation is useful (triphalá and ghee,
or castor oil).
Other recipes: Ghee cooked in grape juice with
harítakí, musta, ginger, black pepper, and pippalí;
ghee and ámalakí boiled in milk, and pomegranate
juice with cane sugar.
For thirst, boiled milk is given. With diminished
Pitta and Kapha, ghee, boiled milk, and balá are used.
For dysuria or urine discoloration, boiled milk with
ghee, vidárí kand, and gokßhura are used. For pain
and swelling in the penis, anus, hip, and groin, oil
enemas with a little ghee are used.
The ashes of metals and gems (bhasmas) are
widely used in India for rapid healing. Iron ash (loha
bhasma) is suggested to regain strength from wast-
ing and emaciation quickly. Abhrak, pravál and mukta
bhasmas are also useful.
As with all diseases, therapy depends upon the
aggravating doßha.
Difficult Breathing (£hvása)
[including asthma]
Causes: Difficult breathing arises from many factors,
from increases of cough, doßha aggravation, diarrhea
owing to indigestion, vomiting, poisons, anemia,
fever, allergies, smoke, breeze, injury to vital organs,
and drinking very cold or ice water. There are five
types of difficult breathing.
Development: When movement of Váyu is obstructed
by Kapha, it spreads in all directions and vitiates the
channels of respiration (práòa), water (udaka), and
food (anna). The obstruction rises from the stomach
(i.e., the origin site of Kapha) into the chest, causing
difficult breathing.
Premonitory Signs: Pain in the heart and ribs, upward
respiratory movement (of práòa), gas, splitting temple
pain, heaviness in the throat and chest, astringent taste
in the mouth, and abdominal rumbling.
Symptoms of the Five Types:
1. Exertion (kestrel ¤hvása): Caused by exertion
or overeating. It is not serious, subsiding after rest or
digestion.
2. Bronchial Asthma (tamaka ¤hvása): Aggravated
Váyu begins to move upwards in the respiratory
channel (Práòavaha srotas), aggravating Kapha,
making it difficult to breathe. Sharp pains in the head,
neck, chest, and ribs appear. Coughs may be
experienced with cracking sounds, delusion, loss of
taste or appetite, runny nose, and thirst. Heaviness or
forced breathing may develop, causing distress and
loss of consciousness. Expectorants bring temporary
comfort, but there is difficulty breathing when lying
down (or sitting). Eyes are wide and gaze upward,
sweating develops on the forehead, and the mouth
becomes dry. Persons desire hot things, and develop
tremors or shivering. Breathing becomes more
difficult on cloudy days, after drinking cold water,
from cold breezes or direct wind, when eating Kapha-
increasing foods. (Another form of this asthma is
associated with fever and fainting. It is resolved by
cold foods, drinks, and air.) Overall, bronchial asthma
may be healed if treated when it first arises, otherwise
it is only controllable.
The latter 3 types may also be healed if treated in

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
412
the early stages
3. Cheyne-stokes (chinna ¤hvása): When
interrupted breathing with sharp pain develops (i.e.,
extreme pain similar to the pain of injury to vital points
(marma), vital organ pain occurs along with sweating,
fainting, gas, burning sensations, and urinary stones.
Eyes gaze downward, are unsteady and teary; one
eye is red. Coma, dry mouth, erratic speech, feeling
of helplessness, and loss of complexion can also
develop.
4. Mahá ¤hvása: Heavy breathing, feeling
helpless, breathing noises, continuous high-pitched
sounds, loss of common sense and intelligence,
unsteady eyes and face, constricted chest, blocked
urine and stool, broken voice, dry throat, frequent
delusions, severe pain in ears, temples, and head.
5. Úrdhva ¤hvása: Prolonged exhalations with
inability to inhale, mucus lines the mouth and throat,
eyes gaze upward, rolling and terrified, severe pain,
inability to speak (owing to the pain in the vital organ).
Specific Doßha Symptoms
Váyu: Dry cough, wheezing, dry skin, dry mouth,
thirst, constipation, desiring warm liquids, anxiety.
Attacks happen mainly at dawn or dusk.
Pitta: Wheezing and coughing with yellow
phlegm, sweating, irritability, fever, desiring cold air.
Attacks happen mainly at noon or midnight.
Kapha: Wheezing and coughing with excess clear
or white phlegm, lung fluid, rattling sounds. Attacks
mainly develop in the morning and evening.
Therapies:
General: Bronchodilators, such as lobelia and
ephedra, quickly open breathing passages. Long-term
use can be depleting for Pitta and Kapha, and
immediately weakening for Váyu. Tridoßhic herbs
include harítakí, balá, and saffron. Each person must
follow their appropriate doßha diet.
After attacks, the lungs must be strengthened with
tonics like chyavan prá¤h, balá, ahwagandhá,
harítakí, and bráhmí. Rebuilding the lungs in this way
can help prevent future attacks.
For difficult breathing associated with
Váyu: Ghee and pippalí, vaå¤ha lochana, and
guggul; lemon or lime juice.
Váyu/Pitta: Milk, ghee, rice water, bibhítakí, vásák,
and t^ikatu.
Pitta: Ghee, vásák, vaå¤ha lochana, ginger, pippalí,
bráhmí, and kaißhore guggul.
Pitta/Kapha: Vásák, pippalí, guggul, kaißhore
guggul, and honey.
Kapha: Vásák, pippalí, a¤hwagandhá, guggul, and
honey. Apply a mustard paste to the chest.
Kapha/Váyu: Emesis and purgation, including herbs
that reduce these doßhas.
Hiccup (Hikká)
There are 5 kinds of hiccup. Their causes,
premonitory symptoms, kinds, and development are
the same as diseases of difficult breathing.
Type 1. Food-caused (annajá hikká): Váyu
becomes aggravated by eating too quickly and
improperly, or eating and drinking dry, penetrating,
rough, and unaccustomed foods. This produces a
painless hiccup. It is quiet, then followed by sneezing.
It ceases when foods and drinks that one may be
accustomed to are ingested.
Type 2. Exertion-caused (kähudrá hikká): Váyu
becomes mildly increased from exertion. This causes
a slight hiccup from the base of the shoulders. It ceases
after eating food.
Type 3. Indigestion-caused (yamalá kihhá): This
type arises when one hasn’t eaten for many hours or
when digestion is not working properly. These hiccups
come in pairs, causing tremors in the head and neck,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                           Chapter 17: Respiratory System
 413
gas, severe thirst, nonsensical speech, vomiting,
diarrhea, unsteady eyes, and yawning.
Type 4. (mahatí hikká): Rigidity develops in the
eyebrows and sides of neck, eyes become red and
teary, there is loss of body movements, speech,
memory, and awareness. Food is obstructed from
moving, causing the vital organs to feel like they have
been hit. The body bends backwards and emaciation
develops. These types of hiccups arise from deep
inside the body, forcefully, with great sounds.
Type 5 (gambhírá hikká): This hiccup begins either
in the colon or in the navel region. Symptoms are
similar to Type 4, but with more yawning, body
expansion, and vibrating sounds.
Hiccups caused by food and exertion are most
easily healed. Severe hiccups should be taken
seriously.
Therapies: For both difficult breathing and hiccup
oil and sweat (náæí, bolus or steam tent—see Chap-
ter 7) are required. First, persons undergo an oil mas-
sage with black salt (with Pitta constitution) When
there are Pitta problems, such as burning, excessive
bleeding or sweating, weakness and tissue depletion,
or pregnancy, black salt should not be used. Oil loos-
ens and dissolves the thick phlegm blocking the
breathing channels, softening them, and rebalancing
Váyu.
Afterwards, a light diet of basmati rice and ghee
or sesame oil is taken to increase Kapha. Then one is
ready for emesis with pippalí, rock salt, and honey
(reducing Kapha and Váyu). After emesis releases
the excess Kapha, the channels are cleared, and the
Váyu begins to flow properly. Should there be any
remaining Kapha, turmeric and barley grain are mixed
with ghee and smoked.
When either of these illnesses are associated with
a weak voice, diarrhea, internal bleeding, or burning,
one eats foods that are sweet, oily, and cold.
Short periods of fomentation are applied to the chest
and throat. Warm oil is mixed with cane sugar, or
poultices are made with sesame and whole wheat,
Váyu-reducing herbs, foods, sour herbs (e.g.,
ámalakí), and milk are ingested. Other herbs include
da¤hmúl, pippalí, t^ikatu, balá, chitrak, dry ginger,
gokßhura, guæúchí, black salt; along with yogurt,
ghee, dry radish, ghee, rice, and barley. Da¤hmúl also
removes complications of thirst.
A general herbal recipe includes bilwa,
gokßhura, guæúchí, balá, t^ikatu, chitrak, pippalí,
ginger decoction with ghee, black pepper, and black
salt.
If a strong fever with toxins (áma) develops,
reduction therapy (la´gana) is used (i.e., pañcha
karma, exercise, sun bathing, etc.). Emesis with salt
water is especially useful.
Should these therapies cause a Váyu excess,
balanced can be regained through Váyu-reducing
foods and warm massage.
If gas, distention, and constipation develop owing
to Váyu, foods with black salt, ámlavetasa, or
hi´gwasták are recommended.
Hiccup is predominated by Kapha, and is healed
through emesis, purgation, a wholesome diet, and
pacification therapy, using herbal smoking (for strong
persons only).
When weak children or elderly persons develop
excess Váyu, oil therapies are used to reduce excess
air. It is important not to use laxatives when there is
not an excess of Kapha. To do so may dry up the vital
organs and threaten the person.
See difficult breathing section (page 411) for spe-
cific doßha therapies.
For hiccup, ghee mixed with triphalá, or castor oil
quickly stops the situation. Suddenly sprinkling cold
water on persons with hiccups is helpful. Slowly
drinking water nonstop for 30 seconds or until the
hiccups cease is another option. Other therapies
include frightening or causing surprise, anger,
exhilaration, or separation from loved ones.
All foods and herbs should simultaneously reduce
excess Kapha and Váyu. Ghee is used in all situations.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
414
Pulmonary Tuberculosis
(Rájá-yakßhmá)
[and other wasting diseases]
Mythology: Chandra, the moon, was married to the
28 daughters of Dakßha Prajapati, but he favored
only one of the daughters, Rohiní. Having exhausted
and emaciated himself by depleting his ojas (life sap)
through sensual pleasures with this one woman, he
had no strength to satisfy the remaining ladies. Their
father, Dakßha became angry and caused the moon
to develop tuberculosis. The moon soon apologized
and was forgiven by Dakßha, who sent the two
celestial physicians (Ashwins) to heal him with soma
nectar (restoring his ojas).
Causes: The Sanskrit word, Rájá yakßhmádi, means
king of the diseases. There are four causes of Rájá
yakßhmádi:
     1) sudden or excessive exertion or chest wound,
     2) suppression of any of the 13 natural urges (e.g.,
urine, feces, flatulence, etc.),
     3) excessive loss of semen (¤hukra), life sap/tissue
essence (ojas), or tissue lubrication (sneha)
[pratilomak diabetes—depletion of dhátus]
     4) improper nutrition [anulomak diabetes—
depletion of dhátus]. All forms of TB are caused by
the simultaneous excess of all three doßhas.
Development: Owing to any of the above causes,
Váyu overwhelms the chest, deranging Kapha and
Pitta. This vitiated Váyu then spreads throughout the
body to all the body joints, veins, and plasma
channels. These increases spread in all directions (i.e.,
up, down, sideways), excessively constricting or
dilating their channels. Thus, disease is created.
1) Váyu in the joints causes yawning, malaise, and
fever. Váyu in the stomach and small intestine pro-
duce anorexia, palpitations, cardiac pain, and other
chest disorders. When Váyu aggravates the throat,
irritations and hoarseness develop. When the chan-
nels through which vital air flows through are affected,
breathing is difficult and persons feel cold. When the
head is affected, head disorders develop. Constant
coughing causes chest injury, irregular Váyu move-
ment, and throat irritation. If coughing continues, the
chest can be further injured. This weakens the per-
son even more. These complications cause emacia-
tion, developing weight loss, wasting of muscles, loss
of appetite, and debility.
2) By suppressing natural urges of gas, urine, and
feces (owing to bashfulness, disgust, or fear), Váyu
becomes superabundant, and while mixed with Pitta
and Kapha, move in all directions. As Váyu moves to
the bones, stomach, etc. (as described above), it causes
many disorders. Tridoßhic symptoms include coryza,
cough, frequent vomiting and diarrhea, dry stool, rib
and shoulder pain, anorexia, panting, head disorders,
coughing, difficult breathing, fever, hoarseness, and
colds. These develop emaciation that leads to weight
loss, wasting of muscles, loss of appetite, and debility.
3) Excessive weight loss can be caused by great
grief and worry, envy, terror, jealousy, anxiety, fear
anger, excessive sexual intercourse, excess oily diet
when emaciated, fasting, or insufficient sizes of meals
when weak.
Should one continue having sexual intercourse
after the depletion of semen, Váyu then enters the
blood vessels and is ejaculated. This causes loose,
dry joints, and further excesses Váyu and weakens
the body. This deranged Váyu spreads throughout the
body and further deranges Kapha and Pitta (i.e.,
reduces them).
Other symptoms include reduction of muscle
tissue and blood, rib pain, grinding shoulder pain,
throat irritation, head congestion (owing to excessive
Váyu vitiating Kapha), malaise, anorexia, and
indigestion. These symptoms can develop into fever,
cough, difficult breathing, hoarseness, and excess
mucus. This can lead to consumption that will develop
into TB if not corrected.
4) From poor eating habits, the three doßhas can
become imbalanced and spread throughout the body,
obstructing the entrances of the circulatory channels.
This results in most foods becoming converted into
feces and urine instead of tissue elements. Persons
become depleted and emaciated. Váyu causes colic,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                           Chapter 17: Respiratory System
 415
malaise, throat irritations and hoarseness, rib and shoul-
der pain, and excessive mucus. Pitta causes fever, di-
arrhea, and burning. Kapha causes excessive mucus,
anorexia, coughing, and heaviness of the head. Ex-
cessive coughing injures the lungs, resulting in spit-
ting blood, which further weakens the person. This
develops into TB.
Premonitory Signs: Nasal mucus, excessive sneezing,
salivation, sweet taste in the mouth, poor digestion,
physical weakness, imagining objects (e.g., dirt, flies,
grass, hairs) in food and drinks, nausea and vomiting
(even during meals), loss of appetite or taste,
weakness or tiredness when eating, fault finding,
staring at hands, swelling of the feet and face,
excessive showing of the whites of the eyes, denying
one’s emaciation, imagining one’s looks are
disgusting, excessive desire for sexual intercourse,
wine and meat; miserliness, excessive passion,
cruelty, covering the head with clothes, nails and hair
grows at an unusually rapid rate, unusual dreams (e.g.,
being defeated by small animals and insects, climbing
on piles of hair, bones, and ash; visions of deserted
villages, empty places, dry wells, stars, and mountains
falling, trees burning).
Symptoms: Symptoms of tuberculosis include
heaviness of the head, coughing, difficult breathing,
hoarseness, vomiting phlegm, spitting blood, rib pain,
shoulder pain, fever, diarrhea, loss of appetite and
taste, coughing up mucus with sticky, thick odorous,
green, white, or yellowish phlegm.
Vághbhata (Aßhþáñga H^idayam) states that,
depending where in the body the doßhas are found,
different symptoms will manifest.
The signs and symptoms vary according to the site
of development of tuberculosis (e.g., pulmonary,
intestinal, bone, kidney, adrenals, etc.). Main
symptoms according to modern medicine include
weight loss (despite proper diet, low-grade fever, and
pain.
Secondary diseases include chest pain, excess
yawning, body aches, expectoration of mucus, weak
digestion, bad breath, and throat problems.
Váyu causes pain in the head and ribs, shoulder
and body aches, hoarseness and other throat prob-
lems.
Pitta causes burning sensations on the soles,
shoulders and palms, diarrhea, vomiting blood, bad
breath, fever, and toxins.
Kapha produces loss of taste and appetite,
vomiting, cough, heaviness of head and body, excess
salivation, mucus, difficult breathing, weak voice,
poor digestion. When Kapha is predominant, the
digestive fire is weakened owing to excessive coating
of the plasma channel (rasa dhátu). This causes the
channel to become obstructed, preventing plasma
from going into other tissues (dhátus). Blood is forced
upward and expectorated with mucus. Further, the
undigested food, which becomes toxic (áma), does
not allow for proper absorption of nutrients,
preventing the nourishment of the other tissues. As a
result, weakness occurs. If one is strong and not
emaciated, therapy is recommended. Tuberculosis can
be healed in persons who are still strong or who have
regained strength.
Pulmonary TB
Location
Symptoms
Upper
body
nasal mucus, difficult
breathing, cough, pain in
shoulders and head, hoarseness,
loss of appetite and taste
Lower
body
diarrhea or constipation.
Digestive tract vomiting
Sides of
the body
rib pain
Joints
fever

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
416
Therapies:
Pacificatory Therapies:
Coryza: Sudation, massage, smoking, pastes,
sprinkling, whole baths. Ingesting barley, rock salt,
sour, pungent herbs, and foods mixed with ghee or
oil. Herbs include pippalí, ginger, and ámalakí. Foods
include pomegranates, radish sour, wheat, rice, tea
of da¤hmúl, coriander, ginger, or bhúámalakí.
The throat, sides, chest, and head are fomented
using a bolus (see Chapter 7). The head is sprinkled
with a lukewarm water decoction of balá and guæúchí.
Náæí sweda (tube steam) can also be applied to these
areas. Steam water is mixed with Váyu-reducing
herbs.
Headaches and pain in the sides and shoulders
receive poultices of balá, vachá, vidárí-kanda, ghee,
and sesame oil. A paste of kußhóa, tagara, and
sandalwood mixed with ghee also relieve these
symptoms.
When these symptoms include secondary doßha
complications, balá, cedar, sandalwood, nágkeçhar,
punarnavá, vidárí kanda, ¤hatávarí, sesame oil, and
ghee are used according to the doßhas they reduce
(as an external ointment).
Toxic blood may require blood-letting. Abhyañga
with sandalwood oil or ghee is helpful. Snuff and
smoke are also useful. Sprinkling milk or sandalwood
decoction is also advised (see Chapter 7 for various
therapies).
If the person is strong, emesis and purgation are
advised. They are given with ghee or oil to prevent
drying and debilitation.
Cough, difficult breathing, hoarseness, head, side,
and shoulder pain: After stool evacuation, a snuff is
made with ghee, balá, vidárí kanda, and mixed with
rock salt. Frequent ingesting of ghee, balá, da¤hmúl,
and milk after meals (and/or balá and ghee during
the middle of the meal) alleviates these symptoms.
     Fever, difficult breathing, cough, hoarseness: Eat-
ing ghee mixed with dates, cane sugar, raw honey,
and pippalí heals these conditions. Therapies for other
symptoms are discussed in their respective chapters.
Wasting and emaciation: Váyu-reducing herbs and
foods. Other therapies include abhyañga followed by
bathing in oil and milk. This removes the blocks in the
channels (srotas) and heals the person. After bathing,
the person receives another abhyañga.
Ingredients for this abhyañga include ¤hatávarí,
mañjißhóhá, punarnavá, a¤hwagandhá, apámárga,
balá, vidárí kanda, kuähthá, rice, linseed, sesame, and
yeast, barley powder in a mixture of 3 to 1 with the
preceding ingredients is added, then, honey and
yogurt. This mixture anointed on the body promotes
nourishment, complexion, and strength.
Next, persons dress in special clothes offered in
worship and place essential oils on themselves. A
wholesome diet according to their doßha is taken,
including light whole grains. Meditation music,
celibacy, pleasant company, company of elders,
meditation, prayer, ethics, and nonviolence are other
aspects required to restore good health.
Cold (Pratißhyáya)
Causes:
When the head or nasal passages are filled with
excess Kapha or Pitta they may move towards the
Váyu location in the head (prati). This causes a serious
form of cold (coryza) and develops emaciation of the
body.
Signs and symptoms are headaches, stuffy nose,
cough, mucus, nausea, hoarseness, heaviness, fever,
fatigue, anorexia, and poor mind/body coordination.
This develops into tuberculosis.
Therapies:
Kapha: If mucus is abundant, white, or clear, take
Kapha- and áma-reducing foods and herbs. Light,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                           Chapter 17: Respiratory System
 417
warm, simple foods. Dairy, sweets, fried foods, herbal
tonics, and breads (with yeast) must be avoided be-
cause they increase Kapha. If a person is strong, a
short fast is useful. Tea with lemon juice, fresh gin-
ger, and raw honey reduces Kapha.
Sweat therapy is advised, using diaphoretic anti-
cough and expectorant herbs prepared as a tea (e.g.,
cinnamon. ginger, pippalí, tulsí, licorice, sitopaladi
mix). Steam tents or sleeping under many blankets
to promote sweat are also useful.
Pitta: (Yellow or green mucus, high fever, sore throat,
flushed face) Gokßhura, punarnavá, coriander, fen-
nel, spearmint, and other cooling diaphoretics used for
Pitta doßha. Sitopaladi or sudarähan mixture is espe-
cially useful for fever.
Váyu: (Little mucus, dry cough, hoarseness, insom-
nia) For a dry nose, 3 drops of sesame oil can be
placed in each nostril. Warming diaphoretics used
for Kapha are mixed with a smaller dose of demul-
cent herbs like a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, and lico-
rice. Here, too, sitopaladi is an excellent mixture, and
can be mixed into warm milk.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
418

419
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                              Chapter 18: Urinary System
Nothing in this universe is non-medicinal;
all substances can be used for various healing purposes.
              Aßhóáñga H^idayam Sú. Ch. 9: ver. 10.
Chapter 18
Urinary System
Urinary Diseases, Gravel, Obstructions, Diabetes
Urinary Diseases
(Mútrá-gháta)
efinition and Causes: Although the bladder is
full, urine will not pass. The area involved
includes the urinary bladder, ureters (which
connect the kidneys with the bladder), and urethral
passage. Urine is secreted into the urinary bladder
through minute channels. Excessed doßhas enter the
bladder through these channels to produce 20 varia-
tions of urinary diseases.
Dysuria (Mútrá-k^ichra)
Difficult or painful urination
There are 4 types of dysuria: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha,
and Tridoßha. [It’s symptoms can be early signs of
urinary stones—see below]
Váyu: Pain in the bladder, groin, and urethral pas-
sage; small quantities of urine are frequently emit-
ted.
Pitta: Yellow urine is discharged with burning sen-
sation, or blood may be voided.
Kapha: Heaviness, edema of the bladder, and ure-
thral passage; disrupted flow, slimy urine.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas are
present.
Therapies:
General: For all urinary retention disorders licorice,
harítakí, and cedar are taken as powder in milk or
water.
Váyu: Oleation and sudation are applied, especially
on the lower abdomen. Medicated oil is made of ghee,
cooked with da¤hmúl, castor oil, barley, ¤hatávarí,
punarnavá, and rock salt; mixed in equal parts. One
tsp. of the medicated oil is taken internally. Also,
da¤hmúl with sesame oil, vinegar, and ghee can be
used in equal amounts—1 tsp. total
Pitta: Cooling measures are used to alleviate Pitta. A
decoction of ¤hatávarí, gokßhura, vidárí kand; with
honey and sugar (equal amounts to make 1 tsp.) Also,
the seeds of cucumber, licorice, and turmeric; with
grape juice and rice water can be taken (equal
amounts—4 gms. or .14 oz. per dose).
Kapha : Emesis, sudation, an anti-Kapha diet, and
lassi are advised. The powder of small cardamom
with the juice of ámalakí is also recommended.
Another remedy includes gokßhura, small cardamom,
and t^ikatu with honey. Lastly, pravál pißhti with rice
water is useful.
Tridoßha: The above therapies are used depending
upon the predominant doßha.
Urinary Stones (Mútrá-Áßhmarí)
Causes: Váyu covers the mouth of the bladder,
drying up the urine inside. The urine then mixes with
Pitta, Kapha, or semen, causing stones. Three types
of this disorder develop: Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha.
Premonitory Signs: Urinary bladder distention,
severe pain in and around the stone, urine smells like
a goat, difficult elimination of urine, fever, or loss of
appetite.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
420
Symptoms:
General: Pain in the navel area, and in the seam
and head of the bladder; urine flow is interrupted when
stones obstruct the path/easy flow when there is no
obstruction, clear, golden-yellow urine, pain if strain-
ing to pass urine, blood in urine if stones cause inter-
nal wounds.
Váyu: Severe pain causes persons to grind teeth,
shiver, squeezing penis, rub the navel, cry constantly,
passing feces with gas, frequent urination, and in
drops; stones are black, rough, and thorny.
Pitta: Burning sensation in the bladder, the color
of the stones are red, yellow, or black.
Kapha: Pricking pain in the bladder, and feeling
cold and heavy; stones are big, smooth, golden, or
white.
Therapies:
General: This is considered a serious disease that
can even lead to death if it is not healed. At the early
stages, herbal therapy can heal the condition. How-
ever, at later stages, surgery is required. The best herb
for all urinary disorders is gokßhura.
Váyu: Gokßhura ghee, or gokßhura taken alone
or with lassi, also produces good results.
Pitta: Medicated ghee prepared with a decoction
of gokßhura, ku¤há, vidárí kand, red and white
punarnavá. £hilájit is also useful.
Kapha: Medicated ghee made with a decoction of
gokßhura, elá, guggul, black pepper, chitrak, hi´g,
myrrh, and rock salt. £hilájit is also useful.
Urine Retention (Mútrá-ghátádi)
All the therapies mentioned above are useful for
urine retention. Purgations, basti, and uttara basti
(urinary bladder enema) are also suggested if needed.
Seminal Stones (£hukrá-¤hmarí)
Causes:
These stones occur in adults due to preventing
ejaculation of the semen, once leaving its origin site.
By withholding the semen, it becomes dried by Váyu
inside the scrotum.
Symptoms:
Bladder, pelvis, or genital pain; difficult urination,
scrotum swelling, stiffness or pain; semen begins to
flow but stops in the middle, coming out only when
squeezed; urine mixed with semen.
Therapies:
Strong enemas, especially urinary bladder
enemas (uttara basti) are taken to purify the semen
receptacle. Aphrodisiac herbs are then taken (e.g.,
¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá).
Urinary Gravel (Mútrá-¤harkará)
Causes:
Urinary gravel is a collection of small sand-like
urinary stones caused by Váyu. According to modern
science, urinary gravel combines to form urinary
stones. Both systems are saying the same thing in
different ways. The gravel is expelled with the urine
when Váyu is moving downward, and it is obstructed
when Váyu is moving upward.
Today, modern science breaks the urinary stones
with lithotripsy (a sonic vibration), turning them into
gravel. Then, they are expelled through the urinary
system.
Therapies:
Powder of gokßhura taken with water and cane
sugar expels gravel. Tumburu, apámárga, and barley
are good for both stones and gravel.

421
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                              Chapter 18: Urinary System
13 Urine Obstruction Disorders
(Mútragháta)
Below are discussed various other urinary ob-
structions. In all cases the therapy involves basti and
urethra basti.
Vátabasti -
Obstruction Due to Suppressing the Urine Urge
Habitual suppression of the urge to urinate ag-
gravates Váyu and Pitta. This causes the urine to dry
up and block the mouth of the urinary bladder. Thus,
red or yellow urine is passed with pain, irritation, and
may distend the bladder. This can also cause burn-
ing, throbbing, twisting, urine expelled in drops, or
in a continuous flow if the bladder is pressed. There
are 2 forms of Vátabasti: difficult and very difficult
(to bear and to heal). These symptoms are similar to
benign hypertrophy of the prostate (BPH).
Váta Kundaliká -
Radiating Bladder Pain
Due to urine retention, Apána Váyu (upward mov-
ing air) becomes excessed. Aggravated Váyu, mov-
ing circularly in the bladder, causes severe, radiating
bladder pain, circular moving of urine in the bladder,
obstructed flow, heaviness, urine is released little by
little, accompanied with expelling feces. One may
also experience stiffness, heaviness, and cramps.
Mútrá-títa -
Obstruction Due to Slow Elimination
When trying to expel urine after suppressing the
urge for a long time, it fails to come out or flows with
mild pain.
Mútro-tsa´ga -
Obstruction Due to Narrow Urethral Duct
Either urethral blockages or aggravated Váyu can
cause some urine to remain in the bladder, urethra, or
urethral passage. Urine thus becomes obstructed,
flowing slowly (without pain). The remaining urine
produces heaviness in the urethral passage.
Mútrá-granthi -
Obstruction Due to Bladder Tumor
Pain similar to that of a urinary stone is
experienced from round, immovable, hard, and small
tumors that may suddenly develop inside the cavity
of the urinary bladder. Blood affected by Váyu and
Kapha cause the hard nodular mass at the urinary
bladder opening.
Mútrá-¤hukra -
Obstruction Due to Semen
Performing sexual intercourse when there is a
strong urge to urinate causes the displacement of
semen, and is obstructed. Semen will then be expelled
just before or after urination.
Viægháta -
Obstruction Due to Impacted Feces in Rectum
(Fistula in between urinary bladder and rectum)
Persons who are excessively dry, thin, and
debilitated may experience Váyu moving upwards,
bringing a small amount of feces into the urinary
bladder and urethra. This results in urination with the
odor of feces.
Ußhòa-Váta -
Obstruction Due to Bladder Inflammation or
Cystitis (Hematuria-blood in the urine)
Aggravated Pitta, due to excess exercise, hot,
penetrating foods, long distance walking, and
excessive sun-bathing, overflows into the bladder
because of aggravated Váyu. This causes pain,
burning, or inflammation in the bladder and urethral
passage (cystitis), and yellow urine. It may be mixed
with blood, or only blood flowing alone; urine is warm
or comes out repeatedly with difficulty.
Mútrá-saåkßhaya -
Due to Diminished Urine
Dry, debilitated persons may experience Váyu and
Pitta depositing into the urinary bladder, diminishing
urine, causing pain, and burning.
Mútrá-sáda -
Obstruction Due to Bladder Inflammation or
Cystitis
If Váyu aggravates Pitta and Kapha (alone or to-
gether), difficult urination is produced. Urine

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
422
is yellow, red, white (or all colors mixed), thick,
accompanied with pain, and is dry.
Therapies: Kapha- and Pitta-reducing measures
are used to heal this condition, in addition to the
common therapies for all these 13 urinary conditions.
Vátáßhþhílá - Obstruction Due to Enlarged
Prostate (or prostate tumor)
When aggravated Váyu becomes trapped between
the rectum and urinary bladder, it results in an enlarged
prostate, or a hard, elevated, immovable tumor. It
causes abdominal distention and blockages of urine,
feces, and gas.
The prostate is situated below the bladder and in front of the rectum. The
urethra tube runs from the bladder to the penis or vulva.
Prostate and Ureter
An enlarged prostate compresses the lower ureter, obstructing
the passage of urine. This dilates the bladder and thus weakens
it. The backed-up urine in the bladder enlarges and weakens
the upper ureters that run to the kidneys. The kidney pelvis
becomes damaged. Continued pressure on the kidneys causes
damage to kidney tissue.
Therapies for this disorder are covered under
cancer and tumors, Chapter 22 page 501.
Mútrá Jaþhara -
Obstruction Due to Enlarged Bladder
Habitual suppression of urine causes Váyu to be-
come obstructed and move upward. A full bladder
results in abdominal distention below the navel, se-
vere pain, indigestion, and accumulation of feces.
Therapy: Diuretics (e.g., gokßhura) are used to heal
this condition (in addition to the common therapies
for all these 13 urinary conditions).
Basti Kuòæala -
Obstruction Due to Bladder Displacement
This condition is similar to Vátabasti.
Váyu: Due to fast travel, jumping, exertion, in-
jury, or pressure on the urinary bladder it may shift
out of place and remain expanded. This will cause
pain, shaking, and burning. Urine will pass in drops,
or if pressed, will come out in a stream. One can ex-
perience stiffening, cramping, and distress. It is a se-
vere condition.
Pitta: One feels burning, pain, and abnormal
urine color.
Urinary
Bladder
Swollen Prostate
Compressed
Urethra
Compressed
Bladder
Enlarged
Ureter -
urine backs up
into Kidneys
Enlarged
Prostate
Urethra
Prostate 
Gland
Urinary
Bladder
Healthy Prostate
Bladder
Prostate
Rectum
Urethra

423
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                              Chapter 18: Urinary System
Kapha: Persons experience heaviness, swelling
and oiliness; whitish and precipitant urine.
Pitta and Kapha forms can only be controlled
but not healed.
Obstinate Urinary Diseases (Prameha)
(Excessive Urination, Diabetes, etc.)
Causes: There are 24 forms of this disease: 4 are due
to Váyu, 6 result from Pitta, and 10 are caused by
Kapha. The main causes of these diseases are fat,
urine, and Kapha buildups due to;
     1) Foods (e.g., sweets, sours, salts, hard to digest,
slimy, cold, raw grain; marsh, domesticated, and
aquatic animal meats).
  2) Liquids (e.g., beer, sugarcane juice, molasses,
and milk).
 3) Life-styles (e.g., sedentary, sleeping while
sitting).
  4) Other things causing an increase of Kapha,
fat and urine.
Development:
     Kapha prameha: Excessed Kapha overflows into
the body channels and becomes mixed with the dhátus
(i.e., tissues of fat (medas), plasma/lymph (rasa),
muscle (máåsa), and sweat (Kapha mala). This situ-
ation weakens the dhátus and brings them into the
urinary system, causing the 10 types of Kapha
prameha.
Pitta prameha: Aggravated Pitta and blood also
can vitiate the urinary bladder when the watery tissues
are depleted. If fat (medas), muscle (máåsa), and
plasma (rasa) are already weak or depleted, then this
Pitta excess in the blood produces the 6 types of Pitta
prameha.
Váyu prameha: Váyu may also weaken the bladder
by drawing the depleted tissues into the bladder. Váyu
diabetes is due to vitiated ojas, marrow, and lymph.
When Kapha and Pitta doßhas become decreased
Váyu becomes excessed, bringing fat (medas), muscle
(máåsa), marrow (Majjá), and life sap (ojas) to the
urinary system. This produces 4 types of Váyu
prameha.
Kapha prameha involves rasa, máåsa, and medas.
They are similar in nature. Thus, the herbs to heal
this prameha will not imbalance the other doßhas.
Pitta prameha involves plasma (rasa), muscle
(máåsa), and fat (medas) dhátus that are opposite in
nature to Pitta-reducing herbs (i.e., Pitta reducing
herbs are cool). These herbs will increase plasma,
muscle, and fat tissues. Still, Pitta diabetes (prameha)
can be helped with special herbs (e.g., ¤hilájit and
guæmar) if dhátu depletion is not extensive.
On the other hand, when Váyu prameha involves
muscle (máåsa) and fat (medas) dhátus, it is very
difficult to treat because all the therapies for reducing
Váyu will further increase the already excessed fat
and muscle tissues. In this case, Váyu becomes
aggravated either due to depletion of the reproductive
(¤hukra) and life sap (ojas) tissues (dhátus), or from
obstruction of the channels due to excess fat (medas)
and muscle (máåsa) tissue.
Premonitory Signs:
Common to all forms of diabetes is an excess of
perspiration, body odor, looseness of body parts,
desiring rest, thickening heart, eyes, tongue, and ears;
stoutness of body, fast growth of hair and nails,
wanting cold things, dry throat and palate, always
having a sweet taste in the mouth, numbness and
burning of the hands and feet (and other organs), sweet
urine, matted hair, sticky excreta from orifices, ants
and insects attracted to the body and urine,
abnormalities of the urine, urine smells of raw flesh.
Analysis Cautions
1) If the urine is yellowish or expelling blood
without the aforesaid premonitory signs of prameha,
a person is not to be said to have prameha, but rather
a disease of Rakta Pitta. Since the signs and symptoms
of these two diseases are similar, being sure of the
disease is important.
2) If persons with prameha expel sweet, slimy, and
honey-like urine, it is caused by the depletion of
doßhas (a Váyu-caused disease), or from over
nourishment (a Kapha disease).
If Váyu, Pitta, or Kapha prameha is left untreated
after their premonitory signs and symptoms, they are
not able to be healed. Generally, Pitta prameha is
controllable. If the adipose tissue (fat/medas) is not
depleted, then Pitta prameha can be healed. Kapha

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
424
prameha is usually able to be healed.
Symptoms:
General: Common to all forms of diabetes is
the increased quantity and turbidity of the urine.
Kapha: Excess Kapha weakens the body fluids,
muscle, and fat; and are drawn into the urinary blad-
der and kidneys. This results in 10 forms of Kapha
prameha.
1) Udaka—large quantities of clear urine, white,
cold, odorless, watery, sometimes slightly murky and
slimy.
2) Ikßhumeha—urine is sweet, cold, slightly
salty, and muddy.
3) Sándra—urine becomes thick when kept
overnight.
4) Surá—urine looks like beer (clear on top and
thick on the bottom) when kept overnight.
5) Pißhta—hair stands on end, urine is thick
and white.
6) £hukra—urine looks like semen or is mixed
with semen.
7) Sikatá—urine has dirty particles, like sand,
frequently cold, sweet urination.
8) £hítá—urine contains small hard things
(because the weakened doßhas pass through).
9) £hanair—urine passes very slowly, with little
force.
10) Lála—urine is thready (like saliva) and
slimy.
Pitta: Aggravation of fire is caused by
a) Excess of hot, sour, salty, alkaline, and
pungent food.
    b) Eating before the previous meal is digested.
       c) Exposure to sun, fire, physical exertion,
and anger.
   d) Eating mutually contradictory foods (e.g.,
fish and milk, hot and cold things; see page 551).
Manifestation of Pitta forms of diabetes is
quicker than that of those caused by Kapha. The 6
Pitta forms are only able to be controlled because it
is a different element (fire) than the watery elements.
Bitter and pungent herbs heal Kapha. Bitters help
Pitta, but the pungents will cause aggravation. The
stomach, small intestine, fat, and the abdominal wall
membrane (which connects the stomach with the
other abdominal organs) are involved here. The 6
forms are;
    1) Kßhára—urine smells, looks tastes and feels
salty.
2) Níla—urine is blue.
3) Kála—urine is ink black.
4) Háridra—urine is pungent or bitter,
yellowish, and burns when expelled.
5) Mañjißhþhá—urine smells like raw flesh and
has a slight red color.
6) Rakta—urine smells bad, is hot, slightly
salty and reddish.
Váyu: These 4 forms of diabetes immediately
become aggravated due to;
a) Overeating of astringent, pungent, bitter,
rough, light, and cold things.
   b) Over indulgence in sexual acts and exercise.
   c) Over use of emesis, purgation, dry enemas,
head evacuation.
   d) Suppressing natural urges, fasting, physical ac-
cident, excess sun, anxiety, grief, blood-letting, stay-
ing up late at night, poor posture.
The excessed Váyu then overflows, along with
muscle fat (vásá) and enters the channels (srotas) with
urine, causing the development of fat in the urine
(lipuria). It may also carry marrow to the urinary blad-
der (via the mútravaha srota), deranging the marrow
(majjá) as myelouria. Marrow may be expelled with
urine as Váyu pushes the marrow out.
Should there be an excess of lymph entering the
bladder (due to deficient insulin), large amounts of
urine are produced, with a need for constant urina-
tion (without pressure). Váyu converts the sweetness
of life sap (ojas) into an astringent taste and brings it
to the bladder. This causes roughness, which devel-
ops Diabetes mellitus [Either (a) an insufficient pro-
duction of insulin that causes abnormal metabolism
of carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Sugar levels are
increased in the blood and urine causing great thirst,
frequent urination, wasting, and acidity.

425
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                              Chapter 18: Urinary System
This can occur in childhood or early adolescence, or
(b) A mild form appears in adulthood aggravated by
obesity and an inactive lifestyle. Few symptoms ex-
ist, and insulin may not be needed].
The 4 Váyu-caused diseases are serious because
of the risk of secondary diseases developing due to
the loss of all the tissues. Váyu-diabetic urine is
grayish, reddish, and painful.
1) Vasá—urine is expelled with muscle fat or fat
may be passed alone and frequently (fat-lipid-like
urine).
2) Majjá—urine is frequently expelled with
marrow, or marrow may be passed alone (mar-row-
like urine).
 3) Hasti—urine passes continuously and without
force, mixed with lymph, and without difficulty
(urinary incontinence/diabetes tuniflues).
 4) Madhu—sweet and astringent urine, which is
pale and oily (diabetes mellitus).
This is caused either by aggravated Váyu
depleting the tissues, or by obstructing the movement
of the doßhas covering it. In the latter case, Váyu
shows signs of the doßha covering it, washout any
other reason, occasionally, and thus the bladder is
sometimes empty, sometimes full. These diseases
cannot be healed.
Any form of diabetes not tended to eventually
develops into Madhu (honey-like) diabetes. All the
sweet forms of diabetes (i.e., sweet-tasting urine and
sweet-smelling body) are called Madhu.
Sweet, slimy urine may be confused as being
caused by either Kapha (excess nutrition) or Váyu
(malnutrition). Should Kapha and Pitta forms be
experienced with all the premonitory signs (and Váyu
forms, after lasting for a long time) cannot be healed.
The 4 Váyu types are unable to be healed because
they afflict the deepest tissue layers (marrow and
semen). The Pitta forms which last for a long time
are controllable. Forms where the fat tissue is not
greatly excessed are healable.
Secondary Complications:
Kapha Forms: Poor digestion, anorexia, vomit-
ing, excess sleep, cough, nasal mucus.
Pitta Forms: Pricking pain in the bladder and
passage, oozing from the scrotum, fever, burning, and
loose stools.
Váyu Forms (upward moving air): Tremors, sharp
abdominal pain, insomnia, dry mouth and throat,
cough, difficult breathing.
Hereditary and genetic diabetes (like all hereditary
and genetic-caused diseases) cannot be completely
healed due to the dysfunctional genes. However, these
forms of diabetes can be controlled; persons can live
symptom-free as long as they remain on the proper
herbs and diet.
The 7 types of diabetic carbuncles (skin or
subcutaneous tissue bacterial infections that exude
pus) require surgery.
Diabetes involves the imbalance of carbohydrate
metabolism that is controlled by the insulin secretion
of pancreas. The blood level of sugar/glucose rises
beyond the normal limits in the system that is excreted
by the urinary system.
General Therapies:
There are 2 general categories of urinary
diseases: persons who are strong and obese, and those
who are weak and emaciated. The former category
of people use elimination therapies, while the latter
follows nourishing therapies. After oleation, the strong
and obese person follows Kapha-reducing therapies
to eliminate the excesses through the upward and
downward channels.
Once the toxins are eliminated (and digestive
power is strong) one follows refreshing therapy
(stearopten) [e.g., barley with honey] instead of
fasting. Fasting immediately after elimination may
cause cystic tumors; wasting, kidney, urinary bladder,
and genital disorders. Alleviation therapy is used for
people not strong enough for elimination therapy.
Diet: The most important herbs for all doßhas are
¤hilájit, guæmar, turmeric, neem, ámalakí, guggul, and
arjuna. Turmeric with aloe vera gel (1 to 3 gms./.035
to .1 oz) is best used during the early stages of diabe-
tes for regulating pancreas and liver functions. Other
therapies include roasted or fried barley, corn flour,
light, bitter vegetables, barley porridge, ghee, rice,
and herbs like gokßhura, guæmar, triphalá, musta,
cardamom, fenugreek, or coriander, mixed with

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
426
honey. Triphalá with ámalakí juice can also be used
to heal prameha. Barley is the main food to heal uri-
nary diseases. Other methods to heal prameha in-
clude strenuous exercises, oil massage, steam, sitz or
waist bath, and sprinkling of water and ointment.
Herbs of dry ginger, cardamom, and sandalwood are
used in baths, and taken orally. Guæmar is the best
herb for digesting sugar in the pancreas. Guæmar and
¤hilájit are an excellent herbal combination used by
modern Áyurvedic practitioners.
Simultaneously, the foods and life habits that
caused the disease are avoided.
Kapha Therapies:
1) Emesis and fasting.
  2) Food: Barley soaked in a triphalá decoction
overnight, then mixed with honey and eaten several
times a day (cane sugar may also be used).
3) Herbs: Include decoctions of triphalá,
fenugreek, musta, arjuna, sandalwood, lodhra, ajwan,
gokßhura, viæa´ga, guæúchí, harítakí, and chitrak.
These may be taken with a small amount of ghee.
Guæmar and ¤hilájit are excellent.
Pitta Therapies: Only when muscle tissue (medas
dhátu) is excessively aggravated is Pitta prameha
unable to be healed.
1) Purgation is the best therapy for healing.
2) Herbal decoctions include sandalwood,
musta, ámalakí, neem, kuþaj, turmeric, blue lotus,
and arjuna. These are taken with ghee or sesame
oil. Guæmar and ¤hilájit are excellent.
Váyu Therapies:
1) Guæmar and ¤hilájit, triphalá, fenugreek,
musta, turmeric, harítakí, and ámalakí mixed
with raw honey and ámalakí juice. They may be added
to a drink of roasted corn flour mixed with raw honey.
2) Medicated oils and ghees.
Pitta/Kapha Therapies:
1) For either Pitta or Kapha urinary diseases, herbs
of gokßhura, bibhítakí, and kuþaj are mixed in ámalakí
juice. After digesting this drink rice and soup (with
ghee) may be taken.
2) For Váyu secondary excess with Pitta
prameha, medicated ghee and Pitta-reducing herbs.
 3) For Váyu secondary excess with Kapha
prameha, medicated oil (canola or mustard) is used
with the same herbs to reduce Kapha.
  4) For Tridoßhic symptoms, both the ghee
and oils are used with the same herbs.
Diabetic Ulcer, Pimple, Pustule, etc.
(Prameha Piæaká)
Causes:
If madhumeha (diabetes mellitus) is not treated,
10 forms of eruptions can develop on the joints, vital
spots, and muscular areas during diabetes. All three
doßhas are aggravated.
Symptoms:
      1) £hará-viká: Raised edges, depressed centers,
black, oozing, painful, saucer-sized and shaped.
 2) Kacha-piká: Deep continuous or intermittent
pain, extending over large areas, smooth, and tortoise
shell-like.
3) Jáliní: Stable, vein networks, oily, oozing, with
a large inner cavity, severe, intermittent pain, minute
openings.
4) Vinatá: Large, found on the back or abdomen,
blue, deep pain, oozing, bending downwards.
5) Alají: Burning, raised, hard to bear, spreading,
reddish-black, severe thirst, boils, delusion, fever.

427
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                              Chapter 18: Urinary System
6) Masú-riká: Lentil sized and shaped.
     7) Sarßha-piká: The size and shape of a mustard
seed, severe pain, surrounded by similar eruptions.
8) Putriòí: A large eruption surrounded by many
smaller eruptions.
   9) Vidá-riká: Round and hard shaped.
     10) Vidhradi: Abscesses (discussed in the next
section).
The first 3 ulcers are caused by fat and are difficult
to bear and heal. The rest are bearable and easy to
heal. Aggravated symptoms of these eruptions are
similar to diabetes. These symptoms may occur even
without diabetes as they are caused by vitiated fat
tissue.
Symptoms of deep yellow or red urine, without
experiencing any premonitory signs of diabetes, are
classified under bleeding disorders (Rakta Pitta—
Chapter 14) and require the same therapies.
Piæaká Therapies:
General: Early stages of all 10 eruptions (piæaká) use
inflammatory edema ¤hotha) therapies (Chapter 25).
Advanced stages of eruptions use therapies according
to ulcers (Chapter 16).
     Small eruptions that appear only on the skin, are
soft to the touch, slightly painful, easily form pus and
then burst, and develop on persons who are strong
and can be healed. When symptoms include eruptions
in the rectum, heart region, head, shoulders, back vital
parts, and joints; associated with complications; and
who have poor digestion; no therapy is available.
Medicated oil herbs for ulcers include cardamom
(elá), saffron or safflower, sandalwood, and kaißhore
guggul.
 Massage herbs include neem, guæúchí,
bhúámalakí, and paóola.
Sprinkling (parißheka) water requires herbs of
kaóuká, neem, viæa´ga, mañjißhóhá, guæmar, and
guggul.
Liquids and foods include herbs of kaóuká, black
pepper, cardamom, vachá, hi´g, and viæa´ga.
Charak suggests surgical procedures.
Incontinence
Useful herbs are cardamom, bákuchí, yogaraj guggul,
nutmeg, skullcap, cinnamon.
Renal Failure:
Punarnavá is the recommended herb to use until the
kidneys begin to function again.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
428

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 429
Pouring warm water over the body bestows strength,
but the same over the head, makes for loss of strength of hair and eyes.
Aßhóáñga H^idayam - Sú. Ch. 2: ver. 17
Chapter 19
Ears, Nose, Throat, Catarrh, Hoarse Throat, Eyes, Mouth
Diseases of the Ear Karòagata-Roga-
Vijnániya
wenty-eight different types of ear disorders
exist: ear (karna) diseases, earache
(karna-ßhula), ringing/noise (pranáda), deaf-
ness (vádhirya), windpipe sounds (karna-kßhveda),
secretions (karna-sráva), itching (karna-kandu),
karna-guntha, parasites (krimi-karna), prati-náha,
two forms of local abscess (vidradhi), boil/pus for-
mation (karna-páka), pus and malodor (puti-karna),
four kinds of cysts, seven forms of tumor, four types
of swelling (¤hopha).
Causes and Symptoms:
Earache (karòa-¤hula): Great aching pain in the ear
region and inside the middle ear (tympanum) from
local Váyu excess that becomes aggravated and
obstructed by the other imbalanced doßhas.
Ringing/noise (karòa-náda): Ringing and other
sounds resulting from excess local Váyu entering the
ear the wrong way and becoming blocked in the sound
channels.
Deafness (vádhirya): When excess Váyu remains in
the sound channels along with Kapha imbalances and
is not healed or balanced.
Wind-Pipe Sounds (karòa-kßhveæa): Results from
cold object or exposure to nasal purgatives for the
head, or continual derangement of Váyu in the sound
channel and aggravated by excess work, any wasting
process in the system, or by ingesting astringent or
dry items. The sound is caused by excess of Pitta,
Kapha, and blood.
Secretion (karòa-sráva): Caused by excess Váyu in
the ear cavity, resulting from head injury, remaining
underwater for a long time, or a spontaneous
formation and bursting of an inner ear abscess.
Itching (Karòa Kaòæú): Excess itching from local
Kapha.
Excess Ear Wax (Karòa Gúthaka): Accumulated
mucus in the ear dries and is hardened by local Pitta
heat.
Inner Ear Fistula (karòa-prati-náha): When dried
ear accumulations caused by secretions become
liquefied and seep from the nose (and/or the mouth)
and head, diseases (and certain forms of headaches)
may develop.
Parasites (krimi-karòa): These vermin, collecting in
the ear impair the hearing.
Abscesses (karòa-vidradhi): These are caused by ear
ulcer, external injury to the ear, or other unknown
causes. Symptoms include choking and burning
sensations, piercing and sucking pain, yellow, red, or
bloody secretions.
Pus-Boil- Ulcer Formation (karòa-páka): When pus
forms in the boils of the ear from excess Pitta, a
blockage and consequent malodor in the passageway
of the ear occurs.
Pus and Malodor (puti-karòa): When the pus, with
or without accumulation of mucus in the ear passage
is secreted after being heated by excess Pitta, it may
cause swelling (¤hopha—Chapter 25), tumors
(arbuda—Chapter 22) and multiple growths
(polypoid—ar¤has—Chapter 15).
Therapies:
General: Therapy includes ingesting ghee after meals,
rejuvenative herbs such as ¤hatávarí and balá,
refraining from exercise and sex, avoiding wetting

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
430
the ear, and less talking.
Váyu: For all Váyu-related ear diseases (earache,
ringing, wind sounds, and deafness), oil is first used
internally and externally (in the ear too) in addition
to emulsive purgatives (e.g., licorice/viæa´ga). Then
the ear is fomented with Váyu-reducing herbs by
means of steam (náæí sveda) that is applied to the ear
through a tube. Ringing in the ear is helped by placing
three drops of clove oil in the ear.
Váyu/Kapha earache: These are helped by smoke
fomentation. Herbs include bilwa, castor oil root,
a¤hwagandhá, barley, and vaμ¤ha lochana, boiled
in fermented rice, It is applied via tube fomentation
(náæí sveda). Warm oil (mahánáráyan, da¤hmúl,
sesame, guggul-ghee) is dropped into the ear for
instant relief (one or two drops). Ingesting ghee after
meals and ¤hiro basti are also useful. Rice should not
be eaten at the dinner time meal, but replaced with
milk and ghee. The same herbal oils can also be used
as nasal therapies, sprinkling and ingested. Three
drops of garlic oil may be placed in the ear for V/K
earaches.
Váyu earache: Three drops of warm garlic oil are
applied to the ear.
Pitta earache: Ghee cooked with licorice, musta,
mañjißhþhá, sandalwood and milk, used as ear drops
(three drops per ear).
Kapha earache: Three drops of mustard or garlic oil
are placed in each ear. Strong nasal evacuatives and
gargling with guggul, pippalí and ginger are also
useful.
Blood earache: Pitta therapies are followed. Deafness
(vádhirya): Sesame oil cooked with milk, water,
bilwa, licorice, mahánáráyan, and da¤hmúl oils is
applied (3 drops per ear).
Itching (karòa kaòæú): Local steam (náæí sweda) to
the ear; herbal emetics, smoke, and head purgatives
may also be taken.
Pus/Malodor (puti-kaòna), Secretion (kaòna-
sráva) and Parasites (krimi-karòa):
General therapies: These include ear-drop therapy
as discussed above, nasal therapy, smoke, medicated
washing herbs (see below).
Secretion (karòa-sráva): Ear drops made from cane
sugar, licorice, and bilwa (Bilwadi Tail) are made into
a paste and mixed with goat’s milk and sesame oil.
Pus/Malodor (puti-karòa): Ear drops made from
milk, honey and herbs of licorice, ámalakí, patta,
dhátakí, mañjißhþhá, lodhra, and príya´gu. The herbs
are boiled in milk and sesame oil, and are either
dropped into the ear or ingested.
Parasites (krimi-karòa): This includes viæa´ga, kuóaj,
musta, guggul taken internally, and mixed with
warmed mustard oil to be applied to the ear canal.
Smoke of guggul destroys the odor. Emetics and
gargling are also useful.
Wind Pipe Sounds (karòa-kßhveæa): Mustard oil ear
drops are useful (3 drops per ear).
Abscess (karòa-vidrahi) is the same as ordinary
abscesses. The ear is fomented after being filled with
oil (to soften the deposit). Discharges can then be
removed with a probe.
Inner Ear Fistula (karòa-pratináha): Therapies
include oil and sweat, followed by nasal evacuatives.
Diet and lifestyle changes that reduce the imbalance
causing this disease are recommended.
Ear Inflammation - pus - boils (karòa-páka):
Therapies include lightening (see pañcha karma:
Chapter 7), vomiting, and bitter herbs (e.g., chiráyatá,
kuóki, neem, aloe vera, gentian, barberry). Bloodletting
and purgation are also employed. Dirt, parasites, or
other foreign objects stuck in the ear cavity should
be removed with a probe.
Ear Lobes (Karnapálí Rog)
There are 5 main diseases of the ear lobes.
Inflammatory Swelling (Paripota): The lobe is sud-
denly pulled and held for a long time in this position,
it becomes numb, painful, swollen, blackish-red, and
may spontaneously burst or crack as a result of ex-
cess Váyu.
Traumatic Swelling (Utpáta): This condition results
from friction and the weight of earrings. Painful swell-
ing, burning, and pus develops in the ear lobe and
may be brown or red-colored,owing to toxic blood
and Pitta.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 431
Piercing/Pulling (Unmantha): Pulling the earlobes
creates excess Váyu and Kapha at this site, causing
painful swelling, itching. The color of the lobe
depends upon which doßha is present in excess.
Ulceration (Duhka-vardhana): Swollen, painful,
burning, itching lobes result from being pulled and
lengthened, leading to pus formation.
Pustules (Parilehi): Small oozing pimples, painful,
burning, and itching may cover the lobes. These result
from toxic blood, excess Kapha, or parasites. This
disease quickly spreads. Inflammation and fever may
develop. The lobe may be destroyed.
Ear Lobe Therapy
General: These five diseases are considered very
dangerous and may eventually destroy the lobe if not
quickly attended to. The first line of therapy includes
a wholesome diet of foods, drinks, and lifestyle habits.
Oils and sweat, ointments, washes, plasters, poultices,
and blood-letting are used for all five disorders. Váyu
does best with oils, poultices, and enemas. Pitta does
best with purgatives. Kapha does best with emetics.
Inflammatory Swelling (Pari-potaka): Licorice,
apámárga, devadaru, bákuchí, and mañjißhþhá are
pasted together and cooked with milk, ghee, sesame
oil, and are applied to the lobe.
Traumatic Swelling (Utpáta): Mañjißhþhá, sesame oil,
licorice, ¤hatávarí, musta, turmeric, and mango are
cooked together and applied to the lobe.
Piercing or pulling (Unmantha): A medicated oil of
bákuchí, guggul, mañjißhþhá, viæa´ga, turmeric,
musta, and ginger is applied to the lobe.
Ulceration (Duhka-vardhana): Ghee and sesame oil
are mixed with milk (10 times the weight of the ghee
and oil) and are cooked with a¤hwagandhá and
apámárga. The finished recipe is then filtered before
application to the ear lobe. Constant application and
fomentation helps the regrowth of the lobe, making
it soft, healthy, smooth, painless, evenly developed,
and able to bear the weight of earrings.
Pustules (Parilehi): The lobe is oiled with warm ghee,
sesame or sunflower, cooked with bákuchí, guggul,
mañjißhþhá, viæa´ga, ginger, and turmeric. A powder
of these herbs is also dusted on the lobe. The use of
medicated oil on ear lobes preserves their health.
Diseases of the Nose Násá-
gata-roga-Vijñániya
There are 31 forms of nasal (násá) diseases:
obstruction (apínasa); malodor (púti-násá);
inflammation/pus pimples (násá-páka); bloody pus
in the nose (puya-rakta); hemorrhage (¤honita-pitta);
sneezing (kßhavathu); mucus sneezes (bhramßhathu);
vapors (dípta); stuffiness (násá pratináha); cold/
mucus/coryza (násá-parisráva); dryness (násá-
ßhoßha); four types of arßhas (nasal hemorrhoids);
four forms of swelling (¤hopha); seven types of
tumors; and five forms of prati-¤hyáya.
Causes, Symptoms, and Therapies
1. Obstruction—Wasting or Atrophic Rhinitis
(apínasa)—excesses of Váyu and Kapha cause
symptoms of choked and burning nostrils with
dryness and dirty and slimy mucus in the passage.
This deadens the faculty of smell and taste. [This is
identical to the type of mucus (pratißhyáya) block
discussed in the next section.]
Therapies include applying oil and steam to the
nasal passage, emetics, and purgation, taking light
and moderate meals, drinking boiled water, and nasal
inhalation of the smoke from viæa´ga, pippalí, and
apámárga. Nasal oil is made from mustard oil and
herbs of t^ikatu, hi´gwasták, calamus, ku¤hþha,
viæa´ga, and applied daily.
2. Malodor (púti-násá)—Excess Váyu mixed with
other doßhas in the throat and palate roof causes a
malodorous smell in the nostrils and mouth. The same
therapies are used as described for obstructions.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
432
3. Inflammation/Pus/Pimples (násá-páka)—Excess
Pitta causes sliminess, malodorous ulceration inside
the nose, secretion, putrefication. Internal and external
Pitta-reducing therapies are required. Ghee is mixed
with ámalakí, guæúchí, dúrba, elá, and dhátakí
flowers. This is applied as a wash and a plaster in the
nasal passages after bleeding.
4. Bloody Pus/Ulcers (púya-rakta)—resulting from
trauma to the head. Pitta and Kapha become very
heated, causing a discharge of blood or blood-streaked
pus. For Pitta reduction, a porridge made of milk,
ghee, dúrba, mañjißhþhá, and nágke¤har is used as a
poultice. Then the sinus is cut open with a knife and
a plaster of licorice, dúrba, nágke¤har, mañjißhþhá,
turmeric, and kuþaj is applied. Neem and turmeric are
used to wash the ulcer daily. Medicated ghee of
triphalá, turmeric, kuþaj, dúrba, nágke¤har, and balá
are used to lubricate the sinus. For Kapha reduction,
poultices of white mustard seeds, dúrba, nágke¤har,
and mañjißhþhá are used daily until softened.
The sinus is then cut open with a knife and plastered
with neem, dúrba, nágke¤har, mañjißhþhá, and sesame
paste. A decoction of neem, guæúchí, and mañjißhþhá
is used to wash the ulcer. Sesame oil is cooked with
myrrh, chitrak, neem, guæúchí, and mañjißhþhá, can
be applied to the ulcer. Nasal therapy using a few
drops of herb juice or medicated oil is also useful.
Another useful therapy is smoke inhalation of
£hadbindú oil (endrojo, pippalí, black pepper, dry
ginger, calamus (vachá), kút, kuþaj, and tulsí seed).
After the blood and pus are reduced, purifying herbs
are used.
5. Hemorrhage (¤honita-pitta or nasá púyarakta)
decoctions and snuffs are discussed under bleeding
(Raktapitta) in Chapter 14.
6. Excessive Sneezing (kßhavathu)—the nasal marma
results from doßha imbalance or trauma, causing
Váyu and Kapha to flow from the nose while
sneezing. If something touches the nose hairs, a
trickling sensation develops. This sensation can also
develop from eating or smelling any pungent aromas
or from looking at the sun. Therapies include
evacuative herb nose drops, such as pippalí, kayphal,
dry ginger, kút, viæa´ga, bilwa, munuka (dry grapes),
and ginger. Inhaling smoke is also advised. The head
is fomented with Váyu reducing herbs (e.g.,
ahwagandhá, balá), and oily snuff, including
turmeric, balá, kaóuká, and bilwa.
7. Mucus Sneezes (bhramßhathu)—Excess thick and
salty Kapha accumulations in the head become
liquefied from the heat of Pitta and are expelled
through sneezing. The same therapies used for
sneezing may also be used here.
8. Burning Sensation/Vapor (dípta)—Vapor breaths
of Váyu emit from the nostrils with a great burning
sensation. Pitta-reducing therapies are used to heal
dípta.
9. Stuffiness/Deviated Septum (násá-prat-ináha)—
Upward moving Váyu (Udán) becomes excessive as
a result of Kapha and blocks the nasal passages.
Therapies include applying blowing powders of
viæa´ga, millet seed, vachá, kút, kayphal,
frankincense, sage, and tulsí to the nose. Talisadi
chúròa with honey or ¤h^i´gyádi chúròa may be taken
internally. Váyu-reducing herbs such as
a¤hwagandhá, bilwa bark, gokßhura, kaòókárí,
punarnavá will provide relief. Balá or Náráyan oil
is also useful.
10. Cold and Mucus/Coryza (násá-paris-ráva)—
Constant clear or white watery secretion of Kapha
will emit from the nostrils (especially at night).
Therapies include powdered herbs of musta, kuóki,
pippalí, turmeric, chitrak, rock salt, and kayphal
inhaled through the nose. Fresh herb juice poured in
the nose is also useful. Inhaling aromas of chitrak
and cedar may also be taken.
11. Dryness (násá-parißhoßha)—Excess Váyu and
Pitta causes difficult breathing owing to drying,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 433
 hardening, and accumulation of the mucus (Kapha).
Therapies include ghee and sesame oil used as a na-
sal lubricant.
* Excess Mucus (Násá-sráva)—Váyu and Kapha
block the passages of respiration (similar to
pratináha). Consequently, a continuous discharge of
yellow or white fluid runs from the nose. Váyu/Kapha
therapies are used.
* Dry Frontal Sinus (Srotaà ¤h^i´gáóa-¤hoßha)—Nose
oil drops of aòu taila [sesame oil, goat’s milk,
madhuka, da¤hmúl decoction and rock salt] may be
used.
The four nasal hemorrhoids or polyps (arßhas —
Chapter 15) [Guggul, triphalá and pippalí are used.]
and four swellings (ßhophas—Chapter 25) result from
the three deranged doßhas, either separately or in
combination. Therapies are the same as those
discussed in their respective chapters.
Seven different nasal tumors (arbuda) exist,
(Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/Kapha, Pitta/
Kapha, Tridoßha).
General Therapies: Triphalá, antiseptic and
germicidal herbs are taken internally, as snuff and oil
drops.
Váyu: Comfrey, ginger, licorice, sandalwood, tur-
meric, asafoetida, bh^i´garáj, bráhmí.
Pitta: Barberry, dandelion, sandalwood, turmeric,
jasmine, mañjißhóhá, neem, bh^i´garáj, bráhmí.
Kapha: Barberry, dandelion, sandalwood, turmeric,
jasmine, mañjißhóhá, neem, asafoetida, bh^i´garáj,
bráhmí.
Rhinitis (Pínasa)
It is caused by all doßhas. Two stages of rhinitis
can occur: early and advanced.
General Symptoms: Intense pain and distress
occurring in all three doßhas.
Early Symptoms: Heaviness of the head, no ap pe-
tite, discharge of thin fluid from the nose, feeble voice,
and frequent expectoration of mucus and saliva.
Advanced Symptoms (Pakva): Mucus becomes
thicker, staying in the nasal passages; voice returns,
mucus returns to its normal color. If this condition is
neglected, it can develop deafness, blindness, loss of
smell, eye diseases, body swellings, poor digestion,
and cough.
Pínasa Therapies:
(also see next section—Hoarse Voice)
When symptoms of one doßha dominates, the fol-
lowing therapies are used.
Váyu: Unction followed by non-unctuous enema.
A light, Váyu-reducing diet using, oily, sour, and hot
foods. Hot water is also used for drinking and bathing.
Homes should be draft-free. Anxiety, exertion,
excessive talking, and sexual intercourse should be
avoided.
Pitta: Ghee should be taken with bitter herbs and
milk boiled with ginger to help dispel the toxins. This
is followed by nasal evacuatives, such as viæa´ga,
apámárga, and pippalí (with turmeric). Pitta-reducing
foods and liquids can also be taken.
Kapha: Lightening therapy (emesis) is used with
symptoms of heaviness or anorexia. To improve
digestion, ghee is applied to the head, followed by
fomentation and water sprinkling (parißheka).
Sesame seed paste is eaten, followed by emetic
and pungent herbs (e.g., garlic, kuähtha, vachá,
pippalí), with green gram powder, rock salt, and ghee
boiled in milk. This drink causes emesis. The herbs
can also be made into a medicated mustard oil and
applied to the nasal passages. Kapha-reducing foods
and liquids are taken.
For all nose and head disorders, ¤hadbindu,
bilwa and Náráyan oils are useful.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
434
Catarrh
Inflamed Mucus Membranes
of the Nose and Throat
 (Prati¤hyáya-Prati¤hedha)
Causes:
Overindulgence in sexual intercourse, heating of
the head, inhaling dust or smoke through the nose,
excessive heat or cold, suppression of stool and urine,
eating raw foods, or excessive talking can instantly
cause nasal catarrh. Excesses of Váyu, Pitta, Kapha,
Tridoßha or blood may cause catarrh (prati¤hyáya).
Premonitory Signs:
Heavy head, sneezing, aching limbs, goose
bumps.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Hoarseness, stuffiness, thin mucus secretions,
dry throat, palate and lips, pricking and piercing pain
in the temples, excessive sneezing, bad taste in the
mouth.
Pitta: Hot, yellow, hot smoky mucus secretions,
heated skin, thirst, emaciation, yellow skin.
Kapha: Constant runny nose, cold, white or clear
mucus, swollen eyes, heavy head, tickling and itching
in the head, throat, lips and palate.
Tridoßha: Spontaneous appearance or disappearance
of symptoms of all three doßhas.
Blood: Bloody secretions from the nose, red eyes,
bruised pain in chest, bad breath and smell, loss of
smell, small white or black worms in the nose.
Chronic Coryza (dußhóha prati¤hyáya): Neglect of
coryza and poor eating habits, causes this condition
to worsen. Serious conditions are noted by constant
alternation between dry and slimy nostrils, and
between contracted and expanded nostrils, foul smell
and loss of smell. Nasal diseases previously discussed
can also develop. Other symptoms include ear, eye,
head disorders, graying or baldness, whitening of
body hairs, thirst, difficult breathing, cough, fever,
intestinal bleeding, swellings (¤hopha), hoarse voice,
and consumption. Chronic coryza symptoms are
difficult to heal. Inhaling smoke of roasted gram flour
and ghee is advised.
Therapies:
General: Ghee emetics and fomentation are useful
except during the beginning and acute stages of
catarrh. Fresh herb juice (according to doßha) is
applied as nasal drops (for blood conditions such as
bloody secretions from the nose) add sugar cane and
milk). Acidic foods should be lukewarm and taken
with ginger, fresh or dried. Sugar cane juice and
pungent tastes may help thicken mucus secretions.
When mucus is too thick, it can be loosened and
secreted by using nasal head purgatives, non oily
enemas, inhaling warm aroma smoke, and medicinal
gargles.
Persons should rest in draftless rooms, with their
heads covered to protect them from the temperature.
White basmati rice, harítakí and other herbs related
to the excessed doßha are eaten. Wine, cold liquids
and baths, sexual intercourse, anxiety, grief,
suppression of stool and urine, and eating very dry
foods should be avoided.
Fasting (if one is strong) or light meals with
digestive and appetite-increasing herbs are used when
catarrh is accompanied by vomiting, aching, heavy
limbs, fever, lack of hunger, apathy, and diarrhea.
Adults with a Váyu/Kapha-caused illness should
drink a large quantity of liquids and them vomit.
Váyu: Ghee cooked with vidárí-kand, balá, vásák,
licorice, triphalá, t^ikatu, chitrak, and rock salt. Snuff
of warm and moist herbs and oils may also be used.
Pitta and Blood: Ghee cooked with bitter herbs is
ingested. Decoctions of bitter herbs are used to wash
and plaster the affected area. Red sandalwood,
guæúchí, licorice, ¤hatávarí, triphalá, honey, and cane
sugar are boiled in milk and/or oil and used as a gargle
and nasal purgative.
Kapha: Ghee is applied to the affected area. Persons
should eat barley gruel and sesame seeds or paste,
followed by vomiting. Then Kapha-reducing
measures are used. Oil cooked with balá,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 435
viæa´ga, pippalí, tulsí, kút, vásák, elá and black pep-
per are used as nasal drops. Herbs of chamomile,
a¤hwagandhá, vásák, viæa´ga and harítakí are
smoked.
Tridoßha: Ghee cooked with bitter and pungent herbs
is ingested; herbal smoke (dhúma), as for Kapha
catarrh (e.g., viæa´ga, vásák) is used; pungent foods
are eaten. Nasal therapy and gargling use sesame oil
cooked with musta, bráhmí, cardamom, pippalí,
vachá, kaóuká, pippalí, myrrh. Váyu-reducing herbs
are cooked in milk and water (twice as much water
as milk) and cooked to half the amount. Then ghee,
cane sugar, licorice, and red sandalwood are added.
This mixture is also used as a nasal therapy—4, 6, or
8 drops are put into each nostril.
Chronic Coryza (Dußhóha Prati¤hyáya): The smoke
of roasted gram flour and ghee is inhaled. When the
nose is dry, an oil snuff is made from sesame oil,
goat’s milk (made into paste), da¤hmúl decoction and
10 times as much licorice and rock salt. Aòu taila is
another good oil for the this condition. Therapies to
reduce all doßhas are required.
Hoarse Voice (Svara-bedha)
Cause Hoarseness may result from Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, Tridoßha, TB, or excess weight.
Symptoms:
Váyu: The throat is dry, harsh, unsteady and thorny.
Relief comes from oily and warm foods and liquids.
Pitta: Burning sensation and dryness of the palate
and throat, inability to speak.
Kapha: The throat feels coated, voice is slow,
husky, and obstructed.
Tridoßha: All three doßha symptoms are
experienced.
TB: Painful upon speaking; hot fumes emit from
the mouth. There is no therapy for this type of hoarse-
ness.
Over Weight: Kapha symptoms, some difficulty
speaking. There is no therapy for this type of hoarse-
ness.
Therapies:
All forms of TB are caused by simultaneous de-
rangement of all three doßhas. Depending upon one’s
strength, the predominant doßha aggravating the con-
dition, and the stage of development, the appropriate
therapies are applied. There a two general therapeu-
tic categories: the specific and general. Specific dis-
orders include colds, headache, and difficulty breath-
ing. All seven of the weakened tissue elements must
be balanced to promote general healing.
Alleviation Therapies These therapies include ghee,
sesame oil, lemon and lime, pippalí, vásák, dúrba,
nágke¤har, black salt, and ámalakí eaten hot, with
foods such as thick or thin gruel (barley, rice, or wheat,
depending upon doßha and strength). External thera-
pies include fomentation, massage, aromatherapy,
sprinkling, bath,) and blood-letting.
Colds/Rhinitis (Pínasa) are healed with chitrak,
harítakí, and triphalá.
Fomentation: Applied over the throat, chest (and
the sides of the chest), and head, using thick gruel or
pudding made with boiled milk, barley, da¤hmúl, oil,
and ghee. For headache or pain in the chest, sides, or
shoulders, a thick hot ointment is applied using cala-
mus, guggul, punarnavá, ¤hatávarí, sandalwood,
vidárí kand, balá, vásák, cardamom, ghee, and oil.
For these conditions, aromatherapy, sneha—sandal-
wood oil massage, and medicated enemas are useful
after meals.
Water Sprinkling (Ekánga dhárá or Parißheka
sveda): Water boiled with balá, guæúchí,
ahwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, sandalwood, barley, and
honey are poured over the head when the mixture
becomes lukewarm.
Elimination Therapies: First, oleation and fomenta-
tion therapies are undergone, then mild emetics and
purgation. As with all therapies, physical strength and
health must be considered. Therapies should neither
deplete nor causing diarrhea.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
436
     Persons who have extensive depletion of the dhátus
must not undergo elimination therapy. Solely the heat-
producing properties of the feces (purísha mala) sus-
tains life. All the digestive fires of the dhátus are
weakened; only the main digestive fire is active.
General: Ghee boiled with balá, da¤hmúl,
turmeric, milk, sitopaladi, and eating after meals.
These therapies are useful for cough, throat disorders,
difficult breathing, and pain in the shoulders and sides
of the chest, and headache.
Cough: Nasal oils and aromatherapy herbs
include balá, vidárí kand, vásák, a¤hwagandhá, and
chyavan prá¤h.
Throat: Aromatherapy with ghee, pippalí, balá,
kaychant, licorice, small cardamom seeds, and milk.
Burning, fever, upper body bleeding: Vásák,
¤hatávarí, dúrba, nágke¤har, and ghee, grapes. Care
should be taken to follow therapies for the appropriate
stage of fever ( see Chapter 14 for fevers).
Excess Phlegm: If persons are not too weak, and
predominantly of Kapha constitution, therapies may
include boiled milk with pippalí, apámárga,
cardamom, tulsí, and vásák. Another useful therapy
is thick barley gruel boiled with emetic herbs and
ghee.
Váyu causes excessive phlegm, so oily and hot
therapies are necessary.
Vomiting: When phlegm results from excess Váyu
and Kapha, Váyu-reducing foods and herbs (e.g.,
black pepper, ajwan, ginger, honey), and arjuna for
the heart are taken.
Diarrhea: People with TB have weak digestive
fire, causing diarrhea, mucus, bad taste in the mouth,
and loss of appetite. Therapies include thick barley
gruel with bilwa, kuþaj, ginger, í¤habgol, or ámalakí,
arjuna, gokßhura, ghee, and múng flour, mixed as a
drink.
Bad Taste in Mouth: Brush teeth morning and
evening. Chew herbs of cardamom, turmeric, musta,
ámalakí, pippalí, and coriander to remove bad tastes.
They may be mixed with sesame oil, ghee, honey
milk, and sugar cane, and kept in the
mouth as a thin paste. Herbs include cardamom,
khadir, and majuphal.
Miscellaneous Therapies: Oil massage, wearing
new clothes, taking medicated baths, medicated
enema, using pleasant aromas, soothing music, good
company, meditation, prayer, donating, celibacy,
truthfulness, having good conduct, and nonviolent
activities, words, and thoughts. Other therapies
include drinking goat’s milk and staying in a pine
forest. A parallel in Western medicine was the use of
sanitariums for healing and recuperation.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 437
Eye Diseases
(Aupadravikam Adhyayam)
Eyeball (Nayana-Budbuda):
The eyeball consists of all five elements. Earth
(bhu) forms the muscles. Fire (tejas) forms the blood
in the veins and arteries. Air (Váyu) forms the iris
and the pupil. Water (jala) forms the cornea. Ether
(akáßha) forms the ducts or sacs that discharge se-
cretions.
Rasa and alochak Pitta support the anterior coat
(retina). Muscle (máåsa) supports the chorid or
second coat. Fat tissue (medas) supports the third
or scleroid coat and cornea. There are many divi-
sions and subdivisions of these coats.
Blood vessels, muscles, vitreous body and the chor-
oid hold together the various parts of the eyeball. The
eyeball itself is held by a watery substance, the cap-
sule of tenon, which is supported by various vessels.
When excessed doßhas pass upward into the eyes
through the veins and nerves, many diseases are
caused.
Lacrimal
Nasal Duct
Sac
Puncta lachrymalia
Lachrymal
Glands
Ducts
Cornea
Anterior
Chamber
Pupil
Iris
Posterior
Chamber
Zonules
Lens
Ciliary
Body
Conjunctiva
Vitreous
Chamber
Macula
Lateral
Rectus
Muscle
Rectus
Muscle
Medial
Left Eye
Optic Nerve
Sclerotic Layer (coat)
Chorid coat (layer)
Retina
Nerve Sheath
Canal for central artery

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
438
Premonitory Signs: Cloudy vision, slight
inflammation, tear secretion, accumulated mucus,
heaviness, burning, aching, and red eyes.
Eyelid inflammation causes feelings of bristles
studded in the eyes, pricking pain, and impaired sight
(seeing colors with the eyes opened or closed).
Causes: Local doßhas become imbalanced from
submerging the head in water immediately after
exposure to heat and constant glaring at the sun,
straining to see objects far away, taking naps, staying
up late, forced staring, excessive crying, grief, worry,
fatigue, being hit or bumped, excessive sex, overeating
or drinking, suppressing the natural urges, smoke,
dust or sweat entering the eyes, excessive or blocked
vomiting (i.e., pressure), and constant squinting to
see tiny objects.
There are 76 forms of eye disease: 10 Váyu, 12
Pitta and 13 Kapha, 16 forms related to excesses or
toxic blood, 25 from tridoßhic causes, and 2 resulting
from external trauma.
Development and Symptoms:
Váyu: Five Váyu disorders are healable, anyato-
Váyu, ophthalmia (adhi-mantha), ¤hußhkákßhi-páka,
abhißhyanda, and maruta-paryaya. Váyu cataracts
can only be temporarily healed. The other four
diseases cannot be healed. Three of these disorders
affect vision (hatá-dhimantha, nimißha, gam-bhiriká),
and one afflicts the sclerotic coat (Váyu-hatavartma).
Pitta: Seven Pitta eye diseases can be healed
(abhißhynda, ophthalmia/adhi-mantha, am-ládhy-
ußhita, súktiká, Pitta-vidagdha-drißhti, pothaki, also
known as gramulocyte tracoma, and lagana). Three
can only be prevented from getting worse (kácha,
parimláyi, nila). Two disorders cannot be healed
(hrasva-jádya, jala-sráva).
Kapha: Eleven disorders can be healed
(conjunctivitis (abhißhyanda), cataracts (adhi-man-
tha), balása-granthita, ¤hleshma-vidagdha-drißhti,
pothaki, lagana, krimi-granthi, parik-linna-vartma,
¤huklárma, pißhtaka, ¤hleßhmo-panáha (healed by
excision). Only Kapha cataracts (Kapha Kácha) are
containable. Sráva-roga is incurable.
Blood: Twelve forms are healable (cataract/adhi-
mantha, abißhyanda, klißhta-vartma, siraharßha and
siropáta, anjana, sirajála, parvani, non-ulcerated
avrana, ßhukraroga (corneal calcification),
¤honitárma, arjuna). Kácha cataracts are only
pacifiable. Five are incurable (raktasráva, ajakájata,
pendent/avalambita, ¤honi-tárßhas, ¤hukraroga [If the
third sclerotic layer is affected then it is incurable].
When the first and second sclerotic layer are affected,
they are difficult to heal.
Lacrimal
Nasal Duct
Sac
Puncta lachrymalia
Lachrymal
Glands
Ducts

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 439
Tridoßha: Eighteen diseases cannot be healed
(vartmávabandha, sirája-pidaká, prastáryarma,
adhi-mánsárma, snayvarma, utsangini, puyá-lasa,
arvuda, ¤hyáva-vartma, kardama-vartma,
arßhovartma, ¤hukráßhas, ¤harkará-vartma, two in-
flammations without local swelling/ saßhopha-páka
and aßhopha-páka, bahala-vartma, kum-bhiká, and
visa-vartma). Two disorders are controllable (kácha-
cataract [palliative] and pakßh-makopa). Four diseases
cannot be healed (puya-sráva, nakulándhya,
akßhipáká- tyaya, alaji).
External: Both forms are incurable; sanimitta/ex-
ternal blow, and animitta/seeing the sudden light of a
celestial being.
Locations: Of the 26 diseases, 9 affect the joints, 21
the eyelids, 11 the vitreous humor, 4 the choroid, 17
the entire eyeball region, and 12 the pupil or crystal-
line lens. The two external diseases affect the entire
eyeball.
General Therapies: All types of eye disease dis-
cussed in this chapter can be helped with any of the
following;
1. Triphalá, sarsaparilla and turmeric
2. Barberry and raw honey, or just raw honey 3.
Punarnavá decoction with rose water 4.
Chandrodaya varti
5. Triphalá ghee
6. Pravál pißhti
7. Saptamrita loha (iron ash)
Joint and Binding Membrane
(Sandhigata- Roga -Vijñaniya)
Development, Symptoms, Therapies: There are 9
related diseases. These include symptoms of Váyu,
Pitta and Kapha diseases, and are the premonitory
symptoms of eye diseases.
1. Puyálasa: A pus-filled swelling that develops at
any joint and is malodorous and dense (some say it is
painful and without pus). It is treated with blood-
letting. After oil and fomentation around the affected
area, blood-letting is performed, followed by a
poultice of myrrh.
2. Upangha: A large painless cyst at the union of the
pupil and choroid (K^ißhòa-mandala) [see diagram
2], with itching and a little pus. This is caused by
Kapha. The affected area is opened and rubbed with
pippalí and honey. Then the surrounding area is
scraped. Before pus forms, oil and light fomentation
therapy is used.
3-6. Sráva: Deranged Pitta, Kapha or blood, passing
through the lachrymal ducts into the binding tissues
of the four joints produces a painless secretion with
symptoms of the excessed doßha. Four forms exist:
a) Puyá-sráva—A pus-filled swelling at any eye
joint where the pus is secreted. This results from
Kapha, Pitta, and blood. Rock salt and honey heal
this disease.
b) £hleshmá-sráva—A thick, slimy, white secre-
tion of mucus and pus, without pain. Rock salt and
honey heal this disorder.
c) Raktá-sráva—A copious, thin, warm and blood-
streaked secretion. It results from toxic blood at that
location. Rock salt and honey heal this condition.
d) Pitta-sráva—A warm, watery, yellow-blue (or
reddish yellow) secretion from the middle part of the
joint results from excess Pitta. Rock salt and honey
heal this malady.
7) Parvani: A small, round coppery swelling at the
joint of the choroid (K^ißhòa-mandala) and sclerotic
coat (¤hukla-mandala) due to deranged local blood,
with burning and aching. Rock salt and honey heals
this disorder.
8) Alaki: A similar swelling that occurs at the same
place, but it is larger. Rock salt and honey or rose
water are used to heal this ailment.
9) Krimi-granthi: A cyst or swelling with itching,
appearing where the eyelids and lashes meet, resulting
from parasitical germination. The parasites infect the
inner lining of the eyelid where it is connected with
the sclerotic coat, invading and weakening the eyeball.
After fomentation and incision, a decoction of
triphalá and myrrh is used on the affected area.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
440
Eyelids (Vartmagata-Roga-Vijñániya)
Development, Symptoms, Therapies: The doßhas,
either alone or in combination, expand through the
nerves and veins of the eyelids (vartma), causing
excess blood and fleshy growth. This causes excess
fleshy growth that is responsible for 21 diseases of
the eyelids.
1. Utsangini (conjunctival cyst): A rolled or indented
boil or pimple appears on the outer lower eyelid, with
its head pointed inward. Therapy includes
amritahwardivarti (guæúchí, lotus stem, bilwa, paóola,
licorice, prapaundaríka, cedar, and sarsaparilla. A
quantity of 320 gms of these herbs is made into a
decoction, then strained and reheated until thick. Then
10 gms of white pepper and 40 gms fresh jasmine
flowers are added until the decoction becomes sticky.
Then one drop is placed in the eye. It can also be
treated with scarification.
2. Kumbhika (internal stye-hordeolum cyst):
Resulting from all three doßhas, many boils or
pimples develop on the joint of the eyelids and lashes,
burst and then become inflamed. This is healed with
chitranjan (1.25 gms black pepper, 5 gms
samudraphena (cuttle-fish bone) and 1.25 gms lead
sulfide are pounded finely during Citra constellation
(a Vedic astrology/Jyotißh mystical star) It can also
be treated by scarification. A general treatment
includes placing one drop of honey in the eye.
3. Pothaki (trachoma/granular conjunctivitis): Many
red, hard boils or pimples (such as red mustard seeds),
that are painful, itchy, and secreting. Honey or
barberry is used to heal this condition. It can also be
treated by scarification.
4. Vartma-¤harkará (infection of meibomian gland/
trachoma): Rough large pimples surrounded by very
small and thick pustules (that cover the entire length
of the eyelid). Chandro-daya varti is used to heal this
disorder. Scarification may also be used.
5. Arßho-vartma (papillary trachoma): Small, soft,
rough pimples on the eyelid, with little pain.
Chandrodaya varti (¤ha´k bhasma (conch shell ash),
bibhítakí, harítakí, lead sulfate, black pepper, all
mixed in equal quantities). Then goat’s milk is mixed
with the chandrodaya varti until it becomes a paste.
The paste is then rolled into a cylindrical form with a
diameter of about 1/12 of an inch. This rod is dipped
in water briefly, then applied to the eye. It can also be
treated by scarification.
6. £hußhkárßhas (chronic papillary trachoma or a form
of tumors): Long, rough, hard numb pimples on the
eyelid. Rasáñjana (Berberis aristata DC extract) is
used to heal this malady. Scarification can also be
used.
7. Anjana (external stye-hordeolum cyst): Small soft,
coppery pimples on the eyelid, with burning, pricking,
and slight pain. It is treated by excision. After
fomentation, a spontaneous bursting may occur. This
requires pressing and rubbing with a plaster of
jasmine, cardamom, and myrrh mixed with honey.
8. Bahala-vartma (multiple chalazion): Equal-sized
pimples that are hard, along the eyelid, and of similar
shape and color. Nílathotha (crude copper sulfate),
lead sulfite, small elá and pawchi with honey. It can
also be treated by scarification.
9. Vartma-bandha: Eyelid edema with itching and
slight pain, preventing opening of the lids. Nílathotha
(crude copper sulfate or copper acetate, or basic
copper acetate), lead sulfite, small elá, and pawchi
with honey.
10. Klißhta-vartma (angio-neurotic edema): Mild,
coppery inflamed swellings of both eyelids
(simultaneously), with slight pain, suddenly
becoming red or discharging blood. Punarnavá,
triphalá, and rock salt mixed with honey are
recommended. Scarification may also be used.
11. Kardama-vartma (non-ulcerative blepharitis):
When the previous disorder (klißhta) is affected by
Pitta. Inflammation of the lid margin with redness
develops. Further, the area can become thick, forming
scales and crust, shallow marginal ulcers or discharge
dirty blood and mucus. Honey or barberry heals this
condition. Alternatively, it is treated by scarification.
12. £hyáva-vartma (ulcerative blepharitis): A dark
brown coloration of the eyelids, both internally and
externally, with swelling, pus secretion, and itching.
Therapy includes red sphatik (alum), elá, and barberry
with rose water. It can also be treated by scarification.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 441
13. Praklinna-vartma: The outer eyelid swells
(edema) with mucus deposits in the inner surface,
with little pain, secretion, itching, and pricking.
Surgery is contraindicated. Oil, fomentation,
venesection, purgation, nasal evacuatives and non oil
enemas are required to cleanse the system. Then eye
washes, salves, drops, snuffs, and aromatherapy are
used. Herbs include musta, turmeric, licorice,
punarnavá, triphalá, vaμ¤ha lochana, with honey.
Myrrh and white pepper applied as a slave alleviates
itching of the eye.
Itching: One application of an eye salve of black salt,
white pepper, red sandalwood, sugar cane root,
barberry, cedar, white salt, and chamelí leaf in equal
parts.
Swelling (¤hopha): Musta, cedar, triphalá,
punarnavá, lodhra, are pasted together as an eye salve.
14.Aklinna-vartma (ankylo belpharon): The eyelids
stick together without any pus or secretion (even if
the eyes are constantly washed with water. Surgery
is contraindicated.
15.Vátáhata-vartma (lagophthalmos): Drooping or
inactivity of the eyelids, with or without pain,
obstructing the opening of the eye lashes. The lids
seem to be out of joint. It is treated by scarification.
Pitta causes this disorder. Therapies include triphalá
pasted with water and applied on the eyelids, or
pippalí and olive oil paste on the eyelids.
16. Arvuda (eyelid tumor or angiomas): An uneven,
red, knotty swelling or shape which quickly grows
on the inside of the eyelid, with little pain. Herbal
therapies include pippalí and olive oil paste on the
eyelids. Triphalá pasted with water can also be used.
It is also treated by incision.
17. Nimeßha (ptosis): Wrinkling of the eyelids due to
excess Váyu in the nerves or veins.
18. Shonitárßhas (internal hemorrhage): Soft, fleshy
growths on the eyelids, which reappear even after
they are surgically removed. Pain and burning are
also present, resulting from excess blood. Useful herbs
include triphalá, guæúchí, ámalakí, turmeric, and
licorice.
19. Lagaòa or Nagana (chalazion cyst): A thick, hard,
slimy, painless nodular swelling on the eyelid, with
itching and no pus or secretion. It is treated by
excision.
After incision, vaå¤ha lochana or pippalí are
mixed with honey and applied to the incised area.
Harítakí, ginger, black pepper, neem, vásák, and
lodhra mixed together are also useful. Larger incisions
require cauterization with alkali or fire. This is caused
by Kapha.
20. Visa-vartma: An inflamed swelling of the
eyelid, dotted with tiny punctures or pores. It is treated
by excision. Useful herbs include red sandalwood,
rose water, guæúchí, punarnavá, and mamírá. It is
caused by an excess of Kapha.
21. Pakßhma-kopa (Eye Lashes—trichiasis dis-
trichisis and entropion): Excessed doßhas accumulate
around the eye lash, causing them to become rough
and sharp pointed. This develops eye pain, which is
relieved when the lash is pulled off. The eye is
sensitive to wind, heat, or the light of a fire. Therapy
can be palliative or provide temporary relief, if persons
still have their sight. This disease cannot be healed,
but it can be controlled. Herbs, including bilwa,
¤hyonaka, patluppu, gambhari, arni, kaòþkárí, and
the entire castor oil plant are made into a decoction
and used to wash the eyes. Surgery may also be
indicated.
Sclerotic Coat (£huklagata-Roga-Vijñániya)
Development and Symptoms: Eleven diseases of the
sclerotic coat exist. These are all caused by Kapha.
All these conditions are helped by rock salt, triphalá,
ginger, black pepper, and white coral. The first five
are known as pterygium.
1. Prastáíyarma: A thin, extended, reddish-blue
glandular swelling on the sclerotic coat. This is treated
by incision.
2. £huklárma: A group of soft, white growths,
developing over the entire sclerotic coat. This is
treated with incision.
3. Lohitárma: A reddish fleshy growth on the cornea.
This is treated with incision.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
442
4. Adhi-mánsárma: A soft, thick, dark brown, and
extended fleshy growth on the cornea. This is treated
by incision.
5. Snáyvarma: A rough, yellowish or white fleshy
growth on the white coat that slowly grows larger.
This is treated with incision.
6. £huktiká (xerosis/xerotic Keratitis): Dark brown,
fleshy or oyster colored specks on the white area of
the eyeball). Surgery is contraindicated.
7. Arjuna (ecchymosis kerato-conjunctivitis): A single
dot or speck on the cornea that is blood red. Surgery
is contraindicated. The same therapies apply as for
Pitta abißhyanda. Sugar cane juice, honey, milk, tur-
meric, punarnavá, and licorice are used as an eye
wash or salve. A triphalá decoction may also be used
as eye drops. Turmeric, barberry, guæúchí, bilwa, and
licorice may also be used to wash the eyes.
8. Pißhtaka (pinguecula): A white or transparent, el-
evated, circular dot or speck on the white coat. Sur-
gery is contraindicated. A thin plaster of ginger,
pippalí, musta, black and white pepper may be pasted
together and used as a salve.
9. Sirá-jala (scleritis): Large red patches of a hard-
ened network of veins spreading over the sclerotic
coat. It is also treated by incision.
10. Sirá-Pidaká (deep scleritis): A group of white
pimples on the white coat, near the edge of the iris,
covered with shreds of veins. Therapy includes
rasáñjan with honey. It is also treated by incision.
11. Balása Grathita (conjunctivitis): A metal-colored
speck, covered with veins on the white coat. (Some
say the speck appears like a drop of water.) Surgery
is contraindicated. The eye is cleansed by bloodlet-
ting or by using herbs. The herbs include triphalá,
punarnavá, nirguòæí, chamelí, barberry, banyan tree
(Váta-ala or ginger) bark (or juice), and rock salt.
This is followed with the same therapies as Kapha
ophthalmia.
Black part of the chorid and iris (Krishna-Gata-
Roga-Vijñániya) Development and Symptoms: Four
diseases related to this area exist. These are all forms
of calcifications of the cornea.
Savrana-£hukra (keratitis/corneal ulcer): A puncture-
like dip in the area, pricking sensation, great pain,
hot secretion. If the seat of the disorder is far from
the pupil (marginal keratolysis), the entire retina has
no pain or discharge, if it is not deep-seated or without
double spots, it can be healed.
A-vrana-£hukra (corneal opacity): A whitish film
overlays the choroid region, including the iris, like a
speck of transparent cloud in the sky, tear secretion,
slight pain due to ophthalmia (secretion). This is easily
healed. When a non ulcerated form of this disease is
thick, deep seated, and chronic, is difficult to heal. If
it is a chronic situation which is mobile, covered with
fleshy shreds, full of veins or stretching down to the
second skin layer in the eye, it cannot be healed. Other
unhealable symptoms are obstructed vision, severed
in the middle and with a reddish tint in the extremities.
Some authorities also say if spots are on the iris, with
pimples, and hot tear secretions, it also cannot be
healed. This is a Kapha disorder.
Therapies- (for this milk-white fleshy growth in the
eye): The non ulcerated form (a-vrana) follows the
above blood caused ophthalmia. Should these
therapies not work, then scarifying is used. The
ulcerated form (sa-vrana), be it in the first or second
layers, or rough, one follows the same therapies.
Scarifying (rubbing) myrrh, black pepper, pippalí
powders on the affected area, and used as a salve is
useful.
Eyelid inflammation (Akßhi-Pákátyaya): A milky
white film over the black part of the eye, slowly
covering it completely, (and some say) with great pain.
It is treated with venesection.
Akßhi pákátyaya (Akshi-Páká, Netra-páka):
(Inflammation of the entire eye.) Oil and fomentation
is done for both swelling (sa-¤hopha) and non
swelling (a-ßhopha) forms. Venesection is then done.
A triphalá decoction is used as eye wash and eye
drops, nasal evacuatives, and Puta-páka are also
applied.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 443
Puta-páka: Triphalá and water are first mixed into
a paste. The paste is then pasted on the bottom side
of two leaves of Jamum or Vat, and left in the sun to
dry. After the eyes are cleansed, myrrh, ginger, pippalí,
black pepper, viæa´ga, ghee, honey, and milk are used
as an eye salve.
Ajaká (anterior staphyloma): A reddish painful growth
rising from below the surface of the black area, with
red, slimy secretions. The watery accumulation in the
eye is drained by a needle puncture on either side of
the cornea, and the hole filled with ghee.
Chandrodaya varti with honey is used for this
condition. Scarifying or rubbing is frequently done if
the punctured area becomes elevated.
Disease Affecting the Entire Eye
(Sarva-gata-Roga-Abhißhyandha/
Conjunctivitis)
Development, Symptoms and Therapies: Seventeen
forms of eye diseases affect the eye as a whole. Herbal
therapies are useful when these diseases are not se-
vere. Only when conditions are serious is venesec-
tion required.
1-4. Ophthalmia (Abißhyanda): Eye inflammation
(four types)
  a) Váyu—causes pricking eye pain, numbness,
irritation, roughness, dryness, restricted movement,
cold tears, lack of secretions, and headache. First, a
few drops of ghee are applied in the eye. Then the
forehead, over the eye is fomented. Next, local
venesection is done. Other useful therapies include,
oil enema for cleansing, eye drops of triphalá, raw
honey, ghee (tepid in winter, cold in summer). Eight
drops are used for scarifying, 10 drops for lubricating,
and 12 drops for healing. Aromatherapy (frankincense
and sandalwood), eye washes (triphalá), and nasal
evacuative oils using ámalakí, and ¤hatávarí are also
useful. Plasters of triphalá and licorice with milk are
used as a collyrium for acute Váyu ophthalmia.
Punarnavá is also useful for all Váyu eye diseases.
Another recommendation is the mixture of pippalí,
dhátakí flowers, rock salt, and 10-year-old ghee. This
is applied in the eye.
b) Pitta—burning, inflammatory secretions,
needing coldness in the eyes, excess hot secretions,
cloudy vision, yellow eyes. It is treated with
venesection. Bloodletting, purgatives (rhubarb, castor
oil, triphalá), eye washes, plasters (around eyes),
medicated nasal oils, eye salves, and Pitta-Visarpa
(erysipelas) therapies. Herbs include cardamom,
lodhra, musta, cane sugar, dúrba, ghee, raw honey,
red sandalwood, licorice, milk, turmeric, punarnavá,
viæa´ga, cardamom. Depending upon the consistency,
liquid or paste, they may be used as plasters, washes,
salves, eye drops, or taken internally.
c) Kapha—desiring warmth, heaviness, itching,
swelling, excess whiteness, constant deposit and
discharge of slimy mucus. It is treated with
venesection. During acute aggravation when
fomentations does not help, the local vein is opened.
Nasal drops using fresh herbs (avapida nasya), eye
salves, aromatherapy, washes, plasters, gargles, puta-
páka rukßha. Persons fast every 4 days on ghee
cooked with arjuna, triphalá, musta, sandalwood,
turmeric, ¤hatávarí, and calamus taken in the
morning. Lunch and dinner meals should not
aggravate Kapha.
Mild fomentation with bilwa and triphalá is
applied around the eye. A thin plaster of triphalá,
ginger, cedar, lodhra, barberry root, and elá
(cardamom) is applied over the eyelid or entire eye.
Triphalá, licorice, asafoetida, turmeric, licorice,
ginger, pippalí, black pepper, harítakí, viæa´ga,
punarnavá, t^ikatu, musta, and white pepper are
mixed with water into a paste and applied in the eye
as a salve.
  d) Blood—red eyes, coppery tears, deep red
stripes, Pitta symptoms. It is treated with venesection.
Ghee is taken internally and externally, therapies for
blood/Pitta and Pitta visarpa are followed, and a Pitta-
reduction diet is required.
5-9. Adhimantha (acute glaucoma): All chronic
types must be quickly treated or excruciating eye pain
(as if the eye is being torn out) will develop. The pain
extends upward to half the head, feeling as though it
is crushing the head. Specific doßha symptoms also
exist.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
444
a) Váyu—cloudy eye, feeling as though it is being
torn out and stirred, is irritating, piercing and painful,
with local fleshy swelling. The side of the head with
the affected eye develops symptoms of twisting,
cracking, swelling, and shivering. It is treated with
venesection (also see Váyu ophthalmia therapies).
b) Pitta—blood-streaked eye, secretions, burning
sensation in the eye and head, swelling, perspiration,
eye secretion, yellowed vision, fainting, liver-colored
eyes and feeling ulcerated. It is treated with
venesection (also see Pitta ophthalmia).
c) Kapha—swollen eyes, slight congestion
(inflammation), cold, itching heavy secretions, slimy
deposits of mucus, slight clouding, dilated nostrils,
headaches, objects are seen as dusty. It is treated with
venesection. See Kapha ophthalmia therapies.
d) Blood—pricking pain and blood-streaked
secretions of the eye, bright red eyes, unbearable to
touch, objects seem as if on fire, eye extremities
become red, cornea (white coat of the eye) looks as if
it is submerged in blood. It is treated with venesection.
See blood ophthalmia therapies.
If one does not follow a wholesome diet
(according to the excessed doßha) blindness may
occur (within 3 days for Pitta, 6 days for Váyu, 5
days for blood, and 7 days for Kapha).
10. Netra-páka:
a) Swelling (Sa-¤hopha)—itching, mucus deposits
in the eye, teary secretions, redness, burning, coppery
colored, heavy, pricking pain, swelling, constantly
secreting cold or hot slimy discharges, eventually
forming pus. It can only be treated with venesection.
b) Nonswelling (A-¤hopha)—the same symptoms
except swelling. It is treated with venesection. Blood-
purifying herbs and diuretics, such as mañjißhþhá and
gokßhura, respectively are useful.
11. Blinding Eye Inflammation (Hatádhimantha):
Excessed Váyu becomes caught in the optic nerve.
This is incurable.
12. Váyu-Paryáya: Shifting pain in the eye lashes (or
just the eyebrows and eyes). The same measures as
Váyu ophthalmia are used, including, ingesting large
amounts of ghee before the meal with da¤hmúl,
t^ikatu, tagar, mañjißhþhá, barberry, figs, kaòókárí, and
musta. It may also be treated with venesection.
13. £hußhká-kaßhi-páka: Eyelids become dry, hard,
remain closed. Vision is cloudy and hazy vision. Great
pain is experienced when opening the eyelids. Sur-
gery is contraindicated. Cedar, powered ginger, milk,
and ghee are mixed and used as a collyrium. Ingest-
ing ghee with balá, ¤hatávarí and licorice, and drop-
ping this liquid in the eye is also useful. Alternatively,
dry ginger and rock salt can be used internally or as
eye drops. Nasal oil of bráhmí and triphalá ghee is
helpful, as are eye washes of milk with black salt or
milk cooked with cedar.
14. Anyato-váyu: excessed Váyu in the head, ears,
cheek bones, back of the neck, the nerves on either
side of the neck (the manyá marmas) causes great
pain in the eyes or eye brows. It is treated with ven-
esection. The same measures as Váyu ophthalmia are
used, including ingesting large amounts of ghee be-
fore the meal with a decoction of bilwa, gámbhárí,
sonapatta, paþola, ajwan, and sarsaparilla. This de-
coction is also used as an ointment.
15. Amládhyushita-Drißhti: Eating excessive amounts
of acidic foods (or from acid indigestion) causes the
eyes to swell and develop a bluish red tint. Surgery is
contraindicated. The same therapies as Pitta
ophthalmia are used, and triphalá ghee.
16. Sirotpáta (hyperemia conjunctivitis): The veins
throughout the eye become coppery, with or without
pain. If not quickly attended to, copious discharges
of transparent and coppery color develop, leading to
complete blindness. Rasáñjan is advised, i.e., bar-
berry, vaμ¤ha lochana, white pepper, sámudra phena
(os sepiae or cuttlefish bone), and phitkárí (alum,
sulfate of alumina and potash or of aluminum and
ammonium; aluminous sulfate) mixed with honey.
Additional therapies include honey and ghee as an
eye salve. It is also treated with venesection.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 445
17. Sirá-harßha (orbital cellulitis): If sirotpáta is
not quickly treated, large amounts of transparent
and coppery eye secretions develop and cause
blindness. Therapies include rhubarb, musta, and
amalatas mixed with honey, and used as an eye salve.
It is also treated with venesection.
Pupil Diseases (Drißhti-gata-Roga-Vijnáñiya)
Development and Symptoms: There are 12 diseases
of the pupils. One disease affects the coating over the
entire pupil.
1st Pupil Coat (Patala): When the excessed doßhas
pass into the eye’s innermost coat through the veins,
objects appear dim and hazy.
2nd Pupil Coat: When excessed doßhas are found in
the second coat, false images appear before the eyes
(of bugs, hair, nets, cobwebs, circular patches, flags,
and earrings), objects appear covered in mist, haze,
as if underwater, or seen through colored droplets
falling in all directions.
3rd Pupil Coat: When the excessed doßhas reach the
third coat, one only sees higher placed objects, and
cannot see objects below a certain level. If the crys-
talline lens is affected, objects reflect the colors of
the lens. Objects seem covered with cloth. One does
not see ears, eyes, noses etc. on other people. When
the doßhas affect the lower area of the crystalline lens
blocks near vision, affecting the upper area causes
distant blocking, and excessed doßhas in the lateral
areas blocks lateral vision. When the doßhas affect
the entire lens, objects are seen as dim and confused.
If the middle part of the lens is affected, objects ap-
pear to be cut in two. When the doßhas are in two
places, there is triple vision. A multi-image of ob-
jects develops when the doßhas are all over the lens.
4th Pupil Coat: Loss of vision (timira) results from
excessed doßhas being trapped in this area. Superfi-
cial excesses only allow for the vision of bright ob-
jects, whereas deep-seated excesses cause blindness.
Six Healable Diseases
All six healable diseases of the pupil and lens, the
local veins, loss of vision (timira), cataracts (kácha),
linga-náßha, Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, blood (rakta),
tridoßha, and parimláyi are bled, persons are duly
purged using ghee mixed with herbal purgatives.
Váyu symptoms of all six diseases:
Castor oil with boiled milk is used as a purgative.
Pitta/blood symptoms of all six diseases:
Triphalá ghee is used as a purgative.
1. Blindness (Timira):
Triphalá ghee is useful in all types of timira. Na-
sal evacuatives with sesame oil are also goo for all
forms of this disease.
Váyu-caused blindness requires triphalá mixed
with sesame oil. Kapha-caused Timira needs triphalá
mixed with honey. Pitta-caused therapy involves
goat’s milk boiled with kákolí, kßhír kákolí, honey,
licorice, and saraswat. Váyu doßhas use a decoction
of a¤hwagandhá, bilwa, and ¤hatávarí. Kapha doßhas
inhale smoke of viæa´ga, patta (corchorus
capsularis), apámárga seed, and hingot bark pow-
ders. Also, an ointment of vat, pippalí, kákolí, tur-
meric, and fig tree bark (anjír) is useful.
An eye salve using ghee, honey, salt, licorice is
useful. Ingestibles for all causes of blindness include
ghee, triphalá, ¤hatávarí, ámalakí, and barley. Blood-
letting is never used for this disease if the eye is red
as it will aggravate the condition.
If a lack of redness exists, and the disease in only
in the first coat, the disease is healable. When red-
ness develops, and the second coat is affected, it is
very difficult to heal. Should the third coat be affected,
showing redness on the first coat, it is only control-
lable.
Váyu Blindness—objects appear cloudy, moving,
crooked and red. This cannot be healed. Therapies
include triphalá, ¤hatávarí, and sesame

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
446
oil paste is eaten. Another therapy is ámalakí, rock
salt, pippalí (in equal amounts), and a little black
pepper. All these herbs are mixed and taken with
honey. Yogurt water may be taken as well.
Pitta Blindness—objects seem to be rainbow-colored,
like a flash of lightning, the feathers of a peacock or
with a dark blue-black tint. Therapies include triphalá
ghee paste is eaten. Sarsaparilla, licorice, cane sugar,
and honey are applied as an ointment. Lodhra, elá,
punarnavá mixed with honey can also be used as an
ointment.
Kapha Blindness—objects appear with a thick cloud-
white coating in a dull, oily, hazy, or as though looking
through water. This is a progressively developing
cataract. Triphalá and honey are eaten. Sarsaparilla,
dry ginger and dry molasses cakes are applied to the
eyes.
Blood Blindness—objects appear red, gray, black, or
multicolored, or enveloped in gloom. Lodhra,
triphalá, punarnavá, rose water applied as a collyrium
(black powder). Another therapy is sandalwood,
¤hilájit, kesar, neem gum, and white lotus, made into
a collyrium.
Tridoßha Blindness—objects seem variegated and
confused with double or triple vision, with stars and
planets appearing broken, or with additional
armatures, and floating. Chandrodaya varti can
probably heal this condition. Otherwise, it cannot be
healed.
Pitta/Blood: (Parimláyi) The corners of the sky seem
yellow and bright like a sunrise, trees appear to sparkle
with lights like fireflies. The same therapies as Pitta
cataracts are used here. Should this not balance the
doßhas, salves and nasal oils are also applied.
Cataract (Kácha) Therapy: This is a corneal
calcification preventing persons from seeing.
Váyu: Ghee, milk, and triphalá as an eye salve.
Pitta: Ghee is used as nose oil and as a meal. Triphalá
is ingested. Puta-páka and an eye salve of paþola
patra, punarnavá, red sandalwood, barberry, ámalakí,
and lodhra.
Kapha: Triphalá and sesame oil are cooked together
and used as a nasal oil, aromatherapy using viæa´ga,
paþola patra, punarnavá, turmeric, red sandalwood,
ámalakí, and lodhra. Ghee and honey are mixed with
these honey. This mixture is applied to the eye as
puta-páka.
Tridoßha: Triphalá decoction and licorice are used
as a salve, in puta-páka and as food.
Linga-náßha (cataract): Surgery is required.
Sometimes, therapies of barberry with honey, or
chandrodaya varti with honey may be helpful.
Váyu—reddish-looking pupils, circular patches
that move around, and are rough to the touch. This
cannot be healed.
    Pitta—blue, yellow-blue or metal-colored
circular patches and pupils. This cannot be healed.
   Kapha—whitish pupils circular patches are thick,
oily and white, looking like a drop of water. It moves
when the eye is rubbed. This cannot be healed.
    Blood—blood-red pupils.
    Tridoßha—pupils are multicolored with symptoms
of the different doßhas. This cannot be healed.
  Pitta/Blood—a blue or yellow blue circular patch,
looking like a blade of grass on the pupil. Occasional
glimpses of light are possible.
Two forms of linga-náßha due to trauma also exist.
Surgery is contraindicated for these diseases.
1. Sa-nimitta (determined origin): Loss of sight
resulting from overheating of the brain (causes include
inhaled poisons) and toxicity in the blood. The pupil
is sunken, pierced, or impaired. Triphalá ghee is
advised in this condition.
2. A-nimitta (undetermined origin): Loss of vision
resulting from excessively bright lights, including that
of celestial beings. The eye is not outwardly affected.
Triphalá ghee or gámbhárí flower, licorice, lodhra,
and barberry are suggested.
Pupil and Crystalline Lens Therapies: Three of these
diseases can be healed, three are incurable, and six
can only be controlled. The general therapies are again
suggested.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 447
Pitta-Vidaghda-Drißhti: Pupils and objects appear
yellowish, persons only have night vision. It is caused
by excess Pitta in the third coat. Surgery is
contraindicated. All the therapies for Pitta (except
surgery) are used here. Triphalá ghee is also very
good for this condition. Gambier flowers, licorice,
lodhra, and barberry are also suggested.
Kapha-vidagha-drißhti: Kapha appearing over the
three parts of the lens, causing objects to be seen
whitish and night blindness. Surgery is
contraindicated. All the therapies for Kapha (except
surgical operations) are used here. Traivrita ghee is
very good for this condition. Also, nirguòæí seed, elá,
and pippalí, mixed with goat’s milk is suggested.
For Pitta and Kapha vidagdha-drißhtis, eye salves are
used with myrrh, pippalí, pepper, açhoka, triphalá,
and kapikachhú mixed with honey.
Kapha Vidhagha (night blindness): Myrrh, pippalí,
ginger, licorice, triphalá, and balá are used on the
eye and also ingested. A salve consisting of triphalá,
myrrh, pippalí, and cardamom mixed with honey is
also useful.
Dhúma-drißhti or Dhúma-darßhin
(Smoky vision): Objects seem dusty or smoky
resulting from grief, high and prolonged fevers,
straining, excessive physical exercise, or head injuries.
Surgery is contraindicated. The same healing
therapies as Pitta ophthalmia are suggested. Ghee is
taken internally and externally, therapies for blood/
Pitta and Pitta visarpa are followed. A Pitta reduction
diet is required.
Hrasva-Jatya (Day blindness): Cold weather causes
a loss of Pitta that creates difficulty with seeing small
objects in the daytime that may easily be seen at night.
A combination of myrrh, licorice, triphalá, ghee, and
honey is used as an eye salve.
Nakulandhyatá: The pupil seems to emit luminous
flashes and day vision appears multicolor. This is
treated similarly to night-blindness.
Gambhiriká (paralysis of the carrial nerve): Excess
Váyu contracts the pupil and deforms it, causing it to
sink in its socket . It is associated with extreme pain.
Scarifying/Rubbing (Lekhana):
This therapy requires licensed medical care, and will
not be discussed in detail here. Vartmá-vabandha,
klißhta-vartma, bahala-vartma, pothaki eye diseases
are gently scraped, then scarified. £hyáva-vartma and
kardama-vartma diseases are moderately rubbed
(neither too light nor too deep). Small, hard coppery
pus pimples that may arise from rubbing are cut. Small
and slightly swollen pimples on the exterior eyelid
surface are fomented and plastered.
Incisions:
General: Before pus develops, oil and light
fomentation are administered to the eye. Once pus
has developed, therapies for healing an ulcer are used.
Vißha-granthi: First fomentation is conducted, then
holes are cut to remove swelling. This is followed by
dusting with myrrh and cardamom powder. Ghee and
honey are applied over the dust and a loose bandage
is applied.
Upanáha: The area is opened and rubbed with pippalí
and myrrh powders mixed with honey. It is then
scraped, and the surrounding area is also gently
scratched.
Excisions: Only surgeons are qualified to perform
exicsions. Diseases requiring excision include arman,
sirá-jála, sirá-pidaká, parvaniká, and the inner eyelid.
£hukti-páka: (Inflammatory diseases, such as ble-
pharitis, styes, conjunctivitis, etc.) The same thera-
pies as Pitta ophthalmia are used, and triphalá ghee.
An eye salve with cooling herbs (e.g., musta, viæa´ga)
is useful for lower eye disorders.
Arjun and Sulel: General therapies are used.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
448
Eye Therapy Glossary
Triphalá may be ingested and used as an eyewash
(after straining). Depending upon the doßha
responsible for the illness, herbs are used to reduce
the doßha excess.
Soothing (tarpana):
These remedies are used in the morning or
afternoon after nasal purgation, elimination of stool
and digestion of the previous meal. (Technically, the
planets should be auspiciously situated.) Persons lie
on a bed in a clean, draftless room where the sun
does not get in their eyes.
The eyelids are thickly coated with a paste of black
gram and water and built as a circular wall to surround
the eye. Ghee and tepid water are poured within the
wall, in the eye, up to the eye lashes (see Netra Basti
in Chapter 7 page 244). Healthy Kapha-, Pitta-, and
Váyu-imbalanced persons should allow the ghee to
remain in their eyes for 3 periods of time: 8 minutes/
20 seconds, 10 minutes, and 16 minutes/20 seconds
respectively. Other authorities suggest the length of
retention varies according to what part of the eye is
affected: sandhi—-five minutes, vart-man—eight
minutes/20 seconds, white (¤hukla)—11 minutes/45
seconds, black (k^ißhòa)—16 minutes/45 seconds.
For diseases affecting the entire eye—13 minutes/20
seconds. Still, others say that such eye diseases require
16 minutes/45 seconds, and diseases affecting the
pupils require 30 minutes.
The ghee is then released through the inner corner
of the eye. Kapha becomes excessed in this area and
is then relieved by inhaling Kapha-reducing aromas
such as cedar, frankincense, or myrrh. This continues
for 1, 3, or 5 days for Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha,
respectively, or some say for mild, moderate, and
severe symptoms, respectively.
Tarpana is used for symptoms of shriveling or
debilitation of the eyelashes, cloudy and dark vision,
arched vision, no tears, parched eye, hard eyelids,
and severe diseases of the eye.
Precautions: Tarpana is not used on cloudy, very
hot or very cold days. Persons who are anxious or
fearful should not use tarpana. Nor should it be used
before major symptoms have cleared up.
Puta-páka:
Three forms exist:
1. Emulsives (snehana)—used in very dry conditions.
2. Scraping (lekhana)—used when oil is frequently
applied to the eye.
3. Healing (ropana)—used when eye diseases are
healed.
Preparation:
1. Emulsives—ghee with ¤hatávarí, balá and licorice,
are held in the eye for 3 minutes/20 seconds.
2. Scraping—ghee with pravál pißhti or salt (scraping
properties), and are used for 1 minute/45 seconds.
3. Healing—ghee, milk, raw honey, and herbs such
as mañjißhþhá, barberry, turmeric, neem, chamelí,
sandalwood, bilwa, ajwan, and onion. These herbs
are kept in the eye for 5 minutes.
Puta-páka is done from 1 to 3 days, 1 day for
Kapha disorders or for scraping measures, 2 days for
Pitta eye diseases or emulsive therapy, 3 days for Váyu
eye disorders or healing puta-páka.
Oil, fomentation and aromas are used for
emulsives and scraping puta-páka, but not for the
healing version. Persons must carefully follow their
diets and life-styles (according to their doßha) for
twice as long as the therapy lasts.
Proper use of tarpana and puta-páka results in
clearing of the symptoms involved, whereas improper
use will result in a worsening of vision, pain and other
unhealthy symptoms.
Precautions: Follow all the precautions of tarpana,
nasal evacuatives, and internal oils. After the doßhas
are rebalanced, all precautions are met and tarpana
is applied, puta-páka is then used.
Upon completion of tarpana, one should not stare
at bright lights, including the sun, a fire, or any
luminous object. Further, one is required to prevent
wind gusts from hitting the eye. If these precautions
are not followed and the eyes are hurt, or if they are
hurt from improper puta-páka and tarpana remedies,
eye salves, drops, nasal evacuatives, aromatherapy,
and fomentation can alleviate the troubles.
Procedure: General herbal therapies are used.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 449
Sprinkling (¤heka) and Eye
drops (áschyotana):
(See Chapter 7- Pañcha Karma page 243 for more
details). Eye drops are used for mild diseases of the
eye, and sprinkling is used for severe symptoms.
Three forms of these therapies exist, just like puta-
páka,
Scraping (lekhana)—7 to 8 drops
Emulsive (sehana)—10 drops
Healing (ropana)—12 drops
Some say eye drops are held as long as puta-páka,
and sprinkling is held in the eye for twice as long.
Others say that both are held in the eye twice as long
as puta-páka. Both therapies are applied in the morn-
ing, afternoon, or evening (depending upon the doßha
imbalanced), or whenever there is eye pain. Again,
proper application results in feeling better, whereas
improper application results in feeling worse. (This
is stated because there is a belief in many holistic
circles that detoxification causes one to feel worse
before they feel better. This is not so with Áyurvedic
therapies, except for some skin conditions).
Head Bladders (¤hiro-basti): (See Chapter 7—Pañcha
Karma page 240). This is used for various head dis-
orders. After receiving purgatives and emetics (de-
pending upon the doßha imbalance), and having eaten
according to the doßhas imbalanced, persons are ready
for ¤hiro basti. In the evening, sitting erect, a bladder
or cone that will not leak from oil placed inside it, is
placed on the head, and firmly tied around the fore-
head. Emulsive oil is poured inside the cone, to al-
low the head to soak in the oil. (Some authorities use
various pastes between the cone and the forehead to
prevent leaks.) The head is soaked for 10 times or as
long as the time the tarpana is held in the eye.
Eye salves (añjana): There are three forms of eye
salves:
1. Scraping (lekhana)—herbs used may be of one or
more taste, except sweet (i.e., sour, salty, pungent,
bitter, astringent). The tastes used will depend upon
the doßha imbalanced. Váyu: sour and salty
Pitta: astringent
Kapha: pungent, bitter, astringent
Blood: astringent
Dual/Tri-Doßhas—combinations of the tastes When
an excess of the doßhas exists in the eye, eyelids, in
the eyeball, its passages and capillaries, and in the
nose gristle, they are secreted through the mouth,
nostrils, and corners of the eye through the application
of scraping salves.
2. Healing (ropana)—Herbs used contain bitter and
astringent tastes, mixed with a little ghee. This cooling
therapy brings color and strength to the eye.
3. Invigorating (prasádana)—Sweet herbs are used
with a large amount of ghee. This tones and invigo-
rates the vision.
Punarnavá or chandrodaya salves are used in the
morning for Kapha disorders, afternoon for Pitta im-
balances, and evening with deranged Váyu. Other
authorities say scraping is done in the morning, heal-
ing in the afternoon, and invigorating at night. A third
opinion to sue them according to the seasonal doßhas.
Salves may be in pill, liquid and powder form, and
may be used for serious, moderate, and mild symp-
toms. A typical dose is 4 to 6 gms
Procedure: The eyelids are made to slant with the
left-hand fingers while the salve is applied with the
right hand. The salve is applied from the cornea to
the apañga (corners) and back again (along the inner
eyelid). It is repeated two or three times. A rod is
used for the inside eyelid, and the finger is used on
the outer eyelid.
The salve is only thinly pasted in the corners of the
eye (from the cornea to the corner) so as not to hurt
the area. Only after the doßhas are reduced is the eye
to be washed, otherwise the symptoms might be fur-
ther aggravated. First the eye is washed with water.
Pratyanjana [sarsaparilla, honey, sugar, licorice, and
relegar mainßhil (antimony sulfide) mixed with wa-
ter] is then used depending upon the doßha
imbalanced or one’s constitution.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
450
Herbs: Triphalá, myrrh, punarnavá, kußhtha,
sandalwood, cardamom, licorice, pippalí, black
pepper, jaóámáò¤hí, mañjißhþhá, cedar, lodhra,
barberry, and tálíspatra.
Precautions: Anjana is not used when there is fever,
udávarta, with head diseases, during anger, grief, fear,
crying, intoxication, constipation, or urine retention
because it might cause tears, pain, redness, blindness,
swelling, or giddiness. It is not to be used with
insomnia as it may cause blindness. Anjana is not to
be used on windy days, as it may cause impairment
to the sight.
     When the eyes have dust or smoke in them, anjana
may cause redness, ophthalmia, or tears. It is not used
after nasal therapies as it may cause aching and eye
swelling. Any head disease will be further aggravated
by using anjana. It is not used before sunrise, after
bathing, on very cold days, or with indigestion. When
the doßhas are imbalanced, anjana should not be used.
     This is especially true for scraping anjana. Instead,
these symptoms are treated with washing the eyes
with water, drops, plasters, smoke, nasal therapies,
and gargles, depending upon the symptoms of the
imbalanced doßhas.
As with other therapies, proper application of
scraping anjana results in improved conditions,
whereas improper application (excess or deficient
application) results in increased troubles. For
improper application, the anjana is completely
removed through using nasal therapies, anjana, and
steam therapy.
Invigorating and healing salves are applied prop-
erly when the symptoms are soothed. Excess or defi-
cient application results in aggravation of symptoms.
To heal excess and deficient application, puta-páka,
aromas, and nasal therapies are used.
External Eye Injury Nayaná-
bhigháta- Pratißhedha
Causes and Symptoms: Violent, unbearable eye pain
with redness and swelling, caused by injury to the
eye, or resulting from excess fomentation, smoke,
glare, fear, or agony, is healed by nasal therapies,
plasters, sprinkling (seka), soothing (tarpana)
measures, puta-páka, and all therapies for Pitta and
blood conjunctivitis (abißhyanda). Cool, sweet, and
bulk-promoting herbs are also useful.
     For excess fomentation, smoke, glare, fear, agony,
pain, or injury, these therapies are used during the
first week of the disease. Afterwards, therapies
identical to those used for conjunctivitis (depending
upon the excessed doßha) are employed. Mild
conditions may be immediately relieved by applying
warm breath fomentation (steam in the mouth).
If ulceration is on only one coating of the eye, it is
easily healed. When two coats are affected healing it
is difficult. If three coats are affected it cannot be
healed. When eye looseness, dislocation, sunkeness,
deep impressions, or loss of vision exist, the situation
is only containable. Poor vision with pupil dilation,
without extreme redness or eyeball dislocation, and
good vision are signs that therapies will be helpful.
To raise a sunken eye, holding one’s breath,
causing vomiting, sneezing, or choking the windpipe
is useful. If the eyes are hanging from the sockets, it
is reinstalled without damaging the nerves, and gently
pressed with the palms (with a lotus leaf between the
pupil and the palm). The eye is then filled with a
tarpana of milk, and medicated ghee. This liquid is
also used as a nasal therapy. Long breaths of air are
taken through the nostrils, and cold water is poured
on the head.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 451
Infant Inner Eyelid Disorder (Kukunaka-opthalmia):
Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, and blood may become
imbalanced owing to poor quality of breast milk.
Symptoms include excess itching of the eyes,
frequently rubbing the eyes, nose, and forehead with
fists. Tears are constant, and sunlight is unbearable.
Therapies first involve blood-letting (with
leeches), scraping with rough leaves, and then rubbing
with t^ikatu and honey paste. The mother follows
therapies described earlier for improving the quality
of breast milk. The child should be given black salt,
honey, pippalí, jamun (a black, sweet fruit in India),
ámalakí, mango leaves and bark, neem, guæúchí, and
ghee as an emetic. Therapy is stopped when the child
begins to vomit.
If the child is drinking breast milk and solid foods,
the emetic is given with calamus. For older children
no longer drinking breast milk, the emetic is given
with rock salt, apámárga (kapikachhú) seed, pippalí,
mainsphal, and milk. The eyes are washed and
sprinkled, and eye drops of triphalá and guæúchí ghee
are applied. Salves of black pepper, myrrh, t^ikatu,
onion, licorice, neem, turmeric, lodhra, and
punarnavá, pasted with honey and water are useful.
Mouth Cavity (Mukha Roga)
These diseases include the lips (ústh), gums
(dantmúl), teeth (dantaka), tongue (jihvá), palate
(tálu-gata) i.e., tonsillitis, throat/larynx (kaòóa roga),
entire mouth cavity (savra-sara).
Diseases covered under this section include
gingivitis, tartar, tooth abscess, and laryngitis.
Causes: There are 65 diseases of the mouth cavity:
8 lip disorders, 15 gum problems, 8 tooth ills, 5 tongue
concerns, 9 palate complaints, 17 throat conditions,
and 3 maladies of the entire cavity.
Two forms of healing are available for all
disorders:
Gandúßha: One sits in a darkened room with no draft,
while the neck and shoulders are massaged and
sudated. The mouth is filled with liquid and held, until
there is no room for movement, or until the nose and
eyes begin to tear.
Kavala (gargling): The directions are the same as
gandúßha, only half the mouth is filled with the
liquids, so there is room to gargle. All the herbs and
discussed below are used here as well. Either approach
can be used, gandúßha or kavala.
Therapies: Tingling or pains associated with the teeth
(Váyu excesses): sesame oil, warm water. (Perhaps
the calcium in sesame oil heals tooth and gum
problems.) Triphalá decoction is one of the best
general remedies for oral diseases. It can be used for
either kavala or gandúßha.
Incurable Mouth Diseases
Mouth: Caused by imbalanced muscle, blood, or
tridoßhic causes:
Gums: Tridoßhic sinus in the gums (náæí vraòa) and
tridoßhic ¤haußhira (gingivitis with cavity). Teeth:
§hyáva-dantaka (black or blue discoloration on teeth),
dálana (toothache), and bhanjana (chipped tooth).
Tongue: Alása.
Palate: Arvuda (palate cancer).
Throat: Valaya (tumor), v^inda (large tumor), balása
(sarcoma), ¤hataghni (malignant growths),
inflammatory swelling (vidárí), tridoßhic
inflammatory swelling (máåsatána), rohini.
Tumors and palate cancer require surgery as well
as detoxifying herbs (see Chapter 22). For impacted
teeth (adhimámsaká) additional herbs of vachá,
pippalí, and neem are used, followed by
¤hirovirechana, snuff and inhaling smoke.
For throat edema, tonsillitis, palatal abscess, acute
superficial glossitis, gingivitis, dental abscess, goiter,
and hyperthyroidism, see the Metabolic System;
Chapter 25.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
452
Mouth, and Tooth Disorders (Mukha Roga)
Causes: Over-eating animal products, milk, and yo-
gurt causes gum and tooth disorders, as well as an
excess of all three doßhas with a predominance of
Kapha.
Lips:
Váyu causes lips to become rough, hard,
immovable, painful, and to develop cracks and
fissures.
Pitta excesses cause painful inflammatory
elevations with burning. Ulcers and are yellowish.
Kapha increases cause the lips to develop slightly
painful elevations (papules). Lips are unctuous, cold,
and heavy.
Tridoßhic excesses cause black, yellow, or white
lips, with a bumpy appearance or having several
elevations.
Blood (rakta) excesses cause red elevations that
discharge blood.
Muscle (máåsa) excesses cause lips to become
heavy, thick, lumpy, with discharges from the corners
of the mouth that contain worms.
Fat (medas) excesses cause lips to appear shiny
like ghee, develop heaviness, and exude large
quantities of a clear fluid. Ulcers can form and not
heal. Lips do not return to their normal softness.
External injury can cause bleeding, swelling, or
itching.
Gum Disorders (Dantamúla Roga)
Bleeding, Spongy Gums (¤hitáda) with foul smell,
blackening, oozing, soft, tearing muscle, and pus
formation result from excess Kapha and blood (rakta).
Gum Swelling/Gingivitis (dantapuppuóaka) [of
2 or 3 teeth] is also caused by Kapha and rakta. See
the Metabolic System Chapter (25).
Pus, Blood, Shaky Teeth /Bleeding Gingivitis/
Pyorrhea (dantaveßhóa) are caused by bad blood.
Swelling at the root of a tooth (¤haußhira) causes
excess saliva. This is caused by Kapha and rakta.
Loose Teeth, Palate Fissure and ¤haußhira
symptoms (mahá¤haußhira) are caused by all three
doßhas. Herbal therapies are not useful for this
condition.
Gum Decay and Bleeding (paridara) result from
excess Pitta, rakta, and Kapha.
Burning Gums, Ulcers, Shaky Teeth (upa-ku¤ha)
result from excess Pitta and rakta.
Gum Chaffing, Burning, Ulcers, Shaky Teeth
(vaidarbha) result from trauma.
Extra Tooth [growing over an existing tooth]
causes severe pain during growth (khalivard-hana)
results from excess Váyu.
Irregular or Ugly Teeth (karála) result from excess
Váyu. No therapy exists for this condition.
Large Swelling at Last Molar causes great pain and
dribbling saliva (adhimáåsaka) is caused by excess
Kapha.
Gum Sinus Ulcers (náæí vraòa) [five kinds] are
similar to those discussed in Chapter 16, page 405.
Tooth Disorders (Danta Roga)
Toothache (dálana) results from excess Váyu.
Black Holes in Teeth, Bleeding, Swollen, Painful
(krimidantaka) is caused by excess Váyu.
Irregular Shape of Face and Teeth (bhañ-janaka)
is caused by excess Váyu and Kapha.
Sensitive Teeth (dantaharßha) results from excess
Pitta and Váyu.
Tooth Tartar (dant¤harkará) results from Pitta and
Váyu. In addition to herbal therapies, scraping,
dusting and snuff are required.
Excess Tartar, Flakes and Decay (kapáliká). This
is very difficult to heal.
Black or Blue Teeth (¤hyávadantaka) results from
Pitta and rakta. Herbal therapies are not useful for
this condition.
Gum Abscess (with pus and blood, burning and
pain) (dantavidradhi) is discussed under Metabolic
System, Chapter 25.
Tongue Disorders (Jihwá Roga)
Váyu excesses cause fissures, loss of sensation,
and are leaf-like in appearance.
Pitta excesses cause burning sensations with
studded elevations and reddish thorny lesions.
Kapha excesses cause thickness, swelling, and
muscular sprouts.
Large Swelling (alása) has symptoms of excess
Kapha and rakta, making it difficult to move the

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 453
tongue. An ulcer develops at the root of the tongue.
This condition cannot be helped with herbs.
Salivary Cyst (upajihvá) is a severe swelling under
the tip of the tongue caused by Kapha and rakta.
Symptoms include excess salivation, itching and
localized burning sensation. This is discussed in
Chapter 25, page 533.
Palate Disorders (Tálugata Roga)
Enlarged uvula (kanóa ¤huòæi) is caused by excess
Kapha and rakta. Symptoms include thirst, cough,
and difficulty swallowing. Herbs are used after
surgery.
Hard Swelling (tuòæikerí) is an advanced stage
of enlarged uvula. Symptoms include burning
sensation and pus or ulcer.
Soft Swelling (adhrußha) is caused by excess rakta
with fever and severe pain.
Palatal Tumor (kachapa) is caused by excess
Kapha. It develops slowly and is painless. See Chapter
22 for cancer therapies.
Palate Cancer (táluarbuda) is a swelling at the
palate center caused by excess rakta. This condition
is painless. Herbs are used after surgery (see Chapter
22).
Benign Tumor (máåsa sanghata) is caused by
Kapha it is called máåsa-sa´gháta. This swelling is
painless. Herbs are used after surgery (see Chapter
22).
Fatty Cysts (tálu pupputa) is caused by Kapha and
fat. Small papule sized, it is painless and does not
move.
Dryness (tálu¤hoßha) results from excess Váyu.
Symptoms include difficulty breathing. Ulcer (tálu
páka) results from excess Pitta.
Throat Disorders (Kaòóha Roga)
Rohini : All three doßhas become excessed and
invade the muscle tissue (máåsa dhátu) and blood
(rakta), causing sprouts in the throat that obstruct the
throat and may lead to death. Any of the doßhas can
predominate. —Váyu excesses cause severe pain over
the surface of the tongue (and other symptoms of
Váyu abscess—see Chapter 16) —Pitta excesses
cause sprouts that quickly appear, develop pus and
ulcer. These are accompanied by a high fever and
other symptoms of Pitta abscess.
—Kapha excesses cause large, hard, immovable
sprouts that totally block the throat. —Tridoßha (equal
strength of the doßhas) cause deeply rooted sprouts.
This condition is incurable.
—Rakta sprouts are small, with red papules and
symptoms of Pitta abscess.
Small Tumors (kaòóa ¤hálúka) are caused by
excess Kapha. They are hard, immovable and can
only be healed by surgery. Detoxifying herbs are used
thereafter for prevention of further growths (see
Chapter 22).
Swollen adenoids (adhijihvá) is caused by excess
Kapha and rakta, causing a swelling at the back of
the tongue. If pus or ulcer develop, herbal therapy is
not useful. Detoxifying herbs are following surgery
for prevention of further growths (see Chapter 22).
Tumor (valaya) results from excess Kapha and
obstructs the passage of food. This condition can not
be healed with herbs. Detoxifying herbs are used after
surgery for prevention of further growths (see Chapter
22).
Sarcoma (balása) is caused by excess Kapha and
Váyu causing swelling, difficulty breathing, pain, and
vital organ pain. This condition cannot be healed with
herbs. Detoxifying herbs are used after surgery for
prevention of further growths (see Chapter 22).
Tumor (ekavrinda) is a round, elevated swelling
with burning sensations, itching, hardness. It does not
develop pus or ulcer. It is caused by Kapha and rakta.
This condition cannot be healed with herbs.
Detoxifying herbs are used after surgery for
prevention of further growths (see Chapter 22).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
454
Large Tumor (vrinda) is caused by Pitta and blood.
It is an elevated, round swelling with severe burning
sensation and high fever. If Váyu is involved it is also
painful. This condition cannot be healed with herbs.
Detoxifying herbs are used after surgery for
prevention of further growths (see Chapter 22).
Malignant Growth (¤hataghni) is a swelling
studded with muscle-sprout spikes, causing different
kinds of pain and is life-threatening. This condition
cannot be healed with herbs. Detoxifying herbs are
used after surgery for prevention of further growths
(see Chapter 22).
Tonsillitis (galáyu) See the Metabolic System—
Chapter (25).
Pharyngeal abscess (gala vidradhi) is caused by
all three doßhas and is associated with swelling and
different kinds of pains.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
              Chapter 19: Ear, Nose, Throat, (Eyes, Mouth)
 455

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
456

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 457
Persons whose Váyu is in balance live 100 years without disease.
Mádhava Nidánam - Ch. 22; ver. 80
Chapter 20
Nervous System (Váta-vyádhi)
Convulsions, Sciatica, Insanity, Epilepsy, Addictions, Alcohol, Fainting,
Coma, Wasting, Multiple Sclerosis, Parkinsons, Alzheimer’s
s Váyu is the sustainer of life, those whose Váyu
flows properly will live a long and healthy life.
The five forms of Váyu governing the various
physical and mental movement of air have been pre-
viously discussed. They are repeated here, to show
how the Váyu sub-doähas can afflict the nervous sys-
tem
If any of the Váyus is imbalanced, or moves to the
wrong channel, the body becomes afflicted with vari-
ous disorders that can be life-threatening.
Cause: Váyu is the vital nerve-force that pervades
the entire body. It is considered identical to Divine
eternal energy and is, therefore, self-generating. Váyu
is at the root of all nervous disorders. Causes include
cold, roughness, lightness, little or no food, excessive
sex, talking or staying up late; or excessive release of
toxins and blood. Other causes are leaping, jumping,
traveling, or exercise in excess, wasting of the tissues,
excessive emaciation from anxiety, grief, fear, or
illness. Further causes are uncomfortable beds and
chairs, anger, naps, fear, suppressing natural urges,
áma (toxins), injury, fasting, injuring vital organs, or
accidents. Váyu becomes excessed, filling the body
channels, causing disorders associated with those
body parts.
As tissues become depleted, Váyu fills the chan-
nels with air, or become mixed with the other doßhas
that have filled the channels. A second way Váyu
becomes excessed is by increasing the functioning
of the channels. When Váyu is the only cause of vi-
tiation, the result is more severe; when it is mixed
with Pitta or Kapha, it is not as powerful.
Development: Váyu accumulates in its home site, the
colon, causing colic, gas, gurgling, feces obstruction,
urinary stones, herniated scrotum, hemorrhoids, sharp
pain the back and waist, and other difficult diseases
related to the lower body parts.
ä
y
Váyu
Location
Controls
Práòa
head, chest,
throat, tongue,
mouth, nose
digestion,
breathing,
belching,
sneezing
spitting, heart
function
Udána
navel, chest,
throat
speech, effort,
energy,
complexion,
aspiration,
memory
Samána
sweat, doßhas,
fluid, small
intestine
digestion
Vyána
entire body
circulation,
muscle and
joint
movement,
blinking,
secretions
Apána
colon, genitals,
urinary bladder,
navel, thighs,
anus
semen, urine,
stool, menses,
fetus

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
458
Symptoms: Excess Váyu causes contraction, stiff
joints, hands, back, or head; tearing of bones or joints,
hair standing on end, delirium, limping, crippling,
humpback, organ dryness, and insomnia. It also
causes organ numbness, crookedness of the head,
nose, eyes, neck, and clavicular area; miscarriage,
destruction of sperm or ovum, pulsation, tearing or
piercing pain, distress, convulsions, confusion, and
exhaustion.
When Váyu becomes aggravated
In the Whole Body (Sarvánga): Symptoms include
tremors, twitching, pulsating, cutting pain, joint pain
In the Abdomen/Alimentary Tract/ Bowels (Koßhóhá-
¤hrita): Symptoms include obstruction to the passage
of urine and feces; abdominal tumor, heart disease,
hemorrhoids, and rib pain.
In Rectum (Gudá¤hrita): Urine, stool, and gas
retention; colic, urinary stones or gravel, abdominal
distention, pain and emaciation in legs, calves, thighs,
pelvis, sacrum, feet, and back can develop.
In Stomach and Small Intestine (Ámá¤haya): Person’s
experience pain in the heart, navel, ribs, and abdomen;
thirst, belching, cough, dry throat and mouth, difficult
breathing, vomiting, vertigo, and epilepsy.
In Colon (Pakvá¤haya): Experiences include
intestinal gurgling, colic, meteorism, difficulty
passing stool and urine, bowel hardness, piercing pain
in the navel area and sharp pain in waist and back.
Other experiences include hemorrhoids, cough,
indigestion with vomiting and diarrhea
simultaneously; herniated scrotum, thirst, vomiting,
and difficult breathing. Further symptoms include
throat obstruction, scanty and painful urination and
stool (or complete stoppage); excess belching, coccyx,
pain and diseases related to the body above the navel.
In Sense Organs (Indriyagata): Loss of sensation
(e.g., ears, eyes)
In Skin (Twak): Symptoms include rough, cracked,
numb, and thin skin; redness, joint pain, dryness,
discoloration, and twitching. This leads to tingling
and piercing skin pain, with cracks and fissures.
In Blood (Raktagata): Persons experience severe pain
and heat, poor complexion, thinness, anorexia, body
pimples, indigestion, loss of sensation, redness,
ulceration, loss of appetite, emaciation, and dizziness.
In Muscles (Máåsagata): Symptoms include nodes
and tumors with severe pain and hardness, exertion,
heaviness, and rigidity.
In Fat (Medogata): Persons develop painless tumors
with ulcers.
In Marrow (Majjágata): Symptoms include
 of bones, causing constant pain throughout the body
and insomnia.
In Bones (Asthigata): Experiences include thigh,
bone, and joint breaking pain; loss of strength,
wasting, cracking, and bursting.
In Semen/Ovum (£hukragata): One experiences
premature ejaculation or retention of semen and fetus
(including abnormal fetus).
In Tendons: Symptoms include sciatica, tetanus, and
hunch back.
In Ligaments (Snáyu): Cramps, humpbacked, neck,
torso, and back problems (opisthotonus,
emprosthotonus) are symptoms of this disorder.
In Veins/Arteries - Blood vessels (Sirágata): Persons
experience mild pain, dry swellings, emptiness,
tremors, stiffness or constriction, and neuralgia.
In Joints (Sandhigata): One experiences air-filled
swellings and pain when moving limbs.
Convulsions (Ákshe-paka)
Váyu excesses cause convulsions, drying of hands,
feet, blood vessels, ligaments, tendons, and hips.
Symptoms include frequent jerky movements of the
body. This disease cannot be healed if it lasts longer
than one year. All convulsive disorders are
experienced intermittently.
In Half the Body: When excess Váyu is in one half of
the body, it dries up the blood, hands, legs, and knees.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 459
The limbs and tissues are also contracted. This results
in the face, nose, eyebrows, forehead, eyes, and jaw
becoming crooked. The tongue is raised; the voice is
hoarse, weak, and speech is hindered. It causes loose
teeth, impaired hearing, pains in the foot, eye, leg,
temple, ear, and cheek. These symptoms occur in
either half of the body or the face (facial paralysis).
Throughout Body: The lower body is first affected,
then, the upper extremities and head, or the whole
body are affected; deranging all the tissues. Persons
experience numbness or paralysis, limb convulsions
and contractions, pricking, splitting, throbbing, cutting
pain, stiffness, convulsions, tremors, and swelling.
In the Neck Carotid Arteries/Nerves - Stiff Neck
(Manyásthambha): Váyu can become excessed alone
or with Kapha from day naps, irregular posture or
looking in an upward direction for a long time.
—Áñtaráyáma: Stiff arteries/nerves at the side of the
neck (manyá dhamanis). Experiences include neck
bending inwards, stiff carotid arteries throughout the
body; shoulder constriction, grinding of teeth,
salivation, the back bending inward like a bow, stiff
head, yawning, and lockjaw. It also causes
convulsions, loss of eye movement, vomiting of
mucus, rib pain, and difficulty speaking.
In the Back - Opisthotonos (Vahiráyáma): When
excess Váyu dries up the external vessels of the back
and carotid arteries, it causes back stiffness that results
in one bending outward or downward. The head leans
backwards. The chest is pushed upwards. Carotid
arteries are stiff, and the neck is bent downward. There
is grinding teeth, discoloration of teeth and mouth,
yawning, salivation, loss of speech, excess sweating,
physical debility, restlessness. It may be life-
threatening.
Convulsions and Unconsciousness (Apatan-traka):
When aggravated Váyu becomes obstructed in its
downward movement, it starts moving upwards,
causing pain in the heart, head, and temples, making
the body bend like a bow. One experiences
convulsions and loss of consciousness. Other
symptoms include difficult breathing, wide-eyed
(without blinking) or eyes completely closed, and
cooing sounds. Causes include abortion, heavy
bleeding, and trauma. Healing is difficult. Long-term
conditions cannot be healed.
Convulsions and Consciousness (Apatánaka): This
is a similar condition to apatantraka. Symptoms in-
clude eyes having a fixed gaze, unconsciousness,
cooing, intermittent relief. Healing is difficult. Long-
term conditions cannot be healed.
Váyu/Kapha Body Paralysis (Dandaka): When
excess Váyu further develops an excess of Kapha,
both doßhas overflow into all the body’s channels,
filled with undigested food toxins (áma), it makes
the body stiff (like a wood log) with paralysis. A major
symptom is jaw bone paralysis. Healing is very
difficult, if not impossible.
Tetanus (Dhanustambha): Excessed Váyu causes the
body to bend in a bow shape.
—Inner-Bending Bow (Abhyanthráyáma); When the
excessed Váyu affects the nerves and tendons located
in the toes, heels, abdomen, heart area, chest, and
throat, it causes severe convulsive movements. Other
symptoms include fixed gaze, stiff lower jaw, with-
drawn ribs, vomiting mucus, and the body bending
inwards.
—Outer-Bending Bow (Báhyáyáma); When Váyu
affects the tendons and nerves of the external body
parts, persons develop outward bending (of the front
portion of the body), degeneration (dystrophy) of the
chest, waist, and thighs. This cannot be healed.
Trauma/Hemorrhage (Vraòáyáma): When the
doßhas become aggravated in wounds on vital organs
by Váyu, they spread throughout the body and
produce convulsions. Symptoms include thirst and a
yellowish-white complexion. This is a very serious
condition. Any or all of the doßhas can become
excessed.
Convulsions caused by abortion, trauma, or ex-
cessive bleeding cannot be healed.
Tongue Difficulties (Jihvá-sthambha): When Váyu
is caught in the tendons, nerves, and veins, near the
vocal cords, it causes paralysis of the tongue with
consequent inability to swallow and speak.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
460
Lock-Jaw (Hanusramsa): Loose jaw or lockjaw.
Owing to excess tongue scraping, eating dry foods
and trauma, Váyu becomes localized and excessed
at the lower jaw. This displaces the lower jaw, making
it stay open or closed, causes chewing and speaking
difficulties. Healing is difficult. Long-term conditions
are incurable.
Facial Paralysis (Ardita): Váyu becomes excessed
and localized in the upper body from carrying heavy
loads on the head, excess laughing, speaking, facial
exertion (e.g., mimicking), sneezing, physical strain,
sleeping on uneven or hard pillows, and chewing very
hard foods. Symptoms include irregularities in half
of the face (especially during laughing and with sight).
The head begins to shake. Premonitory symptoms
include speech obstructions, loss of eye movement,
tremors, teeth shaking, hoarseness, deafness, blocked
sneezing, loss of smell and memory, delusions,
exhaustion during sleep, saliva coming out of the
mouth during sleep, one eye becomes closed, severe
pain above the shoulders, half of the body, or in lower
body. When this disorder exists in emaciated persons
for over 3 years, who can not wink and slur their
speech, it is incurable.
In Blood and Veins (Sirágraha): Váyu becomes
excessed in the blood and veins of the head, causing
them to shrink, become hard, painful, and black. This
disorder is difficult to heal or may not be healed.
Hemiplegia - Half of the Body Veins and Tendons
(Pakßhavadha or Eká´garoga): Váyu becomes
excessed in half of the body, drying the veins and
tendons by loosening the joints. The result is the loss
of function and tactile sensation. —Whole Body
Paralysis (Sarváñgaroga): As above, when Váyu
affects the entire body, the disorder is difficult to heal.
The involvement of excess Pitta and Kapha render
this condition incurable.
Pitta symptoms include burning sensation,
increased temperature of the affected body parts, and
fainting. Kapha symptoms include cold, swelling and
heaviness of the affected body parts.
Pakßhavadha caused by Váyu is difficult to heal.
When it is caused by Váyu and other doßhas, it is
easy to heal. Symptoms of emaciation or wasting
cannot be healed. When Pakßhavadha is found in
pregnant women, women who have just given birth,
the elderly, emaciated person, caused by excessive
bleeding, or experiencing no sensation at all in the
affected limb, treatment should not be attempted.
Shoulder Caused Arm Paralysis (Apabá-huka): Váyu
situated at the shoulder’s roots constrict the tendons,
nerves, and veins, and cause emaciation of the local
muscles. Loss of arm movement develops.
Hand Caused Arm Paralysis (Vishvá-chí): Tendon
constriction in the palms and fingers and back of the
arm, leads to loss of arm functioning.
Leg Paralysis (Khañja/Pa´gu): Váyu localized in the
thighs and waist constricts these tendons causing
lameness to either one (khañga) or both (pa´gu) legs.
Leg Obstructions (Kalá-vakhañja): Symptoms
include trembling legs and pain when beginning to
walk, as well as limping and loose joints. This is
caused by eating peas or lentils.
Stiff Thighs (Úru-sthambha): Excesses of Váyu,
Kapha, fat, and undigested food toxins are caused by
overeating cold, hot, moist, dry, heavy, fatty, cooked
or raw foods, overexertion, debility, not sleeping, or
oversleeping. This results in the accumulation of
doßhas and toxins in the thighs, filling the interior of
the thigh bone with Kapha. The thigh becomes stiff
and inactive, cold, senseless, heavy, and with severe
pain. Symptoms include, excessive belching, worry,
body aches, inactivity, stupor, vomiting, loss of
appetite and taste, fever, weakness in the feet,
difficulty lifting, and loss of the sense of touch.
Knee Swelling (Kroßhóuka £hírßha): Váyu and blood
becoming excessed, produces a swelling in the middle
of the knee that is very painful and large.
Ankle Pain (Váta-kaòóaka): Váyu accumulates in the
ankle joint or heel owing to walking improperly or
by overexertion, causing severe heel or ankle pain.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 461
Finger/Toe Contraction (Khalli): The legs, thighs,
calves, chest, and arm contraction and pain.
Foot Sleeping (Páda-harßha): Experiences include
tingling sensations in the feet (i.e., loss of tactile
sensations or it feels like pins and needles.) This is
caused by Kapha and Váyu.
Burning Soles (Páda-dáha): Váyu, Pitta, and blood
cause burning sensations in the soles of one involved
in excess walking.
Nasal/Stammering (Minminatwa/Gadgadatwa):
Excess Váyu and Kapha invade the vessels of the
voice box, causing muteness, talking through the nose,
or stammering.
Cutting Pain in Rectum, Bladder, Groin (Túní): When
excess Váyu moves in a downward direction, severe
cutting pain is experienced in these areas.
Cutting Colon Pain (Pratitúni): When excess Váyu
moves in an upward direction, the pain is felt in the
colon.
Lower Abdominal Distention (Adhmána): Excess
Váyu causes obstructed gas that develops intestinal
gurgling, severe pain, and distention of the lower
abdomen.
Upper Abdominal Distention (Pratádhmána): When
excess Váyu and Kapha are involved the above
symptoms are felt in the stomach (but not in the heart
or rib area).
Prostate Tumor/No Pain (Aßhóila): A tumor obstructs
the passage of feces and urine. Also see Chapter 18.
Prostate Tumor/Pain (Pratyaßhóila): A tumor
obstructs the passage of gas, feces, and urine, and
causes pain. Also see Chapter 18.
Tremors (Vepathu): Váyu excesses throughout the
body cause tremors (including tremors of the head).
Should any of these diseases not subside within
5 years, they cannot be healed.
Sciatica (G^idhrasí)
Excesses of Váyu either alone or with Kapha cause
difficulty and severe pain in the lumbar region down
through the thighs, knees, calves, and feet. Váyu
causes rigidity, throbbing, pricking pain, intermittent
symptoms, irregular shape of body parts, and severe
stiffness of the knee and waist. Kapha symptoms
include stupor, heaviness, poor digestion, salivation,
and aversion to food.
Dual Doßhas
When Váyu enters the origin sites of Pitta and
Kapha (small intestine or stomach), mixed symptoms
occur.
Váyu/Pitta: Burning, heat, thirst, fainting, and other
Váyu diseases related to that part of the body can
develop.
Váyu/Kapha: Symptoms include coldness, swelling,
heaviness in the associated area of the body.
Váyu/Blood: Pricking pain that is unbearable to touch,
or numbness, and other Pitta symptoms occur.
Práòa Váyu/Pitta: Vomiting, burning, and other Pitta
symptoms develop.
Práòa Váyu/Kapha: Symptoms include weakness,
lassitude, skin discoloration, loss of taste, and appetite.
Udána Váyu/Pitta: Burning, fainting, epileptic fit,
giddiness, vertigo, or fatigues develops.
Udána Váyu/Kapha: Symptoms include lack of
perspiration, goose bumps, poor digestion, coldness,
and numbness in the related body parts.
Samána Váyu/Pitta: Excess perspiration, heat,
burning, or epilepsy develops.
Samána Váyu/Kapha: Experiences include excess
mucus, urine and feces, hair standing on end.
Apána Váyu/Pitta: Heat, burning, and menorrhagia
can develop.
Apána Váyu/Kapha: Heaviness of lower limbs can
occur.
Vyána Váyu/Pitta: Symptoms include limbs burning
and jerking, and fatigue.
Vyána Váyu/Kapha: Persons can develop heaviness
of limbs, stiff or numb bone joints, and can find it
difficult to move or walk.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
462
Vertigo: This may be caused by constipation or toxic
liver. Váyu presses bile into the heart and the heart
presses air into the head. Thus, it is a disease of Váyu
and Pitta.
Váyu—loss of hearing, suffocating, dry nose, and
tongue. Bráhmí (gotu kola) is helpful.
Pitta—burning eyes. Bráhmí, ¤ha´kh pußhpí, and
¤hatávarí are useful.
Other therapies: £hiro basti and urd dal for brain and
semen building/balancing are advised. Shad bindu
oil is used in the nose.
Váyu causes excesses of Pitta and Kapha and re-
sult in dual doßha disorders.
Váyu/Pitta: Symptoms include burning, thirst,
pain, giddiness, darkness, desire for cold things; burn-
ing is exacerbated by eating and drinking hot, pun-
gent, sour, and salty things.
 Váyu/Blood: Persons experience burning, distress,
and the area between the skin and muscles become
red, swollen, and rashes develop.
Váyu/Kapha: The above symptoms are experi-
enced along with drowsiness, heaviness, and anor-
exia.
Váyu/Muscle: Symptoms include hard, discolored
boils, swelling, hair standing on end, a feeling like
ants are crawling on the body.
Váyu/Fat: Persons experience anorexia, shifting,
oiliness, softness and cold swellings of body parts.
This is difficult to heal.
Váyu/Bone: One desires hot compresses and mas-
sage and experiences breaking and piercing pain, sick-
liness.
Váyu/Marrow: Bending, yawning, cramps, and
pains (eased when pressed) develop.
Váyu/Semen-Ovum: Semen is either excessive or
not emitted; sterility occurs.
 Váyu/Food: One experiences abdominal pain
when eating; pain disappears when stomach is empty.
Váyu/Urine: Urinary retention, bladder bursting.
Váyu/Stool: Symptoms include constipation, anal/
rectal cutting pain. Oily items are quickly digested;
hard bowels occur after meals; pain occurs in hip,
groin, and back; Váyu moves backwards; the heart
becomes weak.
Therapies: Certain symptoms can be healed if they
have recently developed or if persons are strong.
Symptoms include joint displacement, lockjaw,
contraction, humped-back, paralysis of one or both
sides of the body; wasting of limbs, marrow and bone
disorders, stiffness. Depending upon how deeply they
are located will determine how easy or difficult they
are to heal. When Váyu is excessed without Pitta or
Kapha and is easily reached, ghee and oil (internally
and externally) soothe the nervous system. Unction
quickly nourishes the dried body tissues, promoting
strength, digestion, weight gain, and vital breath.
Unction is given until one feels they have had enough,
then some time is allowed to pass without taking
unction. Unction is again taken, this time, with boiled
milk, vegetable soup, rice, and milk (cooked with
ámalakí and black salt), oil enema, snuff, and moist
foods. When persons are well-saturated, they then
begin fomentation. After massage, oil fomentation is
taken. These measures are said to make even crooked
or stiff limbs pliable again. This has been seen to occur
in persons afflicted with Parkinsonism. Piercing pain,
distress, dilation, swelling, seizures, hair standing on
end, and other nerve-caused disorders (e.g., worry-
caused dysuria) are quickly pacified. Unction and
sudation are frequently administered. Once bowels
are softened from unction, Váyu disorders are quickly
resolved.
Impurities develop from undigested fatty, sour,
Hemispheres
of the brain
Space
(Váyu)
(Menengoleyan 
Layer
Outer Mengel 
Secretion - Pitta)
FIGURE 1
(Váyu)

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 463
salty, and hot foods, that block Váyu in the channels.
If excess impurity exists and the disorder is not healed
by the above therapies, persons should take mild, oil
 purgatives (e.g., castor oil) to assist the evacuation
process. Warm carminative herbs, such as cardamom,
ginger, cinnamon, cloves, and turmeric, help dispel
gas, improve digestion, and assist absorption of un-
digested foods that cause impurities. Weak persons
use non-oil enemas and digestive herbs, and foods
instead of purgatives.
General: Therapies include ghee, sesame oil, Váyu-
reducing foods and lifestyle, aromatherapy using
sandalwood oil on the forehead, hot-oil head
massages (¤hiro dhárá/¤hiro basti); gotu kola oil (3
drops) in the nose, then gently massaged; baths and
sprinklings (on the afflicted body part and after
massage) with decoctions of the herbs listed below.
Poultices made from the herbs and foods listed below,
may be wrapped around the affected body part.
Herbs: Vaμ¤ha lochana, guggul, harítakí, bráhmí,
gokßhura, a¤hwagandhá, bibhítakí, bh^i´garáj, balá,
cedar, da¤hmúl, t^ikatu, and bráhmí ghee are useful.
Foods: Almonds (soaked overnight and peel the skin),
sesame tahini, ghee, sesame oil, boiled milk, black
dal, whole wheat, and barley are suggested. Yogurt/
water (lassi) mixed with t^ikatu is also useful in
soothing nerves.
In Belly: Suggestions include ámalakí and triphalá
(sours and laxatives) mixed with carminative herbs
to reduce malnutrition.
In Anus, Rectum and Colon: Herbs to reverse excess
upward moving air are used. This includes hi´g,
ajwan, black salt, chitrak, ginger, and black pepper.
A castor oil purgative and basti are advised.
In Stomach: If strong, emesis is first done. Váyu-
reducing herbs and foods are used. Chitrak and kaóuká
are also advised.
Throughout Body: Massage, and non-oil and oil
enemas are used.
In Skin: Sudation, massage, bath, and delicious foods
reduce Váyu in the skin.
 In Blood: Cold applications, purgation, and blood-
letting are useful.
In Muscle and Fat (or with Áma): Fomentation,
abhyañga, poultice, non-oil enema, milk, ghee, and
pacifying therapies are used.
In Bone and Marrow: Internal and external unction
are needed. Bones may need to be bound.
In Semen/Ovum: Foods and herbs to promote semen
(e.g., almonds, tahini, boiled milk, ¤hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá) are required. However, if blocks in
the seminal passage occur, purgatives are first used
to remove the obstruction. Sitting in baths or sprinkled
with water— both include Váyu-reducing herbs—is
advised.
For Dry Fetus Or Child: Boiled milk with cane sugar
are suggested.
In Urine/Bladder: Diuretics like gokßhura and
steamed vegetables are helpful; urethral douche,
oiling the body, poultices with Váyu-reducing herbs,
abhyañga, plasters, and fomentation are advised.
In Stool: Castor oil purgative, foods, and herbs to
reduce Váyu are used.
In Heart: Boiled milk with arjuna, chitrak, pippalí,
triphalá, and black salt.
In Navel Area: Bilwa, chitrak, and ajamodá are
advised.
For Twisting: Poultices with Váyu-reducing herbs are
pressed on the twisted body parts.
For Contractions: Sesame oil cooked with black dal,
sesame oil, and rock salt are massaged into the
disorder.
In Arms and Head: Snuff and ingesting ghee after
meals is helpful.
Below the Navel: Juice enemas and snuff alleviate
these conditions. Herbs include ginger and nirguòæí
decoctions.
For Facial Paralysis: Snuff, head oil massage (¤hiro
dhárá/¤hiro basti—around 16 minutes), tube
fomentation and poultices with ghee, a¤hwagandhá,
ginger, t^ikatu, nirguòæí, guggul, kuþki, kút, and
bráhmí are used.
For Paralysis of One Side: Sudation, unction, and
purgation are recommended.
For Cramps: Hot poultices of boiled rice-milk, or
cooked rice-bean, with oil or ghee are advised.
For Sciatica: Haóha yoga leg and back stretches (see
Chapter 9), and herbs of pippalí, gokßhura, and balá
are taken.
For Lock-Jaw:
Open mouth—foment the jaw, then press jaw with

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
464
thumbs and lift the chin up to close the mouth.
Displaced—adjust to proper placement.
Stiffness—foment, then bend.
Váyu/Pitta: Cold and hot measures are alternately
applied; purgation, and licorice are added to the
general therapies listed above.
Váyu/Kapha: Barley, sudation, strong, dry enemas,
purgation, and mustard oil are used along with Kapha-
reducing therapies listed above. When this excess is
in the head, snuff and herbal smoking is advised.
Tridoßhic: Pitta is pacified before Kapha. When Pitta
spreads over the entire body, purgation is used. When
Kapha moves to the stomach, emesis is advised.
Enemas are used after Kapha becomes liquefied
through fomentation, and once Pitta symptoms
appear. When Pitta and Kapha are removed, yet Váyu
remains in the respiratory channels, the above Váyu-
reducing therapies are used.
Afflictions of the Five Váyus
Each of the five Váyus may afflict the other four,
creating 20 different symptoms.
For heart diseases and painful stomach: Ghee with
chitrak, t^ikatu, triphalá, and hi´g are beneficial.
Práò covers Vyána: Symptoms include vacant senses,
weakened intellect, memory, and strength;
senselessness, and loss of speaking. Balá oil and
amridadya are used.
Vyána covers Práò: Symptoms include excess
sweating, skin diseases, numb body parts, hair
standing on end. Castor oil purgatives are advised.
Samána covers Práò: Symptoms include abdominal
pain, digestive disorder (grahaní), rib, heart, and
stomach pain disorders. Ghee with appetizing herbs
(e.g., cardamom and cinnamon) are suggested.
Práò covers Samána: Persons experience feeling
stunned, stammering, and dumbness. Unction is used
internally for massage and in snuff; and enemas are
recommended. When acute headaches, respiratory
problems, heart disease, and a dry mouth develop,
smoking herb and consoling the patient are advised.
Práò covers Udána: Symptoms include a stiff head,
cold, and mucus, difficult breathing, heart disorders,
dry mouth, sweating, skin diseases, and the organs
seem dead. For these conditions, therapies include oily
laxatives (e.g., ghee or castor oil).
Udána covers Práò: One experiences a loss of
immunity, strength, activity, complexion; this may
be life threatening. Sprinkling with cold water,
consolation, and giving all comforts desired are the
therapies used.
Práò covers Apán: Experiences include vomiting and
difficult breathing. Enemas with raspberry;
carminative herbs with harítakí for vomiting and
breathing, respectively, are advised.
Apán covers Práò: Symptoms include confusion,
weakened digestion, diarrhea. Emesis and appetizing
and astringent foods and herbs are best.
Vyán covers Apána: Persons experience vomiting,
abdominal distention, tumors, distress, cutting pain.
Unction is the best remedy.
Apán covers Vyána: Experiences include excessive
stool, urine, and semen. Astringent herbs and foods
are required.
Samána covers Vyána: Symptoms include fainting
drowsiness, delirium, illness, poor digestion,
immunity, and strength. Physical exercise and light
foods are needed.
Udána covers Vyána: Experiences include stiffness,
poor digestion, no sweating, less activity, inability to
keep the eyes opened. Wholesome, moderate-sized,
light meals are most useful.
In the “Chikitsá-sthánam” section of Charak
Saμhitá, these 12 combinations are listed to illus-
trate how the five Váyus combine and what therapies
are used. Based on this, Charak suggests one care-
fully consider the symptoms and therapy for the re-
maining combinations. One needs to remember is that
Práò should be carefully protected owing to its deli-
cate location. Udána is led upwards, apán down-
wards, samána in the middle, and, vyána in all direc-
tions.
Pitta covers Práò: Symptoms include fasting, burn-
ing in the body parts or organs, giddiness, pain, de-
siring cold things, and vomiting partially digested
foods.
Kapha covers Práò: Symptoms include spitting,
sneezing, belching, respiratory problems, anorexia,
and vomiting.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 465
Pitta covers Udána: Experiences are, fainting,
burning in the navel and chest areas, exhaustion,
depletion of ojas, sickliness.
Kapha covers Udána: Symptoms include a poor
complexion, speech problems, debility, heaviness,
anorexia.
Pitta covers Samána: Experiences include excess
sweating, thirst, burning, fainting, restless, and heat
disorders.
Kapha covers Samána: Lack of sweat, poor digestion,
hair standing on end, and very cold body limbs can
develop.
Pitta covers Vyána: Burning throughout the body,
exhaustion, restricted movements, pyrexia, and pain
can occur.
Kapha covers Vyána: Symptoms include heaviness,
joint and bone pain; movement is greatly restricted.
Pitta covers Apán: Experiences include deep yellow
urine and stool; heat in the anus and genitals; excess
menstrual discharge.
Kapha covers Apán: Persons experience stools passed
in pieces with áma, mucus, and heaviness.
Kapha covering Práò and Udána are serious
conditions, as life depends upon Práò, and strength
relies on Udána. If improperly analyzed and the
situation continues unchecked beyond a year, or if
improper therapies are used, it will not be curable.
The results of neglect are heart disorders,
abscesses, enlarged spleen, tumors, diarrhea. If all
five Váyus are excessed, carminatives are
immediately used with oils (that cleanse the channels
rather than block them), yet do not aggravate Pitta
and Kapha. Thus one takes sweet, rejuvenative
enemas, and oil enemas until strength returns. Then,
mild purgatives are given. The best rejuvenatives are
¤hilájit or guggul with boiled milk. Other herbs
include ámalakí and harítakí, taken with a wholesome
or sattwic diet.
Apán covers other Váyus: The only remedy is eating
appetizing, astringent and carminative herbs and foods
that cleanse the bowels and dispel gas.
Pitta covers Váyus: Herbs and foods that reduce both
Pitta and Váyu are used.
Kapha covers Váyus: Kapha-reducing and carmina-
tive herbs are used.
Insanity (Unmáda)
Causes: Charak defines insanity as, “the perversion
of the mind, intellect, consciousness, knowledge,
memory, desire, manners, behavior, and conduct.”
Five types of insanity exist: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha,
Tridoßha, and externally caused insanity. It is the main
disease of Váyu doßha. The main causes of insanity,
as we will see, result from personal misdeeds. When
any of the three doßhas cause insanity, symptoms
quickly develop in persons with certain conditions.
These characteristics include timidness, an agitated
(rajasic) or lethargic (tamas) mind, or an imbalance
in the physical doßhas. Other conditions include
following an unwholesome diet or lifestyle, when
other health concerns are present, or if the mind is
constantly afflicted by emotions (e.g., fear, anger,
greed). Further characteristics include physical
assault, trauma, or injury. From these situations the
mind becomes greatly imbalanced.
Váyu: Caused by fasting or an excessive intake of
dry or cold foods. This affects the heart and mind
with worry, passion, and anger; which results in
distortion of memory and perceptions.
Pitta: Resulting from indigestion, excess of hot,
pungent, sour, or burning foods and liquids, excessed
Pitta afflicts the heart of a person lacking self-control.
Kapha: This is caused by overeating and an excessive
use of oily foods. This aggravated Kapha afflicts the
heart, troubling the mind and memory.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
466
Tridoßha: Caused by the excessed condition of all
three doßhas. It is considered serious because the
therapies will aggravate one or more of the doßhas.
Therefore, this condition is incurable.
External: This results from a lack of following ethics
and virtues in this life, or in past lives, causing
problems by the dogs, sages, demons.
Development: The above causes weaken the doßhas
that afflict the (mind’s) heart when there is less sattwa
(purity) in one’s life and mind. The disease develops
through the mánovaha srota (mental channels) that
sends psychic energy to the mind.
Premonitory Signs: Empty feeling in head, congested
eyes, ear noises, excessive heavy breathing, excessive
salivation, no desire to eat, anorexia and indigestion,
cardiac spasms, fatigue, fainting, and anxiety at the
wrong time and place. Other signs include hair
standing on end continuously, frequent and quickly
rising fevers in children that produces convulsions,
fickle minded-ness, upper body pains, facial paralysis
on one half of the face, frequent dreams relating to
(1) inauspicious objects that are wandering, moving,
or unstable; (2) the two hemispheres of the brain; (3)
being churned by whirlwinds; and (4) retraction of
the eyes. Unlike other diseases, insanity develops
immediately after premonitory symptoms. This
includes a variety of mental problems, such as
schizophrenia and manic-depression.
Symptoms:
General symptoms include, impatience, fickleness,
unsteady vision, a sensation of a vacuum in the heart,
loss of peace, memory, and intellect.
Váyu: Constantly wandering, spasms of the eyes,
eyebrows, lips, shoulders, jaws, forearms, legs; con-
stant incoherent speech, frothing of the mouth, al-
ways smiling, laughing, dancing, singing, and play-
ing with musical instruments at the wrong time or
place. Other symptoms include loudly imitating a
flute, conch, or cymbals; riding in dangerous vehicles,
desiring excessive jewelry and ornaments, longing
for foods that cannot be obtained; emaciation and
rough, reddish skin; reddish, projected eyes; shock,
depression, symptoms worsen by continuing to fol-
low Váyu-increasing life-styles and foods.
Pitta: Irritation and anger, excitement at the wrong
time, place, or for the wrong reasons; causing injury
to others; fleeing; need for shade, cold water, and
cooling foods; overly daring, intimidating; constant
anguish, anger, impatience, passion, intolerance; go-
ing naked; yellow complexion; ferocious eyes that
are coppery, green, or yellow. Symptoms worsen by
continuing to follow Pitta-increasing life-styles and
foods.
Kapha: (with Pitta) Staying in one place and
observing silence; sluggishness in speech and activity,
occasional movement, discharging saliva and nasal
excretions, lack of hunger and longing for solitude,
excessive sexual desire, frightening appearance,
aversion to cleanliness, anorexia, depression, greed,
always sleepy, whitish nails, facial edema, eyes are
white, timid and contain excreta. Symptoms worsen
by continuing to follow Kapha-increasing life-styles
and foods.
Tridoßha: The combined imbalance of all three
doßhas causes symptoms of all three doßhas. This
form of insanity is incurable.
Therapies: Oleation, fomentation, emesis, purgation,
medicated and cleansing enemas, detoxification,
fumigation (burning jaóámáò¤hí and inhaling the
smoke), eye wash, aromatherapy, eye salves,
medicated snuffs (bráhmí nasya), massage,
sprinkling, unction, tying, confinement, frightening,
inducing astonishment and forgetfulness, depletion,
surgery, appropriate doßha foods and life-styles.
Váyu: First, oil and ghee therapies (sneha) are used,
if the air passages are not blocked. If they are blocked,
laxatives are given with the oils and ghee to remove
the blocks.
Pitta or Kapha: First, oleation and fomentation
therapies are used, then purgatives, followed by
emetics, are given. After that, one begins to eat from
thinner and lighter, to thicker and heavier foods
(according to post pañcha karma food regimes—
Chapter 7). Lastly, medicated enemas with oil or ghee
are given, along with doßha evacuation from the head
(via the nose—¤hiro virechana), using the herbs
jaóámáò¤hí and gotu kola (bráhmí).

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 467
If the doßhas are extremely excessed, these
therapies are taken several times. The result of these
therapies is the cleansing of the heart, head, senses,
gastrointestinal tract. The mind gains alertness;
memory and consciousness improve. Head
evacuation is useful after cleansing if the person’s
personality still shows signs of imbalance.
Psychology: Therapeutic methods depend upon the
symptoms. Methods include shouting, giving gifts,
consoling, scaring. In this way, the cause of the illness
is confronted and dealt with. In serious cases, hitting
and shocking. are advised. If insanity is caused by
fear, grief, anger, passion, exhilaration, jealousy, or
greed, approaching person’s with the opposite
emotions will heal them.
Miscellaneous therapies include, abhyañga,
ingesting ghee to stimulate the mind, intellect,
memory, and consciousness and applying thick
ointments.
General herbs to use include, t^ikatu with ghee;
triphalá, viæa´ga, chandan, mañjißhóhá, arjuna,
da¤hmúl, ghee.
External: This is defined as signs and symptoms,
different from those described above. These result
from inappropriate past and present life deeds
(intellectual blasphemy, or the disregarding of or
malicious dealings with deities, spiritual people,
parents and grandparents, teachers).
Premonitory external symptoms: Desire to cause
injury to deities, cows, holy people, religious places;
anger, delinquent behavior, disliking things and habits
that reduce one’s ojas, complexion, and strength;
abuse and incitement by the gods, spirits, teachers.
External Causes: Deities, preceptors, elders, holy
people’s curses; appearance of the spirits of the de-
ceased, demonic possession, or harassment.
External Symptoms: Superhuman strength, energy,
enthusiasm, charisma, memory; artistic, oration, and
spiritual abilities in the person.
Symptoms occur at the beginning of the above-
mentioned deviant actions, when past karmas
manifest in this life, when one is home alone or alone
at a crossroad; sexual intercourse at sunset or on new
or full moon days; intercourse during menstrual cycles,
when reciting scriptures, or performing rites improperly;
breaking one’s vows during battle, when performing
destructive deeds, during inauspicious planetary
positions, during child delivery (for women); contact
with unclean or inauspicious creatures during emesis,
purgation, and bleeding; when visiting sacred places
when unclean and not following the prescribed rules;
when eating remnants of meat, honey, oil, candy, and
alcohol; when unclothed, visiting cities, towns, gardens,
cremation grounds, cross roads, or slaughter houses at
night; when insulting holy people, teachers, gods; when
misinterpreting scriptures, or when beginning any other
inauspicious or harmful activity.
External Causative Goals: The causing of insanity
has three aims: to inflict injury, to play or to offer
prayers. Playing or prayer forms of insanity can be
healed. Inflicting injury includes burning, drowning,
falling, or harming oneself (including suicide).
Therapies: Herbs, such as musk and frankincense,
chanting mantras/prayers (e.g., “Aum Namaà
£hivaya”), wearing talismans and jewelry, performing
auspicious rites, religious sacrifices, oblations, taking
vows, fulfilling religious duties, atonement, fasting,
receiving blessings, obeisance and pilgrimages.
Following wholesome foods and life-styles is also
necessary. Ghee may be eaten as often as desired.
One should sleep in a draft-free room.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
468
Bráhmí Ghee- (4 days worth)
bráhmí—50 gms., £ha´kh pußhpí—50 gms.,
a¤hwagandhá—50 gms., jaóámáò¤hí—50 gms.,
Ghee—100 gms.
Dose: 1 tsp. 2 times daily
Preparation: Make a paste from the herbs and roll
into a ball, boil the ghee and add the paste and cook
for 1/2 hour, filter.
(May be used for any mental disorders)
Insanity may also be caused by both internal and
external factors. Thus, their signs and symptoms will
be combined. When curable and incurable varieties
of insanity appear together they all become incurable.
For combinations of curable internal and external
varieties, a combination of both therapies is suggested.
Blood-letting is also advised for insanity.
Signs or Recovery:
When one’s clarity and sense of normalcy
reappear, it is a sign that the symptoms are removed.
Epilepsy (Apasmára)
Causes: Epilepsy is defined as occasional
unconsciousness with the vomiting of froth and
abnormal body movements related to the distortion
of memory, intellect, and other mental abilities.
Four types of epilepsy exist: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha,
and Tridoßha. Sometimes external situations combine
with internal doßhas to cause this disease, but external
events can never be the sole cause.
Epilepsy will develop quickly in five instances:
(1) when one’s mind has excess rajas and tamas; (2)
when the doßhas are excessed and imbalanced; (3)
by eating unclean and unwholesome foods, eating
mutually contradictory properties, eating foods
contaminated by one having contagious diseases, or
not eating according to one’s doßha; (4) not living
according to one’s doßha; (5) when one is excessively
debilitated.
These situations aggravate the doßhas that affect
the mind full of rajas and tamas. The excessed doßhas
then spread to the heart (home of the soul and sense
organs). This aggravates passion, anger, fear, greed,
attachment, excitement, grief, anxiety, and leads to
epilepsy.
Premonitory Symptoms: Eyebrow contraction,
constant, irregular eye movements, hearing non-
existing sounds, excessive discharge of saliva and
mucus, lack of hunger, anorexia, and indigestion;
cardiac spasms, lower abdominal distention with
gurgling sounds, weakness, cracking bone pain and
debility, unconsciousness, entering darkness, fainting
and giddiness, frequently dreaming of intoxication,
dancing, murdering, aching, shivering, and falling.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Losing and regaining consciousness rapidly,
projected eye balls, speaking incoherently, vomiting
froth, excessive heaviness and a rigid neck, bending
the head to the side, twisted fingers, unstableness of
arms and legs. Other symptoms include reddish, dry,
and brownish nails, eyes, face, and skin; objects
appear as unstable, coarse, and dry (before losing
consciousness). Symptoms increase from Váyu-
increasing foods and life-styles.
Pitta: Losing and gaining consciousness instantly,
breathing with snoring sounds, rubbing the earth;
green, yellow, or coppery nails, eyes, and complexion;
objects appear as bleeding, terrifying, burning, and
angry (before losing consciousness). Symptoms
increase from Pitta-in-creasing foods and life-styles.
Kapha: Slow to regain consciousness, falling, little
distortion of activities, dribbling saliva, white nails,
eyes, and complexion; objects appear as white, heavy,
and oily (before losing consciousness). Symptoms
increase from Kapha-increasing foods and life-styles.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas. This
condition is incurable.
If any disease spreads sideways, it will become
chronic.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 469
Therapies: First, oleation and fomentation are applied.
Internally-Caused: Next, for internally-caused epilepsy,
the appropriate pañcha karma measures are used to
cleanse and balance the heart, circulatory channels,
and the mind that contain excess doßhas.
-Váyu epilepsy requires medicated enemas.
- Pitta calls for purgation.
- Kapha needs emetics.
As with all diseases, the strength of the person
afflicted with the illness must be considered. Then
foods are given, beginning with light meals, then
moving gradually to heavier ones.
Externally-Caused: For epilepsy causes associated
with external situations, mantras, prayers, rituals are
suggested. Therapies include musk, chanting
mantras/prayers (e.g., “Aum Namaà £hivaya”),
wearing talismans and jewelry, performing auspicious
rites, religious sacrifices, oblations, and rites. Other
therapies include taking vows, fulfilling religious
duties, atonement, fasting, receiving blessings,
obeisance, and pilgrimages. Following wholesome
foods and life-styles is also necessary. Ghee may be
taken as often as desired. Sleep should be taken in a
draft-free room.
Friends and spiritual leaders are advised to
encourage understanding, patience, memory, and
meditation.
General Herbal Therapies: After purification, the
person is strengthened, then alleviation therapies
begin to heal the epilepsy. Ghee mixed with bráhmí,
bilwa, gokßhura, triphalá, turmeric, sandalwood,
hi´g, rock salt, pippalí, calamus (vachá), and kuþaj
are useful. Mustard or sesame oil may also be added
to these formulas. Bráhmí ghee is also effective.
Abhyañga is useful for both internal and external
conditions. The above mentioned herbs are burned
as aromatherapy (£hatávarí and jaóámáò¤hí are added
for inhalation).
     Medicated oils may also be placed in the nostrils
(2 to 3 drops). Along with the above herbs, triphalá,
black pepper, ginger, pippalí, jaóámáò¤hí, ¤hatávarí,
gotu kola and musta may be added to the oil.
Váyu/Kapha: Guæúchí, calamus, and guggul may be
added to bráhmí ghee.
Chronic Epilepsy: If the disease is not healed through
the above remedies, then one takes garlic with sesame
or mustard oil, ¤hatávarí with boiled milk, bráhmí with
raw honey, or calamus with raw honey.
Addictions
Symptoms:
Váyu: All addictions increase Váyu by causing a
nervous dependency on them, resulting in a loss of
objectivity. Váyu doßhas can give up addictions for a
while, but will begin them again or switch to another
habit.
Pitta: Unless these persons are convinced that a habit
is bad for them, it will be very difficult to give up
addictions.
Kapha: These persons have the most difficult time
giving up their bad habits due to attachment and
because their constitution is strong enough to take
more abuse.
Smoking: Can be caused by any of the doßhas.
Váyu—These persons smoke to calm anxiety and
worry. Symptoms include dry cough, constipation,
and lung weakness.
Pitta—These persons smoke to feel the fire and
power. Symptoms include lung, liver, and blood
infections.
Kapha—These people smoke to feel clearer and
stimulated. Symptoms include congestion.
  Alcohol: Increases fire in the body and
damages the blood, liver, and causes other Pitta
diseases. Because it contains sugar, alcohol may also
be a substitute for sugar addiction (in Kapha and Váyu
doßhas mainly).
Drugs: Damage the holy or sattwic mental

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
470
nature, dulling the mind and nerves. Hallucinogens
raise the mental fire (tejas), artificially creating clearer
perception and an experience of higher consciousness.
However, they burn up the life sap (ojas), weakening
one’s overall vitality. Sleep-promoting drugs
eventually cause insomnia. Smoking marijuana
poisons the liver and brain. It also causes liver and
lung cancer.
Váyu—becomes greatly imbalanced from long-
term drug use (prescription, non-prescription, and
recreational). Drugs are also usually diuretics, causing
constipation, dryness, weakening to the kidneys, and
reduces life sap (ojas). Stimulants overly aggravate
Váyu.
Pitta—short-term use of stimulants aggravates
Pitta, causing burnout, eye damage.
Kapha—sedatives overly increase dullness
(tamas). All drugs increase dullness, inertia, and poor
perception (for all doßhas).
General Therapies:
General: Brain tonics help reduce emotional needs
for addictive items, tissue-healing herbs for the liver,
lungs, brain, and immune system are also needed.
Wholesome foods and life-styles according to one’s
doßha are important. Understanding the nature of
dependencies is also needed. Spiritual counseling
helps to clarify the true nature of a person’s higher
Self by transferring unhealthy addictions to addiction
to devotion of the Divine. (This is a natural, gradual
process that slowly fills the person with inner worth).
Smoking:
Váyu—a¤hwagandhá, bráhmí, milk, almonds,
sesame seeds, balá, and ¤hatávarí return moisture to
the lungs.
Pitta—bráhmí, chamomile, aloe vera gel,
bayberry, and ¤hatávarí are good detoxing and toning
herbs.
Kapha—bráhmí, herbal cigarettes, and hot spices
will clear up congestion after a person gives up
smoking.
Alcoholism: (see section specific for alcohol)
Váyu—bráhmí is best for detoxifying the brain
tissues.
Pitta—aloe vera gel is best for balancing the
functioning of the liver. Other good liver and blood
herbs include bráhmí, kaóuká, bhúámalakí, and
mañjißhþhá. Turmeric and barberry together clear
congested emotions due to liver toxins.
Kapha—turmeric and barberry together clear
congested emotions due to liver toxins.
Drugs:
Drinking fresh juice of grapes, dates, or pomegranates
is excellent for reducing addiction.
Generally, the best diet is a Váyu-Pitta-reducing
diet. Ghee nourishes the nerves. jaóámáò¤hí is an
excellent sleep-promoting herb. Yogaraj guggul
cleanses the deeper tissues. Bráhmí cleanses
hallucinogens from the liver and brain.
Váyu—a¤hwagandhá rebuilds the nervous
system. Calamus restores mental faculties and clears
toxins from the liver and brain caused by marijuana.
Alcohol Recovery (Madát-yaya)
Whereas improper use of foods can lead to
disease or even death, drinking also leads to loss of
self-worth, life path, wealth, true pleasure,
intelligence, and courage.
Aßhþáñga H^idayam:
Nidánasthána; Ch.6/ver. 11
Properties of Wine and Alcohol: The properties of
alcohol are the opposite of life sap (ojas), and similar
to poisons. The only difference is that alcohol is less
potent than poison, so it does not kill the person.
Alcohol penetrates deeply into the tissues. It is dry
and causes drying, sourness; spreads throughout the
body, and is heating. Alcohol loosens bone joints,
dries life sap, and causes mental disorders. There are
3 stages to addiction.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 471
First stage: Causes a loss of life sap and begins
mental imbalances.
Second stage: Persons are at a critical point in
choosing harmful activities and enjoying thinking
about them. They begin to think they will receive true
happiness from these choices. The mind is primarily
in a state of rajas (agitation-/ irritation-promoting)
and tamas (slowing, clouding, dulling) during this
stage. Persons may go on wild rampages of harmful
activity. This is where vices and self-destruction begin.
Of all thy ways to bring self-destruction, drinking
(i.e., alcohol and wine) is the most harmful.
Aßhþáñga H^idayam: Nidán; Ch. 6, verse 6
Third stage: A person lies lifeless on the ground.
The experience is one of being poisoned.
Hazards: Loss of understanding right from wrong,
happiness or unhappiness, beneficial or harmful, suit-
able or unsuitable. Drinking causes delusion, fear,
grief, anger, insanity, infatuation, fainting, epilepsy,
convulsions, and death. Further, loss of memory,
awareness, and common sense occur.
[Strong mental and physical Kapha persons who
come from families that drinks with meals as a daily
habit and have strong digestion do not become greatly
intoxicated or addicted.]
Causes:
Váyu: When one is emaciated as a result of sex,
grief, fear, travel, carrying overly heavy objects, eating
rough or too little amounts of food, and then drinking
rough, old wine in large amounts in the night, will
disturb sleep. It causes Váyu alcoholism.
Pitta: When one takes large quantities of hot, sour,
and sharp wines, while eating hot and sharp foods, it
burns the plasma and lymph, transforming their
character into alkaline. The result is internal
symptoms of burning, fever, thirst, mental confusion,
giddiness, and narcosis. This leads to Pitta alcoholism
Kapha: When one takes large amounts of fresh,
sweet wine, while eating sweet, oily, and heavy foods
and takes frequent naps, and no exercise, Kapha
alcoholism is caused.
Symptoms:
General: Profound delusion, heart discomfort,
diarrhea, constant thirst, mild or severe fever, loss of
taste and appetite, pain in the head, ribs, and bones;
tremors, twitching, sharp pain in the vital organs and
upper back, constricted chest, blindness, coma, cough,
hiccup, swelling, ear, eye, and mouth disorders;
mental disorders and confusion, unintelligent speech,
vomiting, nausea, anorexia, thirst, severe yawning,
dizziness, giddiness delusion, delirium, hallucination,
nightmares.
Váyu: Insomnia, hiccup, difficult breathing,
tremors, headache, dreams of wandering, pain in the
sides, falling, and talking with demons. Speech
becomes impaired, talking becomes fast, delirious,
slurred, and unsteady; activity is hindered,
complexion becomes dry and blackish-red.
Pitta: Burning sensation, fever, perspiration,
fainting, giddiness delusion, diarrhea, thirst, dizziness,
green or reddish-yellow complexion, reddish eyes and
cheeks, quick to anger, argumentative.
Kapha: Vomiting, excess sleep, skin rashes,
anorexia, nausea, heaviness. One talks less, slurred
speech, worry, laziness and lack of enthusiasm,
yellowish-white complexion, cold feeling.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas.
Miscellaneous: Suddenly starting drinking after
stopping for a long time creates two types of diseases
of Váyu origin that are difficult to heal and one type
of Pitta origin.
Type 1—expectorating mucus, dry throat, excess
sleep, irritated by noise, stupor.
Type 2—severe pain in the head and body, heart and
throat disorders, delusion, cough, thirst, vomiting,
fevers.
     Type 3—When one sees blood or develops an in-
creased volume of blood, the body becomes stiff, eyes
are fixed in a gaze, other Pitta symptoms occur.
Alcoholism leads to fainting, and develops into a
loss of consciousness. The channels of plasma, blood,
and consciousness become obstructed.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
472
Therapies: All forms of alcoholism are tridoßha, so one
first attends to the most excessed doßha (although gen-
erally Kapha is the most excessed). If all three doßhas
are simultaneously imbalanced, one begins healing
Kapha, then Pitta, and lastly Váyu.
Váyu: When wine causes the air to block the
channels, it causes head, bone, and joint pain. To
moisten Váyu (i.e., restore balance), Váyu-reducing
foods are taken, followed by salty wine (made from
flour) with ámalakí and ginger. This improves
absorption, sharpness, and hotness. This dissipates
the obstructions, dispels wind, and increases appetite.
Foods include sours (e.g., pickles, yogurt), barley,
wheat, basmati rice, vegetables, hot baths, ointments,
enemas, ghee, milk, oil massage.
Váyu/Pitta: When these doßhas are in excess, if
one feels great thirst, cold grape juice removes the
imbalances. After food is digested, persons drink
yogurt/water (lassi) with cane sugar, followed by cold
water boiled with musta and ámalakí, to quench thirst.
A paste of ámalakí, barley flour, and ghee may also
be placed in the mouth to quench thirst.
Pitta: Alcoholism caused by excess intake of
sharp, hot, sour, and burning wine is healed by cold,
sour, grape wine with sugar, pomegranate, and roasted
barley flour, having secondary tastes of sweet,
pungent, bitter, and astringent. The acid and wine
combination neutralizes the alkali. Foods include
ghee, cane sugar and ámalakí mixed with basmati
rice, peas, green lentils, ámalakí water.
Cold water boiled with musta and ámalakí,
quenches thirst. A paste of ámalakí, barley flour, and
ghee may also be placed in the mouth for alleviating
thirst. Other therapies include, cold drinks and foods,
sandalwood water, or drinking cool water from gold,
silver, or bronze vessels. External therapies include
cool rooms and breezes, moonlight walks, wearing
clothes made of flax, and being near lotus and lily
flowers. Green gems (e.g., emerald, jade), pearls, and
moonstones further reduce Pitta alcoholism.
For burning sensations, sandalwood, lotus, or lily
water is sprinkled on the body; cold baths or showers.
Further, beautiful scenery, melodious music, jokes,
and peaceful conversation balance this disease.
Pitta/Kapha: When both are excessed in the
stomach, it causes burning and thirst. Grape juice or
water is taken, then vomiting is induced to heal this
illness quickly. Whenever the desire for alcohol
appears, grape juice or water is immediately taken.
This stimulates the digestion, which in turn digests
the undigested food toxins.
If there is bleeding cough, pain in the breasts and
sides, thirst, burning, excess doßhas in the heart and
chest, one takes guæúchí, vásák, dúrba, musta, ginger,
ghee, and sugar cane juice.
Kapha: If alcoholism is caused by faulty or excess
drinking, it is merely healed by moderation. First,
fasting and emesis are used. Later, herbs are used to
remove áma, improve appetite, and return one’s
lightness.
When thirst and fever develop, persons drink warm
water boiled with balá, or cooled water boiled with
balá, musta, and ginger, to help digest the alcohol
excesses. When áma is removed and appetite returns,
cold wine with water, rock salt, and fresh ginger and
honey is taken in moderation.
Small portions of food, including barley or wheat
with ginger; thin vegetable soup with dried radish
and pungents like ginger, sours like ámalakí, and a
little ghee.
To promote appetite, white seedless grape juice,
pomegranate juice, pungent herbs, cardamom,
turmeric, and black pepper are mixed with raw honey.
Foods include hot foods and drinks. External
therapies include hot baths and steam, physical
exercise, staying up late and waking early, no naps,
dry-body massage (promotes strength and
complexion), and wearing rough heavy garments.
Inhaling warm aromas, such as frankincense and
cedar, is also helpful.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 473
If the above measures are not effective, wines should
not be drunk, but substituted with boiled milk with
cinnamon, ghee, and honey. Gradually return to small
amounts of wine.
Fainting (Múrchá)
When drinking continues and one’s health
becomes more seriously impaired, fainting occurs as
a second, more serious stage of this illness.
Symptoms:
Váyu: One sees the surrounding space as light red,
black, or blue; enters darkness or unconsciousness,
then shortly regains awareness. Symptoms include
heart pain, tremors, dizziness, emaciation, and a
blackish-red complexion.
Pitta: Surrounding space is red or yellow. The
person becomes unconscious, then soon after regains
consciousness. One feels sweat, burning sensation,
thirst, increased heat, diarrhea, blue or yellow feces,
reddish or yellow eyes, and an unsteady gaze.
Kapha: One’s surrounding awareness is cloudy,
resulting in fainting. Persons return to consciousness
after a long time. The heart is oppressed and one
develops increased salivation. The body feels heavy
and restricted, as if walking in soaking wet clothes.
Tridoßha: Includes symptoms of all three doßhas
and falling to the ground in a faint.
Therapies:
General: Constant sprinkling or spraying of water
over the body, plunging one into a cold bath, contact
with cold gems and flower garlands, cold compresses
and plasters, cold breeze and fanning, cold-scented
drinks (i.e., all cooling measures).
Drákßhá (medicated grape wine), pomegranate
juice, rice, and barley are suggested foods and drinks.
Herbs include nágke¤har and black pepper; pippalí
and raw honey, harítakí decoction and ghee, ámalakí
and ghee.
Comas (Saånyása)
When drinking continues, one’s health becomes
most seriously impaired. The coma is the third and
most dangerous stage of drinking. Therefore, before
persons decide to drink, they must think about many
factors.
Alcohol Factors Considered for Avoiding Comas
     As the accumulation of all three doßhas become
aggravated together and get localized in the mind and
intellect, speech, body and mind become impaired.
Persons become stiff as a log, and therapy must be
given immediately.
Therapies include strong snuff, strong collyrium,
passive snuffing (i.e., someone else blowing snuff into
the client’s nose), pricking needles under the nails,
pulling hairs, touching the person with a hot object,
or putting sour and bitter tastes in the mouth. Once
persons regain consciousness, they are given juices
of fresh garlic and lemon, with saffron, t^ikatu, and
salt. A light, easily digestible meal is also taken.
g
Alcohol Factors Considered
for Avoiding Comas
physical
strength
drink
potency
season
time of
day
place
doßha
age
quantity
used to
drinking

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
474
Atrophy (Kßhaya)
Cause: Átreya discusses atrophy (phthisis) after
epilepsy because after falling during a seizure, the
chest may become injured. Atrophy is listed in this
book under nervous system disorders. It is this injury
to the chest that can cause atrophy or emaciation.
Internally, it is caused by a deficiency of semen
(¤hukra) and life sap (ojas). These deficiencies result
from an overindulgence in sex and other life-sap-
depleting habits, such as fasting, eating dry foods,
and eating small quantities of food. Other causes
include eating at the wrong time or season, eating
foods of only one taste (i.e., either sweet, or salty, or
sour, or pungent, or bitter, or astringent).
Since ojas originates in the heart, injury to the chest
will also deplete this life sap. Other causes include
excessive straining during sports or work (e.g., lifting
weights that are too heavy, singing scriptures at the
top of one’s voice, hard jolts to the body). Thus, it is
a disease of Váyu doßha.
Development and Premonitory Signs: As a result of
any of these causes, the chest becomes broken,
cracked, or perforated, the chest thus becomes
squashed. This causes emaciation and tremors that
slowly lead to the loss of strength, complexion,
appetite, and digestive fire (agni). Fever, pain,
depression, and diarrhea develop (although Pitta is
deficient, the suppression of digestive power can cause
diarrhea). Symptoms include, coughing up
malodorous, grayish, yellow, and knotty phlegm with
large amounts blood. When semen and ojas are
diminished from the above causes, emaciation also
becomes worse.
Symptoms: The main signs of chest injury are
vomiting, bleeding, and coughing. The main
symptoms of semen and ojas deficiency is blood in
the urine, and torso stiffness.
When the signs and symptoms are mild, when the
patient is strong, or if the situation has just occurred,
then the person can be healed. If the disease has lasted
for more than 1 year, then it can only be controlled
(i.e., the symptoms can diminish but may return if
not careful). Should all the signs and symptoms si-
multaneously present themselves, the disease is in-
curable.
Therapy:
New injury: Coagulative herbs (astringents) like
raspberry and nágke¤har (stop bleeding), taken with
boiled milk and raw honey.
Chest and rib or urinary bladder pain: (with poor
digestion) Herbs include guggul, vásák, neem,
chopchiní, turmeric, with boiled milk, and raw honey
or cane sugar.
Diarrhea: Í¤habgol (and musta if Váyu is not
excessed)
Strong digestion: Herbs include coagulatives with
boiled milk, ghee, and raw honey or cane sugar.
To heal injuries: (same therapies as chest/rib).
Fever and burning sensation: (same therapies as
chest/rib).
Cough, and rib and bone pain: Herbs include pippalí,
balá, ghee, and raw honey.
Limping: Ghee with rock salt are suggested.
Weakness, emaciation, chest injury, insomnia, excess
Váyu: Herbs include turmeric, ¤hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá, balá, ghee, and raw honey or cane
sugar.
Weight loss, muscle emaciation, no appetite, debility:
Therapies include cane sugar, barley, wheat, raw
honey; and afterwards, boiled milk, a¤hwagandhá,
dúrbá, pippalí, turmeric, and honey, with ghee—to
promote blood, tissues, and muscle development.
Chest injury with semen loss: £hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá, aßhoka, and vásák are suggested.
Chest injury: Boil bráhmí ghee (page 468) with equal
amounts of milk. As an option, a decoction of 4 times
as much licorice as ghee may be added to the bráhmí
ghee.
Muscle and Blood Builder: 1/4 to 1/2 tsp. pippalí
and the remainder of the teaspoon with raw honey,
taken for a week. Then for 2 to 3 days, this mixture is
not taken. This regimen is continued as described.
Fever and cough: Sitopaladi and cane sugar are
advised.
Emaciated women: Vidárí kand, ámalakí, and sesame
seed tahini are advised.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 475
Debility and loss of body weight: Therapies include
a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, ámalakí, ghee, and wheat
flour.
Urinary bladder, uterus or kidney problems, or loss
of semen or ovum, due to excess sexual indulgence:
Ghee with a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, and da¤hmúl are
suggested. When persons are strong, a medicated
enema is also useful.
Poor digestion: Therapies include barley powder, raw
honey, and bráhmí ghee.
Multiple Sclerosis
In the nerve cell, axons and dendrites (see
diagram below) are covered by cells that contain
myelin (a fatty substance needed for normal
conduction of electrical impulses). Certain diseases
attack myelin and the cells that produce it. The cells
are stripped of myelin or scarring (plaque) is caused.
This causes the nerves to partially or completely stop
normal nerve impulse conduction.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common of
these demyelinating diseases. However, it is not
equally present throughout the world. Although it is
prevalent in the U.S., it is not equally distributed
within the country. MS is mainly concentrated in
temperate climates (and rarely found in tropical or
arctic regions). Thus, western science feels there may
be a geographic or climactic influence. MS is a disease
involving the central nervous system.
From the Áyurvedic standpoint, MS results from
Váyu and Pitta excesses, caused by anxiety (Váyu)
that leads to hypertension. An inability to withstand
heat can develop.
Therapies
Herbs that calm and strengthen the nerves and
immune system are very useful. A special gold ash
preparation (Survana Vasant Malti) work best but is
more costly than plain herbs [1 pill daily—in the
morning—with 1/2 tsp. raw honey].
Females—After age 50 Pitta is affected. Herbs
include jaóámáò¤hí, ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, yogaraj
guggul, triphalá, bráhmí. The healing process is
longer after age 40.
Nerve Cell
Nerve Cell
Body
Axon
Axon
Dendrites
Nerve Cell Body
Axon
Dendrites
Dendrite Heads
Enzymes
Neuro-
transmitters
Recptor
protein

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
476
Males—The healing process is longer after age
50. Herbs include vachá, ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá,
yogaraj guggul, triphalá, and bráhmí.
Other important therapies include ¤hiro dhárá (hot
oil head drips) and ¤hiro bhyañga (head-oil baths),
as they reduce the excess Váyu in the head, and calm
and tone the nerves of the brain and body. Seven or
14 sessions (daily or alternating days), 30 to 45
minutes per session, is advised as an optimum
program.
Haóha yoga is another effective therapy to slow
and reduce the effects of MS. Mind-body
coordination, muscle and nerve toning, immune
building, and increased flexibility are the benefits of
practicing yoga postures.
For MS pain, rubbing sesame oil mixed with
mahánáráyan oil on the body has been found to be
very effective; people report that pain is stopped for
several hours at a time.
Following a food plan according to one’s doßha
is also required. Lifestyle changes may be necessary
to reduce undue stress in one’s life.
Nasya with medicated brain oils like ¤had bindu
are also very helpful—3-6 drops per .
Parkinson’s Disease
This is a condition that develops from a loss of
dopamine-producing cells in the substantia nigra area
of the basal ganglia. Although it usually affects
persons after age 50, it sometimes is found in persons
as young as age 35.
Symptoms:
Early stages are slight shaking of hands during fine
hand movement. Advanced symptoms include shak-
ing or tremor, stiffness or rigidity, hindered walking
and stooped posture.
Therapies:
Generally this is a Váyu or Váyu/Pitta condition
(sometimes Váyu/Kapha). All therapies for MS are
advised here, especially kapikachhú, abhyañga, çhiro
dhárá, nasya (e.g., çhad bindu oil), basti, yoga
postures
Alzheimer’s Disease
The exact cause of Alzheimer’s disease is not yet
known to Western medicine. However, it is considered
a function of the nervous system. Nerve cells in the
memory region of the brain are found to be greatly
reduced in size and number as compared with those
of a healthy person.
Tourette’s syndrome, ataxia, aphasia, stuttering,
dyslexia, and other diseases of the brain and nervous
system are modern names for conditions that have
not been found in ancient India. Thus, their therapies
have not been specifically discussed.
For all nervous system disorders one can follow
therapies for MS and other previously discussed
diseases based on similar symptoms. Kapikachhú has
been found to be especially effective in Parkinson’s
research.
One who is ever mindful of their life purpose
and how they are living,
their life will never become sad.
Aßhóáñga H^idayam Sú. Ch. 2 : ver. 47

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                             Chapter 20: Nervous System
 477

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
478

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                 Chapter 21: Skin Disorders
 479
Education is a development from within, not an accretion from without; it comes through the
workings of natural instincts and not in response to external force; it is an expansion of natural
powers, not an acquisition of information; it is life itself, not a preparation for a future state
remote in interests and characteristics from the life of childhood.
Rousseau
Chapter 21
Skin Disorders
Warts, Skin, Leukoderma, Herpes Zoster
Warts
hen Váyu and Kapha combine on the
skin, they are nail-like in appearance,
hard, rough, and immovable. When
Váyu predominates, pain and roughness develop.
With Pitta predominance they look blackish-red.
Should Kapha predominate they are greasy, knotty,
and the same color as the skin.
Kapha creates soft skin. Pitta causes hard skin.
They combine when following incompatible thera-
pies (e.g., ingesting milk and salt together), and cause
warts.
Therapies: Externally, lemon juice or tea-tree oil ap-
plied to the warts (daily, for several weeks).
Warts are similar to hemorrhoids in their devel-
opment and appearance. Thus, therapies are the same
as for hemorrhoids.
Obstinate Skin Diseases (Kußhóha)
Causes: These arise from aggravated Váyu, Pitta, and
Kapha that become deranged by four tissues (dhátus):
skin-plasma/lymph (rasa/lasíká), muscle (máåsa),
and blood (rakta). Then, they spread throughout the
body.
The beginning stages of skin diseases are caused
only by the four dhátus, but eventually spread to the
other dhátus. All skin disorders involve the three
doßhas and four dhátus (i.e., plasma, lymph, blood,
and muscle). The various types of disorders depend
upon the combinations of the doßhas and their physi-
cal locations. The combinations of doßha and loca-
tions cause various pains, colors, shapes, and mani-
festations; although they are produced by the same
causes. For example, in some cases the quality of
dryness of Váyu is excessed, while at other times the
coldness of Váyu is predominant.
     Skin diseases are caused by ingesting mutually
contradictory foods and drinks (e.g., fish [hot] and
milk [cold]). They can also be caused by suppressing
any of the natural urges, exercise after meals or un-
der very hot weather conditions; fasting, and eating
heavy meals. Other causes include drinking cold
water just after being in the hot sun, fright, raw foods,
eating before the last meal is digested. Improper use
of pañcha karma and its follow-up therapies also can
cause skin diseases. Further causes include exces-
sive eating of yogurt, salt, fish, radish, pastries, sesame
seeds, milk and sugar, and sour foods. External causes
include, sex after meals, naps, insulting holy people,
Gurus, and other sinful actions.
Some say there are many skin disease
classifications. Others say 18 (major and minor) skin
disorders occur. Still others say only 7 types exist.
Discussed below, are the 7 major classifications.
Premonitory Signs: Lack of, or excess perspiration;
discoloration, itching, pricking pain, numbness, tin-
gling, burning, hair standing on end, rough or exces-
sively smooth skin, coarseness, heaviness, frequent
development of edema, spreading severely, sticky
excreta in body orifices, excessive pain from oozing,
wounds are difficult to hear. After these signs, the
individual symptoms appear.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
480
Seven Major Skin Diseases
(Mahá-Kußhóhas)
Depending upon the degree of excess, many
permutations of skin disorders exist. Charak and
Sußhrut have different listings of major and minor
skin diseases. This is due to the differences of surgical
and medicinal therapies. Below are 7 major skin
diseases.
Kaphála: (macula caelulum/azure colored spots) due
to excess Váyu—dry, reddish, rough, and with rough
edges; uneven, thin, slightly elevated on the edges,
excessive numbness, bristly hairs and great pain,
burning, pus, black or azure in color. They develop
instantly, and are difficult to heal.
Udumbara: Due to Pitta—coppery, and covered with
coppery colored hair; thick with copious, thick pus,
blood, and oozing; itching, sticky oozing, burning,
and hot. The manifestation and ulceration happen
instantly.
Mandala: Due to Kapha—oily, heavy, swollen,
smooth and yellow borders; white and red colored,
and covered with many white hairs; excessive, thick,
slimy, white, sticking oozing, itching, round; they
develop slowly, are difficult to heal. [Charak Saåhitá]
[Aruna: Caused by Váyu, is light vermilion colored,
thin, spreading, pricking and piercing pain, numb to
the touch—listed in Sußhrut Saåhitá as one of the
seven instead of Mandala.]
Risyajihva: Due to Váyu/Pitta—rough, reddish with
dark brown centers and edges; they can be blue,
yellow, and coppery shaded; excessive burning,
cutting, piercing pain and pus, elevated centers and
thin edges, rough pimples, elongated and round, and
they develop instantly.
Pundaríka: Due to Kapha/Pitta—white and red with
red edges and covered with red lines and blood
vessels, swelling, thick excessive discharge of blood
and pus, itching, circular, raised, burning, and develop
slowly.
Sidhma (macule atrophica): Due to Kapha/ Váyu—
rough, reddish, fissured edges with thin centers,
smooth, dusty, white and red shaded; there are many
of them; they are generally found on the chest, and
they develop slowly. [Átreya says it is a major illness,
while Sußhrut considers it a minor one].
Dadru (ringworm): Faint blue or coppery, spreading,
pimples, itching, circular, slow to develop, raised.
[Átreya lists as a minor illness. He sees it being caused
by all three doßhas. Sußhrut considers it minor, based
on surgical measures. Further, he sees it being caused
by Váyu and Kapha].
Kákanaka: Átreya says it is due to Tridoßhic
symptoms; all forms of skin diseases are experienced,
many colors yet mostly red, and cannot be healed
due to the vitiation of all three doßhas (all other forms
of disorders are healable). Sußhrut says it is due to
Pitta, black, sucking or burning pain, emitting hot
fumes, developing pus and break rapidly, eventually
they develop parasites.
Tridoßhic: Simultaneous aggravation of all three
doßhas are caused by
1) Eating cold and hot foods, and nourishing and
depleting diets.
2) Excess and long term use of honey, fish, radish
while there is indigestion.
3) Excessive sexual intercourse, exercise, and heat
exposure before digesting meals.
4) Suppressing the urge for emesis.
5) Excessive oleation.
6) Entering cold water just after developing fear, grief,
and exhaustion.
These habits aggravate the doßhas in the four
dhátus, and weaken them. Due to this weakening,
the tissues (dhátus) cause skin disorders.
11 Minor Symptoms
(Kßhudra Kußhóhas)
Eka (ichthyosis): Váyu/Kapha—no perspiration, vast,
localized groupings, scaly (like a fish), reddish color,
not healable.
Charma (hypertrophy): Váyu/Kapha—thick skin
patches (like elephant skin), burning, restlessness, pus,
piercing pain, epileptic fits and loss of consciousness,
sucking, drawing pain in the palms and soles (with
itching).
Kitima (keloid tumors): Váyu/Kapha—blackish-
brown, rough (excessive scar tissue), hard to the

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                 Chapter 21: Skin Disorders
 481
touched.
Charmandala: Pitta/Kapha—redness, itching, pus-
tules, pain, skin cracks, and tender.
Pámá (eczema): Pitta/Kapha—great itching, white,
red, or blackish/brown small pimples, itching, burn-
ing secretion.
Vicarchiká (psoriasis): Kapha—blackish-brown, itch-
ing, copious oozing, great pain, dry cracks on hands,
feet and body.
Vipádiká (lower psoriasis):
Váyu/Kapha—cracks in palms and soles, great pain,
burning, found only in the lower extremities.
Sphota: Pitta/Kapha—thin, white or reddish pustules.
£határu: Pitta/Kapha—red or blackish-brown ulcer-
ated patches, burning and pain.
Alasaka: Váyu/Kapha—nodular growth with great
itching and redness.
[All skin diseases (Kußhóhas) are the same causes
as Erysipelas (Visarpa)—an acute disease of the sub-
cutaneous tissues—only Koßhóhá develops gradually,
while Visarpa spreads very quickly.]
[Parisarpa, Visarpa, Kachus, Rakasá, Mahá
Kußhóham, Sthulárußhka, Kilásam; Sußhrut sees these
as minor diseases.]
Sthulárußhka: Kapha—pimples around the joints that
are very thick at their base, difficult to heal, with hard
pimples on the surface.
Mahá-kußhtham: Kapha—contracted skin bursts,
causing piercing pain, loss of sensation and general
lassitude.
Visarpa: (discussed in its own section)
Pitta—pimples in the skin, blood and fat, quickly
spread over the entire body, with burning, restlessness,
pus, piercing pain, and epileptic fits leading to
fainting.
Parisarpa: Váyu—oozing pimples that slowly spread
over the entire body.
Kachus (localized eczema): Pámá symptoms with
burning are found only on the legs, hands, and
buttocks.
Rakasá (dry erythema/abnormal red skin due to
irritation and dilation of capillaries): Kapha—dry,
non- oozing pimples, intense itching, all over the body.
Complications: If skin disorders are not tended to
properly, germs in the skin, muscles, blood, oozings,
and sweat further weaken the doßhas and cause
secondary disorders.
Váyu: Blackish brown or reddish in color, rough, dry,
piercing or pricking pain, emaciation, trembling, hair
standing on end, stiffness, numbness, exhaustion,
ulcerations, and fissures.
Pitta: Burning, sweating, tissue softening,
putrefaction, oozing, pus, and redness.
Kapha: Whiteness, coldness, itching, steadiness,
heaviness, swelling, oiliness, and stickiness.
Four Dhátus: Germs eat away at the skin, muscles,
blood, plasma, vessels, ligaments, bones, and
cartilage, causing oozings, ulcerated organs, thirst,
fever, diarrhea, burning, weakness, anorexia, and
indigestion.
The simultaneous excesses of all three doßhas are
the cause of all forms of skin diseases, yet some
doßhas are predominant for each variety. The
predominant doßha and the causes of the illness are
learned from the specific form of the disease, and
vice versa. Thus, after analyzing the signs and
symptoms, the doßha that is predominant is balanced
first, then the other doßhas are healed later.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
482
     Rough, dry, hard, scaly skin, coarse, hair standing
on edge, brown and red, itching, constipation,
distention, increased by wind and dryness; oils are
soothing. Therapies include Váyu-reducing foods,
liquids and life-styles; castor oil laxatives, enemas,
sesame oil massage, triphalá, guggul, myrrh,
¤hatávarí, and cardamom.
Pitta Symptoms and Therapies: Burning, redness,
oozing, malodor, stickiness of limbs, swelling,
infection, fever, irritability; increased by heat; oil
make them worse. Therapies include Pitta-reducing
foods, drinks, and lifestyle; avoiding nightshades
(eggplants, peppers, tomatoes, potatoes, peaches,
strawberries), sour, and hot things. Helpful therapies
include coconut juice, aloe vera gel, cilantro juice,
gotu kola, and bh^i´garáj oils (internally and
externally); herbs include gotu kola, burdock, red
clover, chiráyatá, aloe, rhubarb, mañjißhþhá,
bhúámalakí.
Kapha Symptoms and Therapies: White complexion,
cold, localized, raised, heavy, sticky, unsightly,
oozing, congestion, edema, itching; increased by
damp and cold weather, and oil. Therapies include
Kapha-reducing foods, drinks, and lifestyle; avoiding
heavy, greasy, and oily foods including cheese and
yogurt, and external oil massage. Helpful herbs
include burdock, gokßhura, guggul, triphalá,
mañjißhþhá, ginger, bhúámalakí, and gotu kola.
Therapies: It is said that the skin condition is not able
to be healed if, tridoßhic symptoms exist; symptoms
develop in weak persons, while experiencing great
thirst and burning sensations, poor digestion, and if
the patches have bugs in them.
Preliminary Therapies
Váyu: First—enema using oils and ghee.
Pitta: First—purgation (and blood-letting) using
triphalá.
Kapha: First—emetic therapy when the doßhas are
excessed in the heart or center of the body, and are
not stuck or rooted in the upper part of the body.
Emetics include kuþaj, neem, and honey.
When the doßhas are greatly excessed, these
preliminary therapies are repeated several times,
always monitoring one’s health and strength, as these
therapies may weaken the patient and their Váyu.
Secondary Therapies
Only after the doßhas are significantly reduced,
oleation therapy is given repeatedly. After the
therapies, one begins a food diet that balances their
doßhas. [Beginning with thin gruel-thick gruel,
vegetable soup, etc. as describe in the pañcha karma
section of Chapter 7. Thin gruel is taken for three
meals, then for two meals, and then for one meal.]
Medicated enemas are also taken, using barley and
musta ,with ghee or oil (e.g., sesame, canola,
sunflower).
If excess Váyu still exists even after these
therapies, food plan, and enema, one takes an
anuvásana medicated enema of oil mixed with
harítakí and triphalá (depending upon their strength).
Inhalation Therapy: Rock salt, black pepper, pippalí,
jaóámáò¤hí, and gotu kola are inhaled to heal skin
diseases (and parasitic infections and Kapha diseases).
Medicated ghee may be used internally and
externally to heal skin conditions of the three doßhas.
Pitta-, blood-, and Kapha-caused imbalances use
bitter and astringent herbs (e.g., musta, raspberry).
Kapha skin disorders are healed with chitrak,
guæúchí, cardamom, chakramarda, sarsaparilla,
kuähtha, and punarnavá.
Váyu—triphalá, musta, raspberry, mañjißhþhá,
gokßhura, chitrak, neem, guæúchí, cardamom,
punarnavá, and calamus are useful for Váyu.
Váyu or Kapha: Decoctions of t^ikatu, triphalá, cane
sugar, and sesame oil, taken for 1 month. Herbs are
mixed in equal amounts. These decoctions are also
applied externally to the skin. Massaging the
decoctions (mixed with oil) into the skin also
promotes healing. Váyu uses sesame oil, Pitta,
sunflower or coconut oil, Kapha uses mustard or
canola oil. Sesame or mustard oil decoctions of
bákuchí, t^ikatu, kuþaj, and viæa´ga are massaged into
the skin quickly prevents the bursting of mandala skin
diseases and itching.
     Sidhma and newly occurring likása leukoderma
can be healed. Herbs include bákuchí, kuähtha, and
mañjißhþhá.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                 Chapter 21: Skin Disorders
 483
Charma, eka, kitima and alasaka skin disorders
are healed with medicated ghee and oil, boiled with
mañjißhþhá, sarsaparilla, an equal quantity of milk,
and bees’ wax.
Mandala herbs include viæa´ga, vachá, neem, arka,
chitrak, musta, kuþaj, castor oil, and t^ikatu. The skin
is massaged with sesame or mustard oil.
Váyu and Kapha skin disorders are healed with
chitrak, guæúchí, cardamom, and punarnavá, mixed
with 1/4 yogurt and 3/4 water. Vatsaka, sandalwood/
barley decoction for Pitta. Pitta and Kapha herbs
include sandalwood, kußhtha, and kuþki.
Váyu/Pitta: Herbs include khair, sandalwood, neem,
red sandalwood, triphalá, and ghee.
For burning patches, or skin diseases in general,
massage with a triphalá decoction mixed with
sandalwood, pippalí, turmeric, musta, red
sandalwood, khair, turmeric, licorice, vatsaka, and
ghee. These herbs are also for Charmadala skin
disorder, stickiness, scaling, shedding skin disjointing,
or burning, along with water dripped on the skin.
Sidhma: Herbs include kuþaj bark, nilotpalam, and
satyanasha (yellow thistle).
When skin disorders are predominantly blood and
Pitta excessed, vásák, bákuchí, guæúchí, mañjißhþhá,
neem, and ghee are used.
When disjointedness, serious exudation, or mag-
gots appear, persons take a neem and viæa´ga bath.
After the blood is purified, pañcha karma therapies
are used. The skin is washed with neem and viæa´ga
as antiseptic wash externally to prevent and check
the infection, and then pañcha karma internally to
help recovery.
Dadru (ringworm): Plaster of mustard seeds, tur-
meric, t^ikatu with yogurt/water (lassi) is applied to
area affected by the ringworm. Internally, the same
herbs, and, viæa´ga, neem, sarsaparilla, chakrama-
rda, khadir, chitrak, ginger, triphalá may be taken. In
viral ringworm, baths with a decoction of the above
herbs are also useful.
Minor Skin Disorders: Drinking tepid decoctions
of turmeric, mañjißhþhá, gokßhura, triphalá,
bh^i´garáj, gotu kola, sandalwood, aloe vera gel.
Blisters can develop on the patches. After blisters
burst, a plaster of turmeric, mañjißhþhá, viæa´ga,
neem, harítakí, and aloe vera gel is applied to the
skin.
Foods are light and wholesome, mixed with ghee,
and bitter leafy vegetables are advised. Herbs include
t^ikatu and kaißhore guggul. One simultaneously
avoids eating sour foods, milk, yogurt, meat, cane,
sugar and sesame seeds (except as remedies). Baths
(i.e., soaking the problem skin) with herbs of musta
and triphalá are useful as well.
Leukoderma (£hvitra)
Pigmentation Loss/White Skin Patches
Causes: It arises from the aggravation of Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, blood, muscle, and fat. Váyu forms are easi-
est to heal, becoming increasingly more difficult to
subdue, with fat as the most difficult to heal. Gener-
ally it is caused by excesses of all three doßhas, but
sometimes it is caused by one or two doßhas.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Dry, light red skin
Pitta: Coppery red, burning, and destroys the hair
in the infected area.
Kapha: White, thick, heavy, and itching skin. Blood,
Muscle, Fat: These tissues have the same
respective colors as the three doßhas.
Recovery: Symptoms of black hairs, mild skin
patches; not joined, of recent onset, and not caused
by burning fire can be healed. The remainder, includ-
ing those found on the genitals, palms, soles, and lips
are difficult or unable to be healed.
Therapies: First oleation, then elimination therapies
(depending on one’s strength) are suggested. After-
wards, bákuchí, mañjißhþhá, neem, turmeric, ámalakí,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
484
makoy, khadir, bilwa bark, and chakramarda are taken
with cane sugar. Following this, persons sun bathe to
cause purgation. This will cause thirst, for that thin
gruel (peyá) is taken for 3 days.
All therapies for skin disorders, are also useful for
internal and external Leukoderma disorders
(including bákuchí and rock salt for external
application).
Pustule eruptions: When they occur on the
Leukoderma are first punctured to remove the fluids.
For the next 15 mornings one takes bákuchí,
mañjißhþhá, neem, turmeric, ámalakí, makoy, khadir,
bilwa bark, and chakramarda.
Varieties: The three forms, dáruna, cháruna, and
kilása, are all caused by the simultaneous excess of
all three doßhas. When it is found in the blood, it is
red; in the muscle it is coppery; and if in the fat, it is
white. When it is in the blood, it is the mildest form;
in the fat, it is the most serious.
This disorder cannot be healed if patches are
overlapping, several patches exist, red hair grows
through the patches, and diseases last for several years.
Leukoderma is caused by sinful acts in this life
or previous lives; eating mutually contradictory foods,
disrespect and lying to people and deities.
Minor Ailments (Kßhudrarogam)
Causes: There are 44 forms of minor ailments. All
the different writers give different views of this sec-
tion. Thus, there is no generally accepted number of
ailments or sequence of the diseases.
Symptoms:
Pimples and Swellings
Ajagalliká: Váyu and Kapha—pimples that are shiny,
knotty, painless, the same color as the surrounding
skin, and is found in infants.
Yává-prakßhyá: Váyu and Kapha—barley-corn-
shaped eruptions, very hard, thick in the middle,
knotty, and confined to the flesh.
Andhálaji: Váyu and Kapha—pimples are dense,
raised, slender at the top, in circular patches, exuding
some pus.
Vivritá: Pitta—pimples are the color of ripe figs; flat
at the top, in circular patches, unbearable burning.
Kachapiká: Váyu and Kapha—pimples are in groups
of five or six; hard, raised, nodular, tortoise shell-
shaped, appearing anywhere on the body.
Valmíka: All three doßhas—knotty, undurated,
pimples that slowly develop on the soles and palm
joints, neck and above the collar bone, ant hill shaped.
Indra-vriddhá: Váyu and Pitta—pimples on the skin,
arranged circularly.
Panasika: Kapha and Váyu—very painful pimples/
abscess in or around the ears.
Páßhána-Garddabha (mumps): Kapha and Váyu—
slightly painful, non shifting, hard swelling, appearing
on the jawbone joint.
Jála-Garddabha: Pitta—thin, superficial swelling,
shifts position, fever, burning, but does not form pus.
[Some say when they are circular, raised, studded
with pouches, red, painful, and caused by Váyu and
Pitta.]
Kakßhá: Pitta—black, painful pimples on the back,
sides and armpit area.
Agni-Rohini: All three doßhas—blisters around the
waist, bursts the local flesh, fever, burning inside the
affected area; this cannot be healed. (Some say death
occurs seven, 10 or 15 days from its onset.)
Chippam: Váyu and Pitta—fingernail flesh develops
pain, burning and pus.
Kunakham: Fingernails are rough, dry, black, due to
being hit (e.g., with a hammer).
Anusayi: Kapha—small swelling on the body, the
same color as the skin, but is deep-seated, and forms
pus in the deeper levels.
Vidáriká: All three doßhas—gourd-shaped round, red
swelling on the groin region; symptoms related to
each respective doßha.
£harkarár-budam: Váyu and Kapha—flesh, veins,
ligaments, and fat develop cysts that burst with a large

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                 Chapter 21: Skin Disorders
 485
quantity of honey-like secretion. Excessive secretion
creates excess Váyu, drying the area of the skin in
the shape of many gravel-like pimples. Malodorous,
multi colored secretion from the veins can develop.
The veins may suddenly bleed. The three forms are
eczema, psoriasis, and rakasá (dry erythema/
abnormal red skin due to irritation and dilation of
capillaries), and have been previously discussed under
Kußhóas (Skin Disorders).
Yauvana-pidaká or Mukhadußhiká (acne): Váyu and
Kapha—thorny pimples on the face of young people,
due to blood.
Padmini-Kantaka (skin papilloma): Váyu and
Kapha—circular, gray patches or rash-like pimples
with thorny pimples, with itching.
Jatumani (mole): Blood and Pitta—reddish, shiny,
circular, painless, congenital, level with the skin.
Ma¤haka (lichen): Váyu—hard, painless, black,
raised pimples on the skin.
Tilakálaka (freckles): Any of the doßhas —painless
black spots (sesame seed sized) on the skin (non
elevated). Some call this Nilikam if it is black and
arise anywhere but on the face.
Nyacham: Painless, congenital, circular, white, or
brown skin patches contained to small areas of the
body.
Charmakila (skin hypertrophy/non-tumorous
enlargement): Discussed in the skin disorder section.
Vyañga: Thin, circular, painless, brown patches or
stains. Váyu becomes excessed due to anger, over
exertion, and fatigue; associated with Pitta cause this
disorder to appear on the face. (Some say it is due to
absorption of blood by Váyu and Pitta).
Romántiká (measles): Pitta and Kapha—when small
eruptions appear all over the body, along with fever,
burning, anorexia, and excess salivation. Herbs to
reduce Váyu, Kapha, and Pitta, are advised.
Viähphoóaka (small pox)
Causes and Development: Overeating hot, pungent
and sour foods causes burning sensation during
digestion. Any heat-increasing activity (e.g.,
sunbathing, summer heat) causes all three doßhas to
become excessed. The excessed doßhas invade the
skin, blood, muscles, and bones. Fever develops then
blisters appear on the skin—on the whole body, or
any part of it. Symptoms of blood and Pitta appear.
Eight forms of small pox exist: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/Kapha, Pitta/Kapha,
Tridoßha, and blood. Conditions caused by one doßha
are easily healed. Dual-doßha disorders are healed
with difficulty. Tridoßha conditions cannot be healed.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Headache, severe pain, fever, thirst, joint
pain; pimples are black.
Pitta: Fever, burning, pain, pus exudation, thirst;
pimples are yellow or red.
 Kapha: Vomiting, loss of appetite, lassitude;
pimples are itching, hard, white, with no pain. Pus
forms very slowly.
Váyu/Pitta: Severe pain.
Váyu/Kapha: Itching, hardness, and tightness
Pitta/Kapha: Itching, burning, fever, vomiting.
  Tridoßha: Pimples have depressions at their center
and elevated edges; are hard, little pus, burning
sensation, redness, thirst, delusion, vomiting, fainting,
pain, fever, delirium, chills, and stupor.
 Blood: Red pimples and symptoms of Pitta. No
therapies exist for this condition.
Masúriká (chicken  pox)
Cause and Development:
Overeating sour, salty, and alkaline foods, incom-
patible foods, excess amounts of food, eating before
the last meal is digested, excess fasting, eating con-
taminated foods and liquids, malefic planetary influ-
ences on certain communities of a country; all cause
an excess of the doßhas and bad blood. This devel-
ops lentil-sized eruptions all over the body. Five doßha
forms exist, and 7 tissue (dhátu) forms exist.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
486
Premonitory Symptoms: Fever, itching, pain all over
the body, restlessness, giddiness, swelling and dis-
colored skin, reddish eyes.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Black or crimson eruptions, rough, very
painful, hard, slowly forming pus; joint pain, cough,
shivering, restlessness, exhaustion, dry lips, throat,
and tongue; loss of appetite.
Pitta: Red, yellowish-white eruptions with severe
burning and pain; quickly forming pus; diarrhea, pain
all over the body, thirst, loss of appetite, mouth ulcers,
red eyes, very high fevers, and great distress.
Blood: Similar to Pitta conditions.
Kapha: Watery discharge from the mouth nose and
eyes; inactivity, headache, heaviness, nausea, loss of
appetite, sleep, stupor, lassitude; white, soft large,
itching eruptions that are slightly painful and slow to
form pus.
Tridoßha: Blue eruptions, flat, broad (depressed in
the center and elevated at the edges), very painful,
slow to form pus, copious exuding of malodorous
pus, throat obstruction, loss of appetite, body stiffness,
delirium, and restlessness. This condition is difficult
to heal.
Localization Symptoms:
Plasma/Skin (rasa/twak): Eruptions are like
bubbles of water, exuding thin watery fluid upon
pricking; symptoms of mildly increased doßhas.
In Blood (rakta): Red eruptions, quickly forming
pus; thin skin, eruptions bleed heavily when pricked;
symptoms of medium-increased doßhas. This
condition is difficult to heal.
Muscle (máåsa): Hard, greasy eruptions, quickly
forming pus; thick skin, pain all over the body, thirst,
itching, fever, and restlessness.
Fat (medas): Eruptions are round, soft, slightly
elevated, large, greasy, painful; high fever, delusion,
restlessness, and distress. This is difficult to heal.
Marrow (majjá): Small, flat, rough eruptions,
slightly elevated or at skin level; severe delusion, pain,
and restlessness.
       Bone (asthi): Cutting pain in the vital organs (thus
endangering life) and bone pain.
     Reproductive Fluid (¤hukra): Ripe, waxy, small,
very painful eruptions; stiff body, restlessness, delu-
sion, burning, toxicity. This is a life-threatening con-
dition.
Any of the above seven tissue conditions may also
have one or more of the excessed doßha symptoms
present.
Easily Healed: Residing in the skin, caused by
blood, Pitta or Kapha separately, or Kapha/Pitta.
Difficult to Heal: Váyu, Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/ Kapha.
Cannot be Healed: Tridoßha whose symptoms
include coral-colored eruptions or colors of all three
doßhas.
No herbal therapies are available when symptoms
include hiccup, cough, frequent urination, high fever,
severe delirium, restlessness, fainting, thirst, burning
sensation, body curvatures, bleeding through mouth,
nose or eyes; cooing, or difficulty breathing. Also for
yellow or coppery pimples with pain, fever, burning
all over the body, face, and inside the mouth.
Herpes Zoster (Visarpa)
Seven types of herpes exist: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha,
Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, Tridoßha, and
trauma. It is found externally, internally, or both.
External herpes is easiest to heal. The internal/external
form is the most difficult to subdue.
Cause and Development: Its development is identi-
cal to edema. The doßhas become aggravated due to
their own causes, with the main development being
the eating of salty, sour, pungent, and hot foods. Ag-
gravated doßhas quickly spread to all the internal parts
(lymph, blood, skin, and muscles). When excessed
doßhas are outside, they spread to all the external parts.
When the doßhas are excessed in both the inside and
outside, they spread in all places.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                 Chapter 21: Skin Disorders
 487
Inner herpes arises due to diseases of the vital
organs (i.e., heart, head, urinary bladder, etc.), loss of
consciousness, severe injury due to the sense organs,
extreme thirst, sudden poor digestion, and physical
weakness, forcing of the physical urges. Outer herpes
arises from infections.
Symptoms
Váyu: Similar to Váyu fevers, and edema, pain that is
throbbing, intermittent, piercing dilating, cutting, and
tingling.
Pitta: Similar to Pitta fevers, and is quick spreading,
with red swelling, miscellaneous eruptions of small
and medium size.
Kapha: Similar to Kapha fevers, and itching, herpes
are greasy.
When herpes are not tended to, all forms of herpes
develop eruptions with symptoms of each doßha, and
eventually burst. This leads to ulcers with symptoms
according to each doßha.
Váyu/Pitta (Agni Herpes): Fever, vomiting, fainting,
diarrhea, thirst, dizziness, splitting bone pain, poor
digestion, blindness, loss of taste and appetite.
Burning, blackish, blue, or red skin eruptions look as
though burnt by fire, and spread quickly in a line
diagonally along the torso from the left shoulder to
the bottom right side of the chest (and around the
back to the left shoulder (due to Váyu). This form of
herpes attacks the vital organs, causing them severe
pain, creates loss of consciousness and sleep, difficult
breathing, and hiccup. At this stage, there is little
comfort, difficulty moving, and a sort of coma-type
of sleep.
Váyu/Kapha (Granthi Herpes): Váyu is obstructed
by Kapha and breaks into many parts; or it vitiates
the blood in the skin, veins, tendons, and muscles in
persons with aggravated blood. This causes a chain
of blood tumors that are either long, small, round,
thick, or rough. It is associated with severe pain, fever,
difficult breathing cough, diarrhea, dry mouth, hiccup,
vomiting, dizziness, delusion, discoloration, fainting,
cutting pain, and poor digestion.
Pitta/Kapha (Kardama Herpes): Fever, stiffness,
excess sleep, stupor, headache, physical debility,
tremors, irrelevant speech, loss of taste or appetite,
dizziness, fainting, poor digestion, splitting bone pain,
severe thirst, heaviness, mucus in feces, excess toxic
coating in the plasma channels. Generally, it begins
in the stomach and then spreads elsewhere. Eruptions
are mildly painful, deep yellow, red, or yellowish-
white, or black in color, and greasy. They can be dirty,
swollen, heavy, undergoing ulceration from deep
within; with excess heat and moisture in the muscles.
Other symptoms include being slushy to the touch,
exposed bundles of tendons and veins, gangrene, and
foul odors.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas
simultaneously, quickly spreading to all the tissues.
Kßhataja (Trauma): Pitta and blood are aggravated
producing herpes studded with boils. Other symptoms
include fevers, severe swelling, pain, burning, and is
blackish-red.
Herpes caused by any one doßha, or by two doßhas
without secondary complications is easy to heal.
Several causes of herpes make it difficult to heal, or
cannot be healed. These causes include trauma,
tridoßha, invading the vital organs, loss of tendons,
veins, and muscles; and those that are extremely moist
and malodorous.
Modern science associates these infectious
diseases with erysipelas, cellulitis, herpes zoster,
gangrene, eczema, some forms of dermatitis, and
skin cancer.
Therapies
The following herbs are taken internally and
applied externally as a poultice.
Váyu and Pitta: Mañjiähóhá, chandan, sárivá, neem
Kapha: Dáruharidrá, turmeric, chop chini
Dual and Tridoäha: Combine the required herbs
Trauma: Black pepper, chandan, mañjiähóhá,
kákamáchí
Foot-Skin Disorders
Pádadáriká: People who walk a lot find their soles
becoming dry with painful cracks, caused by Váyu
in the feet.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
488
Kadara (corns): Knotty painful, hard growth; raised
in the middle or sunken around the sides; secretions,
appearing at the soles and maybe palms, due to blood
and fat in the palms or soles. It is due to external
causes such as shoes, gravel, thorns etc.
Alasa (athletes foot): Wetness (e.g., dampness, mud,
etc.) causes burning, pains, itching, and secretions in
between toes.
Head-Skin Disorders
Indralupta (balding), [also called Rujya or Khálitya
(alopecia)]: Váyu and Pitta cause hair to fall from
their roots. Blood and Kapha fill these pores,
preventing fresh hair growth.
Dáruòaka: The roots of the body hairs become hard,
dry and itchy, caused by Kapha and Váyu.
Arun¤hiká: Ulcers containing mucus and pus, and
having many openings, appearing on the scalp  due
to parasites, blood, and Kapha in the scalp.
Palitam (premature graying): Due to overworking,
fatigue, stress, grief, anger, heat; Pitta become
excessed and causes the hair to gray prematurely.
Genitals-Skin Disorders
Parivartiká (phimosis): Vyána Váyu becomes
excessed due to masturbation; pressure or injury to
the penis, forming a knot-like structure or constriction
to the foreskin, prevents it from drawing back to
uncover the head of the penis. Symptoms include pain,
burning, occasionally forming pus; when the knot
hardens, it is caused by Kapha and is itchy.
Avapátiká (paraphimosis): It occurs in young girls
before they develop menses or the rupture of the
hymen. When the outer covering of the glans clitoridis
(prepuce) is abnormally turned back through such
conditions as excited coition or other forcible entry.
Niruddha-prakáßha: Váyu causes the foreskin to
cover up the urethra orifice, preventing the release of
urine, causing great pain. Partial closure causes a thin
release of urine with some pain.
Sanniruddha-guda or Niruddhaguda (narrow
rectum): By obstructing the natural urge to pass stools,
the rectum becomes clogged with feces, deranging
Apána Váyu. This causes constriction of the passage,
resulting in difficulty in passing stools. This is very
difficult to heal.
Ahiputana: Itchy pimples around the anus of children
are caused by not cleaning urine, perspiration, feces,
etc. from their diaper. The eruptions are caused by
deranged blood and Kapha, becoming eczema-like,
and oozing a malodorous discharge with constant
scratching. Eventually it spreads, and is difficult to
heal.
Vrißhana-kachu: When persons do not wash their
genitals, or do not dry them after washing, local
perspiration causes itching and eczema, resulting in
constant scratching. It is due to Kapha and blood.
Guda-Bhranßha (anus prolapse): In weak and thin
persons, Váyu is excessed through straining or urging
the passage of stools, or from dysentery.
Therapies
General: In all disorders, most of the external herbal
therapies may also be taken internally to heal the cause
of the imbalances.
Aja-galliká: Blood-letting with leeches when there
is no pus formation and bursting of pimples; then,
plasters of oyster shell powder or rhubarb. When pus
and bursting pimples develop, ulcer therapies are used.
[A Váyu/Kapha disorder]
Yava-prakhyá, Antrálaji (Anhálaji), Panasi, Kachapi
and Páßhána-gardabha (mumps- non pus stages):
Plastered with kußhta, kút, lavaò bhaksar, cedar,
vaå¤ha lochana, and ghee. When pus sets in, pimples
are cut by incision and then ulcer therapies are used.
Visphoóaka (small pox), Indra-vriddhá, Kakßhá, Jála-
gardabha, Irivelli, Gandhanámni, Gardabhi, and
Vivritá: Therapies for the Pitta-form of Visarpa are
used—lightening (see pañcha karma section), bitter
herbs (e.g., chiráyatá, kuþki, neem, aloe vera, gentian,
barberry), blood-letting, and purgation are also used.
Foods include barley and ghee with balá, lotus root,
sandalwood, basmati rice, peas, lentils, green lentils,
triphalá, and pomegranates. Hot, burning spicy foods
are to be avoided (e.g., onions, garlic, red peppers). It
is also recommended to avoid nightshades (eggplants,
potatoes, tomatoes, peaches, strawberries), naps,
anger, exercise, sun, fire and wind.
Externally, ghee cooked with bitter herbs and
sandalwood are applied to pimples when pus forms
or bursts.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                 Chapter 21: Skin Disorders
 489
Chippam and Kunakham: First, washing the affected
area with hot water is required, and the pus drained
by cutting with a knife. Then, medicated oil is applied
to the area using coriander, neem, sandalwood, aloe,
turmeric, mañjißhþhá, onion, black pepper, rhubarb,
and ghee in a sunflower oil decoction.
Vidáriká: First, oil and fomentation are used; then,
the area is rubbed with the fingers. A plaster of bilwa,
gambhari bark, peyu padal bark, archu, and ¤hyonaka
are applied to the swelling. The toxic blood is let out
by scarification or leech/blood-letting. This is
followed by applying a plaster of musta, mañjißhþhá,
turmeric, rose petals, neem, sarsaparilla, bh^i´garáj,
gotu kola, and sandalwood in sunflower or coconut
oil. As soon as it becomes ulcerated, alterative and
disinfecting therapies including musta, mañjißhþhá,
turmeric, bh^i´garáj, gotu kola, sandalwood,
bibhítakí, golden seal, neem, guggul, burdock, and
gotu kola in sunflower or coconut oil are used. When
ulcers are fully manifested, lancing followed by
plastering with guæúchí, ghee, and sesame oil, and
then bandaging are required. The ulcer is washed
frequently with antibiotic and antiseptic herbs like
echinacea, golden seal, turmeric, neem, guggul,
bibhítakí, gotu kola, mañjißhþhá, and sarsaparilla.
£harkarár-buda: This is treated like Kapha tumors
(see Chapter 22), [or eczema, psoriasis, and rakasá;
three diseases discussed under kußhóa].
Kachu, Vicharchiká, Pámá: These disorders are
treated like obstinate skin diseases. A paste of white
mustard seeds, calamus, turmeric, or an oil decoction
of kaóuka, aloe vera gel, mañjißhþhá, neem, or
sandalwood is applied to the affected skin area.
Páda-dáriká: The vein affecting the disorder is
opened, and the troubled area is treated with sesame
oil or ghee, mañjißhþhá, sarsaparilla, and musk.
Alasa (athletes foot): A plaster of sesame, neem,
harítakí, and kaòókárí is applied to the affected parts.
Blood-letting is also useful. In less serious cases, only
sandalwood powder need be applied to the area.
Kadara (corns): The corns are scraped off with a knife
and cauterized by applying heated sesame oil.
Indra-lupta (balding): The bald area is oiled and fo-
mented; then, constantly scraped and covered with a
paste of black pepper, chitrak, cedar, kaner, wild lico-
rice, Spanish jasmine, and tagar (Ceylon jasmine).
Internally, bh^i´garáj, gotu kola, ámalakí, chitrak,
and ¤hatávarí are useful.
Arunßhiká: The affected scalp area undergoes blood-
letting (by venesection or with leeches), then a neem
decoction is poured over it. Next plasters are applied
using herbs like turmeric, neem, licorice, and castor
oil.
Dárunaka: Oil and foment the diseased hair roots.
Then, herbs are applied (and ingested) that reduce
Kapha and Váyu, such as turmeric, pippalí,
a¤hwagandhá, khadir, kákolí, and ginger.
Palitam (premature graying): An oil decoction of
bh^i´garáj, triphalá, mañjißhþhá, and licorice are used
as nasal oil, head oil, and face oil to help cure bald-
ness, wrinkles, and improve sensory organs.
Masúriká and Romántiká: Therapies for visarpa are
used. Also helpful is internal and external use of
turmeric, mañjißhþhá, sandalwood, aloe vera gel,
bh^i´garáj, gotu kola, musta, guggul, and harítakí.
Jatumani (moles), Ma¤haka (lichen), Tila-kálaka
(freckles): The areas are scraped with a knife, then
gradually cauterized with alkali when superficial, and
with heat when deep seated.
Nyacha, Vyañga, Niliká: Opening of local veins in
the temporal region, etc. is useful. Then, the areas
involved with the disorder are rubbed with plaster of
balá, licorice, atibalá, bhúmíámalakí, kßhira kákolí,
bark, with milk, honey, or ghee.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
490
Charak’s therapy for Vyanga is turmeric,
mañjißhþhá, calamus, red and white sandalwood, and
lotus filaments; pasted together with milk and ghee,
and cooked. This helps remove wrinkles, tans, specks,
moles, pimples, and improves the complexion.
Yuvána-Pidaká (acne): Emetics are useful therapies.
Herbs are ingested and applied to the face, include
sandalwood, mañjißhþhá, lodhra, calamus, and white
mustard seeds. Turmeric creme is also good to apply
topically.
Padmini-Kantaka: A neem, ghee and honey decoc-
tion is taken as an emetic and is also applied to the
diseased area.
Parivartiká (turned-back foreskin): Ghee is rubbed
on the area and fomented, and plasters are applied
for 3 to 5 days. Then, after lubricating the area with
ghee, the glans penis is gently pressed and the fore-
skin is smoothly drawn over the head, entirely cover-
ing it. Lastly, the foreskin is fomented with warm
poultices; Váyu-reducing foods, including ghee and
sesame oil are ingested. Poultices are made from bar-
berry, wheat flour, onion, and cane sugar. They are
made into a decoction and used as an ointment.
Avapátiká (paraphimosis): The same therapy is used
for girls, as above.
Niruddha-Prakaßha (urethra blockage): A tube that
is open at both ends is lubricated with ghee and gen-
tly entered into the urethra. Ghee and sesame oil,
mixed with Váyu-reducing herbs such as ¤hatávarí,
licorice, balá, etc., are sprinkled over (or poured into)
the area as a decoction or plaster. Every third day,
thicker tubes are placed in the urethra. In this way
the urethra passage is made to dilate. Emollient foods
are eaten to help heal the condition.
The doßha causing the below three disorders is
first determined; remembering that these disorders
cannot be healed. However, they may be controlled.
Agni-Rohini: This is treated like visarpa (see visarpa
section).
Sanniruddha-Guda (narrowed rectum): This disorder
is treated like niruddha-prakaßha (urethra blockage).
Valmíka: This is treated as abscesses. Surgical
procedures involve scraping off diseased patches, and
cauterizing them with alkali or fire. Afterwards,
purifying and healing the area is similar to tumors. If
the disorder is not on a marma point (see marmas in
Chapter 7), and not very large, purgatives, emetics,
and enemas (depending upon the doßha involved),
followed by venesection, are used for purification.
Plaster of guæúchí, kalaparni, arakvadam, black salt,
sesames seed paste, ghee, horsegram (kulattha), and
barley flour is applied. When pus is involved, a
poultice with the same ingredients is applied at a
lukewarm temperature. When the pus is at its zenith,
they are opened with a knife, cauterized, cleansed,
and then recauterized with an alkali (bhasin kchhar).
Healing therapies are next used, including neem oil
cooked with cardamom, red sandalwood, mañjißhþhá,
khadir, and sarsaparilla. For symptoms appearing on
the hands or feet, with complications of swelling and
many cavities, no therapies exist.
Ahi-putaná, Vrishana-Kachu: When infants contract
these diseases, first the mother’s breast-milk is
purified (see female reproductive section). The area
affected is washed with triphalá ghee. Then, a paste
of rock salt is applied. Sandalwood powder is
frequently used to keep the area dry.
Guda-Bhranßha (prolapsed anus): The protruding
part is fomented and lubricated with ghee, then gently
reinserted. Next, it is bandaged, leaving a small
opening directly under the anus for passage of stools.
The anus is frequently fomented; boiled milk with
ghee, ¤hatávarí, cardamom, balá, cinnamon, and
guggul are taken as drink. It is said that even the most
difficult prolapses can be normalized by this measure.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                 Chapter 21: Skin Disorders
 491
Subcutaneous Layers

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
492

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                         Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm
 493
For an intelligent person, the whole world is a teacher,
so one should imitate the world after carefully considering
their meaning and effects of such actions
Aßhóáñga H^idayam Sú. Ch. 2: ver. 45
Chapter 22
Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm
Scrotum, Hernia, Fistula, Elephantiasis, Tumors, Cancer
Enlarged Scrotum (V^iddhi)
auses: When Váyu becomes aggravated
owing to obstructed movement, it begins
to move from the groin to the scrotum. This
produces swelling and pain, then a pulling down-
ward, and finally a swelling of the blood vessels.
There are seven origins of this disease: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, blood, fat, urine, and intestines. Enlarge-
ments related to urine and the intestines are caused
by Váyu; however, these are separately categorized
according to the organs involved. Bradhna is the
swelling of the scrotal region caused by any of the
doßhas.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Scrotum looks like a leather bag filled with
air; is dry and painful.
Pitta: Scrotum is brownish-red and small, with
burning, heat and the forming and discharg-
ing of pus.
Kapha: Scrotum is heavy, cold, oily, itching, hard,
with slight pain.
Blood: Scrotum is studded with black boils
and has other Pitta symptoms.
Fat: Soft, swollen scrotum, which is large,
blackish-blue, oily, and hard to the touch.
Fluid in Scrotum
Hydrocele (Mútra V^iddhi)
By habitual suppression of urine, the scrotum re-
sembles a leather bag filled with water. It is painful,
soft, with round rings underneath, and is accompa-
nied by difficult urination.
Inguinal Hernia (Antraja V^iddhi)
Causes: Eating Váyu-increasing foods, bathing in
cold water, suppressing Váyu, or premature release
of urges (e.g., urine, feces), carrying heavy loads,
walking long distances, improper movements of the
body. All these increase Váyu and pull down the weak-
ened small intestine, producing an inguinal hernia. If
the hernia is neglected, the small intestine then drops
into the scrotum, causing swelling. Váyu then causes
an enlarged scrotum with gas, abdominal pain, and
rigidity. Hiatal hernias occur near the navel, usually
in weak children.
Symptoms: Scrotal pain, hollow sounding, re-
cedes but comes back again on the release of pres-
sure. It has all the symptoms of Váyu v^iddhi.
Swelling Therapies
Purgation, massage, medicated enema (nirúha),
neem paste applied externally to the swelling. Rec-
ommended herbs to be taken internally include neem,
turmeric, mañjißhþhá, and guggul. For all swellings
caused by Kapha, the swellings should be cut and
cleansed first.
Fistula-in-Ano (Bhagandara)
[Anal abscesses on the sides of anus]
A pimple develops on either side of the anus within
a 11/2inch radius. It is painful and exudes. There are
5 forms of this condition: Causes:
1. Váyu (¤hataponáka): Eating foods that are astrin-

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
494
gent and dry causes excess Váyu that produces an
anus pimple (papule). If neglect, the pimple devel-
ops pus, then bursts, creating many small ulcers.
Urine, feces, and semen may come out frothy, crim-
son colored, and painfully.
2. Pitta (ußhóra¤hirodara): Excessed Pitta causes
red pimples in the anal region that quickly develop
pus. When the pus discharges it is hot and malodorous.
3. Kapha (parisráví): Itching, thick oozing, hard,
slightly painful, white colored.
 4. Tridoßha (¤hambúkavártá): Different colored
pimples, oozes, looks like cows hoofs, and is spiral
(like a seashell).
5. External Causes (unmárgí): Minor injury (such
as one caused by thorns) at the anus will lead to sinus
formation if neglected. Later, small ulcers form.
Pitta/Kapha-reducing therapies are suggested.
Therapies
Therapies appropriate for each respective doßha
are required. Purgation, probing, cleansing the site,
cutting, cauterizing with oil, and suturing with alkaline
thread.
£hlípada (Filariasis/Elephantiasis)
Mádhavakara, author of the Mádhava Nidánam
defines this disease as a parasitic worm infestation in
the tissues. If neglected it develops into elephantiasis.
This condition is generally prevalent in areas where
water stagnates for a long time and remains
continually cold.
Cause and Development: Deranged muscle, blood,
and Kapha causes swelling of the calves and lower
legs, beginning in the front of the leg.
Symptoms: Swelling of the groin, gradually
involving the legs, lips, nose, neck, ears, and hands.
It is accompanied by fever and severe pain.
Váyu: Black, rough swelling, cracks, or ulcers
between the skin and mucus membrane, severe pain,
and fever without apparent cause.
     Pitta: Yellow-colored, swelling, burning sensation,
soft to the touch, fever.
Kapha: White, smooth, heavy, and hard swelling
Therapies
Swellings that grow upwards (like an anthill) with
many sprouts; swellings that have grown for over 1
year, and swellings that are very large, with conditions
that are caused by food and life-style habits that
increase Kapha. In Kapha doßhas, when swellings
have exudation, when severe itching is present or
when all symptoms are present should not be treated.
Therapies that reduce the appropriate doßha are
advised. Antiparasitical and antiworm herbs are also
useful (e.g., kuóaj, viæa´ga—see Chapter 15).
Mustard paste is applied over the swelling (except in
Pitta conditions).
Abdominal Tumors (Gulma)
General Causes: There are 8 types of gulma: Váyu,
Pitta, Kapha, Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/Kapha, Pitta/Kapha,
Tridoßha, and (in women only), tumors related to
menstrual blood/ovum.
These occur when weak from fever, vomiting,
diarrhea, and other debilitating diseases, or from
excessive or improper therapies of emesis, purgation,
and enema; eating an excess of Váyu increasing foods;
drinking cold water when hungry. Other causes
include excess jumping, swimming, or other
strenuous activities just after eating; forcing vomiting,
suppressing the natural urges (e.g., passing gas and
urination), undergoing purificatory therapies without
oleation and sudation, not following the
recommended eating and lifestyle habits after pañcha
karma (purificatory therapies).
From these conditions the doßhas, with Váyu
predominant, become increased individually or in
combination (two or three doßhas or with blood),
invade the alimentary tract, spreading both upward
and downward, causing abdominal pain, and then a
perceivable, elevated, hard mass (tumor).

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                         Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm
 495
General Premonitory Signs: Loss of appetite, poor,
irregular digestion, indigestion, anorexia, vomiting,
loss of natural urges, colic, intestinal gurgling, hair
standing on end, belching.
Váyu Tumors: For Váyu doßhas or others who have
been greatly emaciated by fever, emesis, purgation,
or diarrhea; tumors are caused by eating an excess of
Váyu-increasing foods, cold food, drink and habits,
non-oily emetic or purgative therapies, forcing
vomiting, suppressing the urges to pass gas, urine,
and stool, excessively drinking water after heavy food,
excess bumpy travel, excess amounts of sex, exercise,
drinking, anxiety; accidents, irregular postures during
sitting, sleeping, standing, or walking.
Premonitory Signs: Excessive belching, constipation,
gruesome feeling of contentment, intolerance,
intestinal gurgling, air moving in the intestines, gas,
poor digestion.
Váyu Causes: These tumors are caused by weakness
from tissue depletion or loss in the colon, passage
obstruction by Kapha, feces, or Pitta. Váyu becomes
aggravated, localized in the alimentary tract, and
forms into a hard mass by causing dryness. The tumor
is called primary if it develops in the colon (the
primary site of its origin), and secondary if it develops
in the small intestine or stomach. Secondary tumors
have branches or cause similar kinds of growth at a
distant organ or area (metastasis). Usually, these
tumors are found in the urinary bladder, navel, heart,
or rib area.
Váyu Pathology: Aggravated Váyu enters the
alimentary tract or mahá srotas, causing it to become
dry and hard. Váyu then relocates and manifests in
the heart, bladder, sides of the chest or navel area. It
causes colic and nodules.
Váyu Symptoms: Tumors change in size and intensity
of pain—alternating between experiencing and not
experiencing piercing and throbbing, expansion and
contraction, numbness and hair standing on end.
There may be a feeling of ants crawling on one’s
limbs, afternoon fever, dry mouth, difficult breathing,
and hair standing on end at the onset of pain.
One experiences pain in the sides of the neck,
headache, fever, enlarged spleen, gurgling intestinal
sound, pricking pain, constipation, difficulty
breathing, stiff body, dry mouth, emaciation, irregular
digestion, dry, black skin, nails, eyes, urine, and feces;
its shape is indefinite, found in various places, changes
location, and size. The nature of pain may range from
throbbing and cutting pain to a feeling that the tumor
is being swarmed by ants.
Váyu Complications: These include spleen problems,
intestinal gurgling, poor digestion, malaise, head pain,
swollen lymph glands of the groin, black, red or rough
skin, nails, eyes, feces, urine, and stool; hardening of
the alimentary tract.
Váyu Tumor Therapies:
1. Oleation is first administered through foods,
massage, drinks, and nirúha and anuvásana
medicated enemas (see Chapter 7).
    a. Oily drinks are especially useful for tumors above
the navel area.
   b. Both enemas are used for tumors in the colon or
abdomen.
c. When there are also obstructions blocking gas
and stool, oily, hot, and nourishing foods and liquids
are taken (after the digestion is improved).
Medicated ghee and sesame oil are suggested for
drinking, for massage, and both forms of medicated
enemas. They are taken very frequently (ensuring that
Pitta and Kapha do not become aggravated).
Medicated ghee includes boiled herbs of ginger, balá,
kaóuká, viæa´ga, and triphalá. Should Pitta, Kapha,
or blood become excessed, then standard therapies
to reduce these doßhas are applied, ensuring Váyu
does not become further deranged.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
496
     Ingesting ghee boiled with the herbs of triphalá,
coriander, viæa´ga, chitrak, and milk (4 times the
amount of the ghee) heals Váyu tumors. A decoction
of da¤hmúl may be added to increase the efficacy of
therapy. Hi´gwasták paste, coriander, chitrak, cala-
mus, cardamom, and yogurt boiled in ghee alleviates
colic pain, and abdominal distention.
Alternatively, ¤hilájit (mineral pitch) with
da¤hmúl and barley is another way to heal tumors.
2) Fomentation therapy is next used to soften the
circulatory channels, reduce excess Váyu, colic pain,
abdominal distention, and constipation, which results
in healing the tumor.
If Váyu tumors are not healed by the above thera-
pies, then blood-letting will heal the illness.
Pitta Tumors
Pitta Causes: Pitta becomes deranged along with Váyu
in persons emaciated from fever, emesis, purgation,
or diarrhea. This is caused by excess hot or burning
foods (i.e., salty, pungent, sour, alkaline, sharp, and
fermented), old wine, salads, eating before digesting
the previous meal, emesis with a dry stomach, ha-
bitually suppressing natural urges, excessive sun, and
wind exposure.
Pitta Pathology: Deranged Váyu manifests in the
stomach and small intestine, producing similar pains
as in Váyu tumors. Traveling through the raktavaha
srota (blood/circulatory system) produces burning in
the areas of the pelvis, heart, chest, and throat as a
result of vitiated Pitta. This causes sour burps with
smoke, burning sensation in tumor with pain, sweat-
ing, soft, loose, tender, or with slight raising of the
hair in this region.
Pitta Symptoms: Persons experience acidity, faint-
ing, diarrhea, sweating, thirst, fever, green or deep
yellow skin, nails, eyes, urine, and feces; tender to
the touch and burning, giddiness, throbbing pain, dry
throat, palate, and mouth.
Pitta Tumor Therapies:
1) When caused by oily and hot foods, laxatives
like rhubarb or senna are used.
  2) When caused by dry and hot foods, ingesting
ghee is useful.
3) When the Pitta tumor is in the colon, an enema
is given with bitter herbs and milk; or a purgative
with lukewarm milk boiled with bitter herbs and ghee
(if there is strong digestion and physical strength).
  4) If the illness is associated with thirst, fever,
excessive burning, colic pain, sweating, weak
digestion, and anorexia, then blood-letting is
employed. To restore strength after blood-letting,
nourishing soups with ghee and sesame oil are used.
 5) Pus-Free Tumors (apakva): A tumor that has
not developed pus will be heavy, hard, fixed, raised,
and located deep in muscle tissue without causing a
change in skin color.
 6) Pus-Forming Tumors (pachya-mána): One
experiences a burning sensation, fever, colic, and
sawing pain; irritation, insomnia, general distaste for
things. Hot medicated oils (e.g., sunflower oil with
bráhmí, turmeric, and cardamom) are used to heal
this type of tumor.
7) Pus Tumors: When the Pitta tumor is also
associated with vitiated blood (rakta) and Pitta, the
tumor may develop pus. Surgery is required for Pitta
tumors.
Symptoms of external tumors that are suppurated
include the exfoliation of skin, protrusion, grayish
color with a red outline, feeling that it is full of water.
After pressing down on the tumor, it immediately rises
to its original position; pain occurs when the sides of
the tumor are pressed together.
When the tumors are internal or there is swelling
in the region of the heart, signs and symptoms are
the same. External tumors will protrude towards the
sides of the abdomen.
The ancient Áyurvedic physician, Sußhrut and the
ancient author Átreya (Charak) have delineated
between pus-filled and non-pus-filled tumors. Sußhrut
stated that tumors do not develop pus, whereas Átreya
notes that pus develops in tumors embedded in the
tissues, creating abscesses. Being an experienced
surgeon, Sußhrut refers to the neoplastic growths,
whereas Charak refers only to infectious swellings.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                         Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm
 497
Some scholars differentiate between internal and
external tumors. All tumors develop in the
gastrointestinal tract. Should they develop pus there,
they are called internal tumors. If the tumors rise to
the surface and then develop pus, they are called
external tumors.
Self-Healing Pus Tumors: When this tumor has
softened the passageway, it moves up or down
(interior tumors), that is, the aggravated doßhas are
eliminating their excesses without need of therapy.
At these times, persons need not resort to herbal or
surgical therapies, but focus only on the proper diet
for 10 to 12 days. Afterwards, more ghee is taken to
help eliminate the doßhas. When the doßhas have
regained balance (excesses are eliminated), persons
ingest ghee boiled with bitter herbs and raw honey.
To reduce the burning sensations of Pitta tumors,
the tumor is massaged using sandalwood oil or ghee
.
Kapha Tumors:
Cause: Kapha tumors (with Váyu) occur in emaci-
ated persons from fevers, diarrhea, excess or improper
emesis or purgation. They result from overeating,
excessive eating of oily, heavy, sweet, and cold foods;
overindulging in pastries, sugar, milk, sesame seeds,
candy, salads, animal products; excessive amounts
of immature yogurt and wine, suppressing natural
urges, drinking too much water when not thirsty, and
physical trauma.
Kapha Symptoms: This causes the excessed Váyu to
settle and develop in the stomach and small intes-
tines, producing pains similar to that experienced with
Váyu tumors. Excessed Kapha then causes fevers that
start as a cold, anorexia, indigestion, malaise, hair
standing on end, and heart disease. Other initial symp-
toms include vomiting, oversleeping, laziness, tim-
idness, heaviness and pain in the head, loss of taste
or appetite, weakness, and fibroids. Tumors remain
stationary (i.e., not moving), heavy, hard, deep seated,
with numbness. When the tumor is overly aggravated,
one experiences cough, difficult breathing, mucus,
TB, whitish skin, nails, eyes, urine and feces.
Tumors caused from each doßha generally
develop in their original site and produce pain at times
specific to the doßha involved.
Kapha Tumor Therapies:
1) Tumors caused by ingesting cold, heavy, and
oily foods require fasting if one is not strong enough
for emetics (vomiting) and has weak digestion.
2) With poor digestion, minimal pain, heaviness,
sluggish gastrointestinal tract, nausea, and anorexia,
emetics are advised.
3) After emetics and fasting, persons are counseled
to eat hot, pungent, and bitter foods and herbs. When
digestive strength is restored from these three
therapies, persons take ghee boiled with laxatives and
pungents, such as triphalá and pippalí respectively.
4) For tumors that are hard and raised,
accompanied with distention and constipation,
fomentation is first used; later the tumor is massaged
to help dissolve it.
5) When the tumor becomes dislodged from its
manifestation site, purgatives, such as castor oil, are
suggested. Oil or da¤hmúl enemas may also be used.
6) Once the GI tract is well oiled, if pus is in the
tumor and one experiences weakened digestion or
retention of wind, then herbal powders or decoctions
are used to relieve these conditions. Herbs include
triphalá, cardamom, and coriander to remove gas;
and pippalí for strengthening the digestion.
Should the tumor be well-rooted, large, hard,
immovable, and heavy, then persons are given
laxatives, medicated herbal wines (arißhóas), and
cauterization.
Laxatives are repeated every 1 to 3 days to develop
physical strength. Kapha purgatives are taken at
double the strength used by Váyu doßhas. Arißhóas
(medicated herbal wines) are used to improve
digestion, remove anorexia, and clear the circulatory
channels. Cauterization is used if all of the above
therapies prove ineffective. Cauterization is useful for
both Kapha and Váyu tumors. For Kapha tumors,
surgery is recommended.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
498
Dual and Tridoßha: Symptoms are of both doßhas or
all three doßhas. Tridoßha tumors also provoke severe
pain, burning, quickly forming and secreting pus,
hardness, and greatly elevated tumors. Tridoßha
tumors cannot be healed.
Váyu/Kapha Therapies (Dvandvaja Tumors):
1) Symptoms include poor digestion, anorexia,
nausea, heaviness, and drowsiness. The main therapy
is emetics (vamana). [See Chapter 7]
 2) With colic pain, abdominal distention, and
constipation, suppositories are useful, along with
herbs that reduce Váyu and Kapha (e.g., triphalá,
ginger, and cardamom).
Váyu/Pitta Therapies: If Váyu tumors develop Pitta
complications with fever and burning sensations, then
mild purgation (so as not to aggravate Váyu), such as
castor oil (2 teaspoons in one cup of hot water before
bed), is useful to help stimulate downward moving
air (Apána Váyu).
Dual/Tridoßhic Therapies: The above mentioned
therapies for the appropriate doßhas are practiced.
Medicated enemas are the best for healing tumors.
It balances Váyu in the site of origin, thereby
removing the cause of the tumor, and eventually, the
tumor itself. Both nirúha (non-oil-based) and
anuvásana (oil-based) medicated enemas are
frequently used to heal tumors for Váyu, Pitta, and
Kapha tumors.
After undergoing fasting for any of the three
doßhas experiencing undigested toxins (áma), thick
barley gruel and herbal soup is eaten.
Anti-tumor Herbs for Specific Conditions
All Tumors: Mañjißhóhã, guggul, aloe, kuähtha,
harítakí, balá, mamírã, neem, garlic, and lavan
bhaskar mixture.
Abdominal Tumors: Pippalí
Glandular Tumors: Yellow dock
Brain Tumors: Brãhmí
Breast Tumors: Musta
TB Tumors: Kañchanar bark with ginger paste
Vãyu Tumors: Paähana Bedha
Blood (Raktaja Gulma) (Uterine/ova-
rian tumors and cysts)
Causes: These conditions develops during a
woman’s menstrual period, soon after delivery (or
miscarriage), with uterine or vaginal diseases, and
from partaking in Váyu-increasing foods and life-
styles (e.g., fear, worry) immediately after delivery
or menstrual period. Other causes include fasting
during menstruation or pregnancy and suppressing
natural urges. These activities aggravate Váyu,
causing it to enter the cervix and obstruct the monthly
menstrual blood in the uterus. [Blood tumors occur
in men only if there is vitiation of the blood; see
Chapter 13.]
Symptoms: Experiences include pregnancy-caused
symptoms (i.e., nausea, longings, breast-milk
disorders, emaciation, distention), colic, diarrhea,
anorexia, cough, malaise, oversleeping, laziness,
timidity, excessive salivation, fainting, darkening of
the lips and breasts, eye strain, swollen feet, growth
of small hairs, and pulsation of round tumors (usually
during pregnancy only a portion of the fetus pulsates).
Gradually the blood, associated with Váyu and Pitta,
cause symptoms of pain, stiffness, burning, diarrhea,
thirst, fever, severe uterine pain (from accumulated
vitiated blood), oozing, foul smell, and tearing and
pulsating pain in the vagina. Sometimes the tumor
moves around the uterus causing pain, but only the
tumor grows (i.e., not the abdominal cavity, as in
pregnancy). These tumors are treated only after a span
of 10 months.
Tumors grow and seep pus after a long time, or
not at all, because they are caused by doßhas.
Abscesses quickly grow and seep pus because they
are caused by vitiated blood.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                         Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm
 499
Tumors in the alimentary tract cause pain in the
urinary bladder, upper abdomen, heart, and spleen;
weaken digestive activity; cause loss of complexion
and strength, and urinary and gaseous retention, and
constipation and restraint of other natural urges.
Tumors in the abdominal organs and outside the
alimentary tract cause the opposite symptoms (i.e.,
mild pain, discoloration at the tumor site and greater
outward growth).
Blood Tumor Therapies: After 10 months of this
illness, one undergoes oleation (oil), fomentation
(sweat), and purgation with oily ingredients (sneha
virechana). See Chapter 7.
To dissolve the blood tumor, the powder of
clerodendron siphonanthus (bhargi), ghee, jaggery,
pippalí, pippalí root, devdaru, and t^ikatu are eaten
with a decoction of sesame plant stems. Another
excellent herb for this condition is aßhoka.
Gas (Ánáha): Due to obstructed upward and
downward Váyu, severe abdominal pain with
gurgling, great enlarged abdomen occurs.
Aßhóhílá and Pratyá-ßhóhíla: Raised, hard stone-like
tumors with gas are called aßhthílá. When these
tumors are elevated sideways they are called
pratyáßhthíla. Tumor (gulma) therapies are followed.
Túoní and Prati-túní: Váyu-causing severe radiating
pain from the colon to the rectum and urethral passage
is called túní. When the pain radiates in the reverse
direction it is called pratitúní. Pippalí and hi´g are
taken with ghee. Medicated enemas are also indicated.
Cancer (Arbuda)
Causes: Áyurveda sees cancer as an emotional dis-
ease. Usually persons who feel a lack of meaning or
purpose in life are afraid or unaware of what to do
with their lives. These people develop something in-
ternally instead of creating something meaningful in
their lives. Another view is that the aura is disrupted,
allowing negative astral forces to enter the body. Can-
cer may be caused by environmental pollution, junk
food, lethargy, lack of spiritual purpose, suppressed
emotions or stagnation. Past-life karma also plays a
role in this disease. Therefore, beyond physical heal-
ing, emotional healing requires meditation and psy-
chic cleansing.
Although one humor is the main cause of a cancer,
there are usually imbalances of all three doßhas. Poor
digestion allows for a buildup of toxins in the body.
Downward moving air (Apána Váyu) excesses
develop negative life-force, which may mean that
distention, constipation, and diarrhea may be the first
physical causes of cancer. There is also a lack of
oxygen (práòa) in the cells. Brain tumors are mainly
Kapha, secondarily Pitta.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Fear, anxiety, depression, and insomnia; dry,
hard tumors of varying size, gray or brown
complexion, distention, constipation, and other Váyu
diseases. Colon cancer is usually a form of Váyu
cancer.
Pitta: Anger, impatience, irritability, hatred,
resentment, inflamed, infected burning or bleeding
tumors. Skin, eye, and liver cancers are usually Pitta-
related.
Kapha: Tumors are caused by any of the
constitutions, but more often found in Kapha doßhas.
Symptoms include fatigue, excess sleeping,
congestion, and salivation. First tumors are usually
benign (not hard or well-defined to the touch) and
are accumulations of mucus or subcutaneous fat;
swollen, with dampness, and congestion. Later, they
may turn malignant. Hot and bitter herbs help reduce
fat, such as ginger, black pepper, turmeric, and kaóuká
and barberry.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
500
T^ikatu, triphalá, and honey is a useful
combination. Tumor-reducing herbs include saffron,
turmeric, safflower, dandelion. Surgery is useful if
cancer is found early enough. Lung or breast cancer
is usually Kapha-related.
Blood (Raktárbuda): Excessed doßhas invade the
blood, causing large, exuding muscle tumors that are
studded, fast-growing, and discharge large amounts
of blood. This condition causes anemia to develop
resulting from the loss of blood.
Muscle (Máåsárbuda): External blows to the body
can derange the muscle tissue, causing painless,
smooth, stone-like, and skin-colored tumors on the
skin. These more commonly occur among non-
vegetarians, and cannot be healed.
     Any cancer tumor that heavily exudes, develops
on vital organs or channels, and those that are
immovable, cannot be healed.
Adhyarbuda: A secondary cancer developing from
the first cancer. This cannot be healed.
Dvirarbuda: A secondary cancer developing
simultaneously with the first cancer. This cannot be
healed.
Therapies:
General Overview:
4 Step Cancer Healing Process
Four cancer healing therapies are required:
1) Cleansing Therapies: (For advanced cases)
a) Castor oil for 40 days. 1 to 2 teaspoons of castor
oil are mixed in 1 cup of hot water and ingested before
bed. If one has more or less than three stools the next
morning, the dose should be adjusted until persons
have only three stools in the morning. Castor oil
therapy is an excellent, gentle cleansing process.
b) Harítakí for 1 year. One-quarter tsp. of harítakí
is ingested 3 times daily. Depending on the season,
add 1/4 teaspoon of sweets or spices to the harítakí.
Summer/Fall: Mix with jaggery (when humid also
add rock salt)
Winter: Mix with ginger (when extremely cold use
pippalí).
Spring: Mix with raw, uncooked honey
    c) Avoid meats, dairy (except lassi) and other
protein-rich foods (although some protein is needed)
because cancer is believed to be caused by excess
protein.
d) For Pitta- or Kapha-related cancers antitoxin
herbs (bitters and pungents) like kaóuká and peppers
are needed for cleansing the blood and improving
circulation.
[For less severe conditions, see additional
therapies below.]
2) Immune-Boosting Herbs:
The immune system must strong to fight off the
illness. For those undergoing chemotherapy, the need
for immune-boosting herbs becomes even greater.
   a) One or 2 teaspoons of chyavan prá¤h is taken
once or twice a day.
b) Several herbs help boost the immune system
without aggravating one’s doßha (e.g., ¤hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá, vidárí kand). The dose taken is
between 3 grams to 1 ounce daily.
3) Music Therapy:
Soothing meditation music harmonizes and heals
the mind, thoughts, and nervous system. Classical
Indian ragas (songs) and devotional chants can be
listened to throughout the day and night. Certain ragas
are designed to create harmony for specific times of
the day and night. Chants like Aum Namah £hivaya
are especially useful. [See Chapter 10 on music
therapy for more details.]
4) Jyotißh Astrology:
A wider range of causes can exist when consid-
ering a serious illness. Ancient India has understood
and successfully used the fields of medical astrol-
ogy, life-purpose or dharma; and karma (past life
actions that affect one’s present life).
These early spiritual astrologers (Jyotiähis) found
a correlation between certain planets and correspond-
ing diseases. Saturn and the north and south nodes of
the Moon (Rahu and Ketu) were particularly related
to mysterious diseases like cancer. From one’s as-
trology chart, the disease-causing planets were rec-
ognized, and the appropriate therapies suggested.
As discussed earlier, Áyurveda believes when a
person does not know or live the life they were meant
to live, they feel a lack of purpose or emptiness. Life-
purpose is also called God-given talent, or simply,
doing what you love to do. In short, if one does not
do what they love to do, emptiness develops which

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                         Chapter 22: Abnormal Growths/Neoplasm
 501
can lead to longing and suffering, eventually
developing into (physical) cancer.
Whenever persons develop serious illness, a wide
range of complications, or a sudden onset of a health
concern, Vedic belief suggests that it is related to
harmful actions performed by the person in previous
lives. Although the idea of reincarnation is certainly
not scientific in the modern sense of the word,
astrologers have successfully helped people
understand and heal such disorders from the
standpoint of karmic causes. It is presented here in
brief only as an option available to those wishing to
consider this field of cause and therapy.
Even if one chooses not to investigate Jyotißh
astrology, considering a career that one loves is still a
useful therapy to follow.
Thus, the Jyotiäh/Vedic astrology chart becomes
a useful tool to gain deeper insight into medical
astrology, dharma or life-purpose, and karma. For
the skeptical mind, these therapeutic approaches may
be considered when other options fail.
Additional Therapies
Váyu: Immune-strengthening herbs are best used
when persons are very weak or undergoing surgery
or chemotherapy. Herbs include a¤hwagandhá,
yogaraj guggul (Váyu-/Kapha-reducing), kapikachhú
(Váyu-reducing), ¤hatávarí (Váyu-/Pitta-reducing),
guæúchí, balá, ¤hilájit, triphalá (tridoßhic), taking 1
or more ounces daily.
Pitta and Kapha: (Lymph or skin cancer) blood
cleansers like mañjißhþhá, saffron, bráhmí, red clover,
burdock, jasmine, and sarsaparilla are used, 1 to 3
ounces daily with meals. They are best used fresh, if
possible.
Váyu/Kapha: (Thyroid, neck or lymph cancer) these
phlegm-reducing herbs include kelp, seaweed, Irish
moss, pippalí, ginger, black pepper, yogaraj guggul,
jasmine, myrrh, turmeric, t^ikatu. Doses may be 1/2
teaspoon, 3 times daily after meals.
Tridoßhic: (Breast, uterine, liver, pancreatic cancer)
strong circulation-improving herbs break stagnation,
reduce masses, and aid tissue healing. These include
turmeric, saffron, safflower, myrrh, mañjißhþhá,
bhúámalakí (liver cleanser), yogaraj guggul. Doses
can be about 1/2 teaspoon, 3 times daily.
Foods: Meat, dairy, and excess protein are not advised
since cancer cells are basically protein (though some
protein is needed for digestive enzyme secretion).
Raw vegetables and juices like wheat or barley grass,
dandelion, celery, alfalfa and sunflower sprouts are
best for Pitta and other strong persons, but should be
taken with spices like ginger and garlic to keep the
digestion strong. The green juices have much positive
life-force (práòa), cleansing negative life-energies.
Weak persons need to take immune-boosting herbs
listed above.
Brain Tumors: Mañjißhþhá and bráhmí (internally and
as nasal snuff), ¤hiro dhárá, and pañcha karma
therapies appropriate to each doßha are very useful if
persons are strong.
Prostate Cancer: Chandraprabha vati 1,000 mg.
twice daily; shilájit 500 mg. twice daily; kañchanar
500 mg. twice daily; punarnavá 500 mg. twice daily;
a¤hwagandhá 500 mg. twice daily; carrot juice 4 oz.
every morning. Herbs for Pitta and Kapha are also
useful (see above).
Jasmine is also useful for bone cancer. Tumors,
goiter, and scrofula are discussed under the Metabolic
System (Chapter 25).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
502

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 503
Chapter 23
Reproductive System
Female Reproduction, Childbirth, Planets and Newborns, Male
Reproduction (including prostate), Venereal Diseases
Female Reproductive Tract
(Yonivyápat)
auses: Twenty disorders of the female repro-
ductive tract exist, caused by poor
diet and lifestyle, imbalanced men-
strual flow, defective ovum and ovary, and past karma.
This results in an inability to conceive and other health
concerns (e.g., tumors, hemorrhoids, menorrhagia).
Specific Causes, Development and Symptoms:
1. Váyu: Causes include excessive ingesting of foods
and liquid, and life-styles that increase air. The
excessed Váyu moves to the genital tract producing
many types of pain, vaginal numbness, exhaustion,
and other Váyu diseases. Menstrual discharge is pain-
ful, frothy, thin, rough, and with sounds.
2. Pitta: Causes include excessive ingesting of foods
and liquids (e.g., sour, pungent, salty), and life-styles
that increase fire. The excessed Pitta moves to the
genital tract and produces burning, inflammation,
fever, and heat. The menstrual flow is blue, yellow,
or black with excessive hot discharges and foul odor.
3. Kapha: Excessive watery foods, liquids, and life-
styles create excess Kapha, forcing it to move to the
female tract. This causes experiences that are slimy,
cold, itching, pale, with mild pain. The menstrual flow
is pale and slimy.
4. Tridoßha: Symptoms include excessive use of air,
fire, and water foods, liquids, and life-styles. This
causes the three doßhas to move to the genital tract
and uterus, causing symptoms of all three doßhas (i.e.,
burning and pain with slimy, white discharges).
5. Sás^ijá (Menstrual Blood): Pitta excesses afflicting
the blood move to the female tract, causing excess
Tradition, ethics, knowledge, humility;
these are the four doors to a good mind.
Mahabharata
bleeding.
6. Arajaská (Uterus, Tract and Blood): Excess Pitta
in theses areas causes leanness and a poor
complexion.
7. Acharaòá: Not washing the genitalia causes itch-
ing and excessive desires for men. It is caused by
Váyu excesses.
8. Aticharaòá: Excessive sex aggravates Váyu, pro-
ducing swelling, numbness, and pain in the genital
tract.
9. Prák-charaòá: Young women having sexual
relations at too early an age causing Váyu to afflict
the female tract. This results in back, waist, thigh,
and groin pain. It is caused by Váyu excesses.
10. Upa-plutá: Taking Kapha-increasing foods in
excess while pregnant or suppressing the urge to vomit
or breathe causes Váyu excesses to carry Kapha to
the female tract. This produces pale fluid discharges
with piercing pain, white mucus, and Váyu and Kapha
disorders during orgasm.
11. Pari-plutá: Pitta doßha females who suppress the
urges to sneeze and belch during sex cause Váyu and
Pitta to afflict the female tract. This produces prema-
ture orgasm.
12. Udá-vartání (dysmenorrhea): Suppressing natu-
ral urges causes Váyu to move upward in the genital
tract, causing painful and difficult menstrual dis-
charges. After the discharge, relief is immediately felt.
See page 508 for more details.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
504
13. Karòiní: Untimely straining during labor causes
Váyu to become blocked by the fetus and combines
with Kapha and blood. This produces growths
(polyps) that block the menstrual flow.
14. Putraghní: Morbidity of menstrual fluid or ovum
may produce Váyu (roughness) that results in the
death of the fetus.
15. Antar-mukhí: Sex after overeating and lying in
unhealthful positions causes Váyu to press against
the food. Váyu and food become blocked in the genital
tract and cause vaginal curves and Váyu bone and
muscle disorders. The vagina becomes very painful;
sex becomes intolerable.
16. Súchí-mukhí: Symptoms of roughness of Váyu in
the mother’s genital tract affects the genital tract of
the fetus (if female) and creates a decreased vaginal
opening.
17. £hußhká Yoni: Suppressing natural urges during
sex excesses Váyu. This results in painful feces, urine
retention, and dryness of the vaginal opening.
18. Váminí: When semen stays in the uterus and is
expelled after 6 or 7 days, it is not accepted, and may
be discharged with or without pain. It is caused by
Váyu excesses.
19. §haòæhí: When Váyu genetic defects destroy the
fetus’s ovaries, a female child will be born with no
breasts.
20. Maháyoni: Uncomfortable positions during sex
on an uncomfortable bed, causes Váyu to become
excessed. This dilates the uterus opening and the
genital tract. Symptoms include pain, roughness with
frothy discharge, fleshy growth, and joint and groin
pain.
For each doßha, general symptoms can be
identified by the doßha responsible for the imbalance.
Váyu: Disorders include scanty menstrual fluid that
is dark red or brown, dry, or old. Symptoms include,
menstrual cramping with lower back pain, headache,
depression, nervousness, fear, anxiety, and loss of
strength and resistance. Other symptoms include
vaginal dryness, gas, constipation, distention; menses
lasts 3 to 5 days; irregular and variable menses.
Pitta: Disorders include excess menstrual flow, dark
red or purple blood, warmth, clotting, fever, burning,
flushed, red eyes, skin rashes, acne, anger, irritability,
impatience, diarrhea, yellow stools; menses lasts 5
to 7 days.
Kapha: One experiences a moderate flow, pale or
light red blood, sometimes with mucus, heaviness,
tiredness, nausea, vomiting, excess phlegm and saliva,
swelling breasts, edema, and sentimentality.
Therapies:
General: All female tract disorders are affected by
Váyu. Thus for all female tract disorders, Váyu-
reducing foods, drinks, and life-styles are used. First,
Váyu is balanced, then the other doßhas are treated.
All disorders include therapies of unction (oil),
sudation (sweat), and mild use of the five pañcha
karma measures. Herbal tampon, pouring water and
oil abhyañga (massage-like) can always be done,
using chitrak, guæúchí, balá with boiled milk and
sesame oil.
1. Váyu: Oil, fomentation (moist heat), enema, and
Váyu-reducing habits, such as ghee, sesame seeds,
and Váyu-reducing herbs, such as triphalá,
punarnavá, turmeric, ¤hatávarí, balá, pippalí, chitrak,
and guæúchí. First, abhyañga with sesame oil and
black salt is advised. Next, tube fomentation (náæí
sveda) and bolus fomentation is applied. Lastly, warm
water is poured over the forehead, lower abdomen,
and genitals; herbal tampons and abhyañga are also
used. £hatávarí or a¤hwagandhá is boiled in sesame
oil and used as a vaginal douche.
Stiff, Hard Tract—Sesame (V-), mustard (K-) oil, or
ghee (P-) is applied locally to soften the tract.
2. Váyu/Pitta: A good tonic includes ¤hatávarí, balá,
pippalí, guæúchí, and punarnavá with ghee in boiled
milk.
Tract Pain—Boiled milk with gokßhura, guæúchí, and
triphalá, are helpful.
Pain In Genital Tract Sides—Herbs include pippalí,
black salt, calamus, chitrak, and ghee.
 3. Pitta: Cold, blood-pacifying measures, and Pitta-
reducing herbs are suggested. Ghee is used

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 505
in pouring water, abhyañga, and herbal tampons.
Herbs include ¤hatávarí and pippalí boiled in milk.
Foods include grapes, cane sugar, and raw honey.
Uterine inflammation—Red raspberry is useful.
Endometritis/PID (pelvic inflammatory disease)—
Both are Pitta conditions resulting from accumulated
heat and stagnant blood, with infection and
inflammation. Additionally, liver therapies are needed.
Pitta-reducing herbs are needed, including ¤hatávarí,
aloe vera gel, gotu kola, dandelion, kaþuká,
bhúámalakí, and mañjißhþhá.
4. Kapha: Rough and hot therapies and Kapha-
reducing habits are suggested. Cleansing
suppositories are frequently used that are made of
cloth, barley powder, black salt, pippalí, and black
pepper. (They are followed by a warm water wash).
It is also used for cleansing the genital tract.
Swollen slimy discharge, Upaplutá, flat, painful, with
eruptions—Tampons of neem, ámalakí, mango, and
pomegranate, with boiled milk and sesame oil are
used. This is followed by massaging the waste, back,
and sacral region and administering an oil enema.
Balá, a¤hwagandhá, ginger, and pippalí are boiled
in sesame oil and used as a vaginal douche.
Pale/white discharges—Herbs include ámalakí paste
(i.e., made with water), cane sugar, and raw honey.
First oil is placed in the vagina. Then licorice, lodhra,
and príya´gu powder are mixed with honey, and made
into a big, round tablet. This tablet is then placed in
the vagina at bedtime. It is washed out at dawn with
hot water. Suppositories made of red raspberry,
bayberry, bibhítakí (astringents), and raw honey are
placed in the vagina to remove the discharge. Vaginal
fumigation is done with guggul, barley, sesame oil,
and ghee.
Endometriosis—This is usually a Kapha disorder with
extra uterine membrane growth. Kapha-reducing
habits are required, including herbs such as khadir,
a¤hoka, guggul, myrrh, turmeric, dandelion, black
pepper, kaþuká, and honey. These herbs reduce
tumors, fibroids, and Kapha.
5. Dual/Tridoßha: Combination therapies
6. Sá^ijá (Uterine Bleeding/Raktayoni): Sesame
seeds, yogurt, ghee, honey, red raspberry, mañjißhþhá,
musta, and turmeric. Vaginal douche with kuþaj is
used.
7. Arajaská (amenorrhea—delayed or no menses):
A vaginal douche with dalchíní, aloe gel, small
cardamom, ginger, gulkand, kuþaj bark, and old
jaggery are used. Another douche includes, yogurt,
sour fruit, ámalakí, a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, ghee,
and boiled milk. It is generally a Váyu condition, but
sometimes Pitta or Kapha will be the cause.
Váyu: (Due to coldness and other Váyu excesses).
Aloe vera gel, myrrh, turmeric, ginger, cinnamon,
Váyu-reducing foods, drinks, and lifestyle are
advised. Warm sesame oil sprinkled over the lower
abdomen or as a douche is useful. Herbal iron
supplements, laxatives like triphalá, aloe vera gel or
castor oil are used. Rejuvenatives include
a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, Kapikachhú, and musta.
Pitta: (mild symptoms) Turmeric or saffron in boiled
milk; rose, musta, and dandelion are advised.
Kapha: (Resulting from congestion and sluggishness)
Recommended herbs include ginger, cinnamon,
pippalí, myrrh, safflower, turmeric, cinnamon, and
jaóámáò¤hí.
8. Acharaòá: Wash and remove discharges with neem,
vásák, pippalí, grapes, and vinegar; or triphalá and
yogurt/water. £hatávarí and a¤hwa-gandhá boiled in
sesame oil may also be used as a vaginal douche.
9.) Aticharaòá: Sesame oil enemas and Váyu-
reducing foods and drinks; with ¤hatávarí, a¤hwa-
gandhá. Barley, wheat, yeast, kút, príya´gu, and balá
are placed in the vagina.
10. Prák-charaòá: £hatávarí and a¤hwagandhá
boiled in sesame oil are used as a vaginal douche.
Sesame oil enemas and Váyu-reducing foods and
drinks; with ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá are used. Barley,
wheat, yeast, balá, kút, and príya´gu are placed in
the vagina.
11. Upa-plutá (or pari-plutá): Unction, fomentation,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
506
and sudation are followed by oil tampons and
medicated oil drops that are placed in the vagina for
lubrication. Herbs include kút, príya´gu, and balá.
12. Udá-vartání (dysmenorrhea): Unction with ghee
and oil; fomentation, boiled milk, sesame oil, ghee,
and da¤hmúl enema are taken for enemas and vaginal
douches. See page 508 for further information.
13. Karòiní: £hatávarí and a¤hwagandhá are boiled
in sesame oil and used as a vaginal douche.
Suppositories with ku¤hthá, pippalí, triphalá, and
black salt may be mixed into a semi-solid paste.
Therapies include lodhra, príya´gu, and soft arka
leaves with rice vinegar (ka´ji).
14. Putraghní: Vaginal douche with kuþaj is used. Kuþaj
and gambhárí barks boiled with ghee are ingested.
15. Antar-mukhí: Váyu-reducing therapies are used.
16. Súchí-mukhí: Váyu-reducing herbs are used with
surgical repair.
17. £hußhka Yoni: £hatávarí or a¤hwagandhá is boiled
in sesame oil and used as a vaginal douche. Unction
with ghee and oil; fomentation, boiled milk, sesame
oil, ghee, and da¤hmúl is taken as enemas and vaginal
douches. Ghee boiled with ¤hatávarí is poured into
the vagina and held there for 2 hours. This procedure
is continued for a month or until healed.
18. Váminí: Unction, fomentation and sudation are
used followed by oil tampons, and lastly Váyu-
reducing medicated oil (e.g., ¤hatávarí and ghee) (see
above).
19. §haòæhí:
Conception: Therapies include ghee with triphalá,
punarnavá, turmeric, ¤hatávarí, chitrak, lodhra,
a¤hoka, bayberry bark, and guæúchí.
Miscarriage Cleansing: Musta, triphalá, neem,
guæúchí, aloe gel, turmeric, mañjißhþhá, and myrrh
with honey are taken for 1 to 2 weeks. Tone with
¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, aloe gel, mañjißhþhá, gotu
kola, red raspberry.
20. Maháyoni: Unction with ghee and oil;
fomentation, boiled milk, sesame oil, ghee, and
da¤hmúl is taken for enemas and vaginal douches.
Ghee boiled with ¤hatávarí is poured into the vagina
and held there for 2 hours.
Prasrastá Yoni (Genital Tract Displacement): After
unction and fomentation the tract is replaced. Covered
tracts are pressed with the hand; contracted tracts are
dilated; bulged tracts are pushed inside; dilated ones
are manipulated. Abhyañga (massage-like) is done
with ghee and added to the milk for fomenting.
Ámalakí, licorice, ginger, salum, kßhír kákolí, and
mahá medá are boiled with ghee, then poured into
the vagina. It is retained until the urge for urination
occurs.
Menorrhagia (As^igdara or Pradara)
Excess menses or spotting is usually due to Pitta
excesses. It is caused by eating excess salty, sour,
heavy, pungent, burning, and fatty foods and animal
products. The Váyu and blood thus becomes excessed
and move into the menses channels, increasing the
menstrual flow. There are 4 types of pradara : Váyu,
Pitta, Kapha, and Tridoßhic. Normal menses is known
by its monthly regularity without symptoms. It is
normal in color, lasts for 5 days, and is moderate in
quantity.
Symptoms
General: Aches all over the body, pain in the abdomen
during menstruation.
Váyu: Frothy, thin, rough, blackish or reddish, with
or without pain; intense pain in the waist, groin, heart,
ribs, back, and pelvic areas.
Pitta: Bluish, black, deep red or yellow, very hot,
frequent and painful with burning, redness, thirst,
mental confusion, fever, and giddiness.
Kapha: Symptoms include slimy, pale, heavy, oily,
cold, and viscous discharge, with mild pain;
associated with vomiting, anorexia, nausea, difficult
breathing, and cough.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas are seen.
Therapies: Are the same as those listed above for

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 507
the three doßhas related to female tract disorders.
Generally, herbs include red raspberry and mañjißhþhá
to help stop bleeding. Then tonics can be given such
as a¤hwagandhá, a¤hoka, ¤hatávarí, aloe vera gel,
and ámalakí.
General: Warm water or sesame oil is poured over
the lower abdomen and genitalia and used as a douche.
Foods, drinks, and life-styles appropriate to the
implicated doßha are followed.
Váyu—Therapies include sesame powder yogurt,
ghee, and honey.
Pitta—Therapies include lotus root, musta, boiled
milk, cane sugar, and honey.
Kapha—Therapies include mustard oil, licorice,
lotus, ámalakí leaves, and alum.
Malodor: A decoction or paste of aromatic herbs
guæúchí, neem, dhátakí flower, chitrak, and
nágke¤har are applied to remove odors.
Miscellaneous: For genital tract defects, menses,
and white, blue, yellow, red, and black discharges,
mango, kuþaj, bilwa, musta, black pepper, ginger, red
sandalwood, arjuna, and honey, followed by rice
water are helpful.
Miscellaneous Disorders and Therapies
Menstrual regulators: Turmeric and saffron (or
safflower) are used.
Spasm regulators: Herbs include fennel, asafoetida,
and jaóámáò¤hí.
Rejuvenatives/tonics: Herbs include ¤hatávarí, red
raspberry, saffron, aloe vera gel, turmeric (with ginger,
fennel, and cardamom).
Tumors/Cysts/Fibroids: They are most common in
Kapha doßhas and are usually benign. Symptoms
include swelling, dampness, and congestion. Large
tumors or cysts are safe to remove through surgical
measures. The best herbs are khadir or fibroids and
a¤hoka for cysts. Additional herbs include guggul,
saffron, musta, mañjißhþhá, pippalí, turmeric, kaóuká,
and barberry with honey.
Váyu: Symptoms include pain, dryness, varying in
size and location. Herbs include musta, guggul,
mañjißhþhá, aloe vera gel, myrrh, red raspberry, and
jaóámáò¤hí.
Pitta: Inflammation, infection, swelling, and heat.
Herbs used are a¤hoka, mañjißhþhá, musta, red rasp-
berry, mañjißhþhá, chamomile, aloe vera gel, guggul,
turmeric, and saffron.
PMS
Váyu Symptoms: Anxiety, depression, insomnia,
constipation, headache, severe cramping, spacey,
dizziness, fainting, rapid mood shifts, being hard to
please, feeling abandoned, chills, thirst, dry skin, and
feeling suicidal.
Pitta Symptoms: Anger, irritability, argumentative,
diarrhea, fever, sweating, warmth, acne and skin
rashes, abundant menstrual flow, possibly with clots,
early onset of menses, spotting.
Kapha Symptoms: Fatigue, heaviness, crying,
sentimentality, longing for love, mild emotions, cold
or flu, mucus, lack of hunger, nausea, swollen breasts,
edema, late onset, white or pale menses with clots or
mucus.
Therapies:
General: Herbs include turmeric, saffron, musta, and
angelica.
Váyu: Herbs include turmeric or saffron to promote
menses; fennel or jaóámáò¤hí to reduce spasms; ¤hiro
dhárá or oil poured over the genitalia or lower abdo-
men; vaginal douche with a¤hwagandhá and
¤hatávarí is recommended. Coffee, tea, tobacco, al-
cohol, and drugs should be avoided. Váyu-reducing
foods, drinks, and lifestyle are advised.
Pitta: Herbs include turmeric, saffron (as above),
¤hatávarí, musta, mañjißhþhá, gotu kola, aloe vera
gel, and bh^i´garáj. Pitta-reducing foods, drinks, and
lifestyle are advised.
Kapha: Herbs include aloe vera gel, turmeric, musta,
cinnamon, pippalí, and ginger. Avoiding heavy or oily
foods is advised. Kapha-reducing foods, drinks, and
lifestyle are advised.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
508
Menopause
Hormonal and emotional balancing and
reproductive tract rejuvenation are essential. It is
generally related to Váyu symptoms of nervousness,
insomnia, depression, and anxiety. Váyu-reducing
foods, drinks, and lifestyle are required, along with
aloe vera gel, myrrh, ¤hatávarí, saffron, kapikachhú,
and a¤hwagandhá in boiled milk. Chyavan prá¤h is
another good tonic.
Pitta: Symptoms include anger, irritability, impatience,
hot flashes. Pitta-reducing habits are followed, along
with aloe vera gel, ¤hatávarí, and saffron in boiled
milk.
Kapha: Symptoms include heaviness, fatigue, leth-
argy, tendency towards overweight and water reten-
tion. Herbs include pippalí, ginger, and guggul.
Dysmenorrhea
(Difficult menses, often with cramping)
This is generally a Váyu condition.
Váyu: Symptoms include spasms, uterine dryness,
bloating, gas, or constipation. Suggested herbs include
musta, ¤hatávarí, guggul, aloe vera gel, myrrh, red
raspberry, turmeric, and jaóámáò¤hí. Warm sesame
oil is poured over or applied to the lower abdomen.
Sesame oil and ¤hatávarí are used as a douche.
Pitta: Congestion develops from stagnant blood
obstructions, with burning and diarrhea. Herbs include
bráhmí, musta, turmeric, and saffron. The latter two
can be boiled in milk.
Kapha: Congestion develops from stagnant blood
obstructions, with edema or phlegm (congestion). Hot
herbs are used, such as pippalí vachá, guggul, myrrh,
and ginger.
Leukorrhea/prolapse
(Abnormal vaginal discharges)
When the natural acidic nature of the vagina is
not healthy, bacteria, fungi, or protozoa will develop.
It usually results from Kapha-excess mucus,
antibiotics, excess sex, infections, venereal diseases,
and lack of cleanliness. Therapies focus on the excess,
not the bacteria. Sour douches of vinegar or yogurt
are most useful, along with acidophilus tablets.
Kapha: Herbs include aloe powder, ginger, and
pippalí taken with honey. Other useful herbs are red
raspberry, ¤hatávarí, lotus seeds, and guggul.
Pitta: Symptoms include yellow color, foul odor,
bloodiness, and burning. Herbs include aloe powder,
kaþuká, and bhúámalakí. For internal use only, aloe
vera gel, turmeric, and mañjißhþhá are advised.
Váyu: Symptoms include brown color, stickiness,
dryness, and severe pain.
Hysterectomy
The removal of the uterus creates hormone im-
balances, devitalization, imbalanced metabolism
(leading to weight gain), emotional imbalance, and
insecurity.
Váyu: Air increases, causing ungroundedness and
anxiety.
Pitta: Symptoms include anger, irritability, and heat.
Kapha: Symptoms of fatigue, sentimentality, weight
gain, and congestion can develop.
Immediately after surgery, turmeric and arjuna
are taken to promote healing. Therapies include re-
productive and hormonal tonics like ¤hatávarí, aloe
vera gel, saffron, chyavan prá¤h; brain tonics, such
as bráhmí (or bráhmí ghee), bh^i´garáj, and
jaóámáò¤hí are recommended.
Note: Most of the conditions pertaining to the female
reproductive system are related to hormones. The
main cause of hormone-related diseases is life style
and diet.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 509
In our modern society, food is produced in larger quan-
tities in the shortest possible time. To achieve this end,
a variety of growth hormones and chemicals are used
to develop these products. Processed foods that are
loaded with hormones and chemicals create a serious
imbalance in the body’s own rate of growth and hor-
monal system. A large number of the hormones and
chemicals used to fatten animals are female hormones.
Thus, when foods containing these chemicals are in-
gested, they wreak havoc with hormonal balance in
the female body.
Many of the problems caused by eating animal
products can be solved if organic animal products
are taken. However, Áyurveda still cautions about the
subtler karmic implications from eating animals.
Áyurvedic Obstetrics (Childbirth)
Discussed in
this section are
the Áyurvedic
principles of con-
ception, preg-
nancy, embryol-
ogy (the devel-
opment of the fe-
tus), and deliv-
ery. Scientifi-
cally minded
readers will see
some amazing
parallels between what is known today through mod-
ern medicine and technology and what was known
intuitively more than 5,000 years ago. Procedures for
pregnancy, mantras, foods, and abhyañga (a type of
massage) are also discussed.
Embryology
The Soul (átman), based on past life actions
(karma), enters healthy semen (¤hukra) and ovum
(ártava), forming an embryo. The embryo is formed
by the subtle elements ether (ákásha), air (váyu), fire
(tejas), water (ap), and earth (pritvi). All five elements
are contained in both the semen and ovum. Later, the
soul or átman enters the embryo.
Males are developed when there is more semen
(a Y chromosome, thus producing XY chromosomes).
A female fetus is created when there is more ovum
present (X chromosome, thus producing XX chro-
mosomes). Váyu divides the semen and ovum into
many parts, giving rise to many embryos (i.e., fertili-
zation of more than one ovum). The best chance for
healthy offspring will occur when the female, 16 years
old or over, mates with a male who is over 20- to 25
years old, and both people are healthy (i.e., none of
the three doßhas are vitiated).
The Charak Saåhitá notes that the child receives
from the ovum, their skin, blood, flesh, fat, umbilicus,
heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, bladder, rectum, stomach,
colon, anus, small intestine, and organ membranes.
Derived from the semen are the hair, nails, teeth,
bones, veins, ligaments, arteries, and reproductive
fluid. Factors derived from the átman (soul) are the
taking of birth, life span, Self-realization, mind,
senses, intake and excretion, stimulation and essence
of the senses. Other factors include shape, voice,
complexion, desire for happiness and sorrow, likes
and dislikes, consciousness, courage, intellect,
memory, egoism, and efforts.
Wholesome food and life-style form a healthy fetus.
This produces healthy rasa (plasma) in the women
that is necessary for both her life and the production
of the fetus’ growth, strength, satisfaction, plumpness,
and enthusiasm. The wholesomeness of the mind is
also essential, since the mind connects the soul to the
physical body. The factors that the mind gives the
embryo are conduct, likes and dislikes, purity,
memory, attachment, and detachment. Other factors
include valor, fear, anger, fatigue, enthusiasm,
sharpness, softness, seriousness, and stability or
instability. The more sattwic the mind, the more
predominant the positive qualities. Thus, the embryo
is formed from various factors. (Charak Saåhitá:
Sharír-asthána, Ch 4, verse 6,7,10-13)
Doßhas are healed with herbs described earlier (e.g.,
a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, and ghee, which build the
semen and ovum (¤hukra dhátu). Additionally, the
female organ is cleansed using herbal uttarabastis
(vaginal douches). Healthy semen is white, heavy,
unctuous, sweet, copious, and thick like honey or
ghee. Healthy menstrual blood is noted by its not
staining a cloth after it has been washed.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
510
Preparation and Conception
When a couple desires to conceive, the following
procedures are followed. At the first sign of
menstruation, for three days, the woman is advised
to think only good thoughts, avoid bathing and
dressing up, reduce her weight, and avoid sexual
activity. She is also advised to sleep on a hard bed
and take meals (in small portions) consisting solely
of milk and small barley for purification of the
alimentary tract. On the fourth day, she bathes, and
along with her husband, dresses in white.
 They adorn themselves with flower garlands and
should feel attracted towards one another. A woman
becomes fertile following menstruation and fresh
blood is formed in the uterus. It is said that if a couple
wants a male offspring, to conceive on an even day;
and for a female child, on an odd day. These days are
counted from the first day of menstruation.
(Additionally, there are many sacred rites that can
assure conception of a healthy male child with good
qualities. (See Charak: £hárírasthána Chapter 8 Verse
10-14; and Aßhþáñga H^idayam: £hárírasthána Ch
1, verse 37-38)
“The couple who have pure ¤hukra and ártava
(semen/ovum) are healthy and in love with each
other...indulge in oleation, purificatory therapies, and
nourishing enemas. The male uses milk and ghee with
sweet, ojas-building herbs. The woman uses sesame
oil, black gram, ovum building, and Pitta-increasing
herbs.” (Aßhþáñga H^idayam: £hárírasthána Ch 1,
verse 18a - 20a)
The bedroom should be clean and filled with
pleasant aromas. The man ascends the bed with his
right leg first; and the woman with her left leg. A
woman is advised to lie on her back to keep the three
doßhas balanced in her uterus. There is a special
mantra recited by the husband, the “Ahirasi sutam”
“O Lord, you are the procurer, you are the life, you
are present everywhere, may Dhátá bestow on me
good, may Vidhátá bestow the divine radiance, may
Brahman, Brihaspati, Vißhòu, Soma, Súrya, Aßhwini-
twins, Bhaga, Mitra, and Varuna grant me a valiant
son.”
Male offspring were highly prized in ancient times;
the prayer can be changed to replace “son” with
“child.”
Other mantras found in the ¼ik Veda are chanted
by a priest, including, “Vißhòuryáni Kalpayatu” (May
Lord Vißhòu fulfill her desire in the womb).
“May Lord Vißhòu prepare the womb. May Lord
Tvastr make the respective forms. May Lord
Prajápati spray the sperm. May Lord Dhátri protect
your wife’s womb.”
Cohabitation then occurs with affection and
cheerfulness. Afterwards, the woman is sprinkled with
cold water.
Lifestyle During Pregnancy
The woman is advised to take various herbs to
nourish herself and the fetus, including bráhmí,
guæúchí, and ghee boiled with milk. The herbs are
also worn as a talisman and held by the wife. The
wife is looked at affectionately, attended to by her
husband and attendants who give her all the
wholesome foods she wants, especially butter, ghee,
and milk.
Many factors may impair the pregnancy or cause
abortion. Thus, she should avoid, excess sexual
activities, exertion, excess sleep or staying up late,
sitting on uncomfortable or seats that are too high,
and walking in high heels. Grief, anger, fear, strong
emotions, suppression of natural urges and desires,
fasting, long walks, pungent, hot, constipating and
hard to digest foods, laxative herbs, and wearing red
are also avoided. Other habits to avoid include staring
into deep pits, wells, or waterfalls, drinking alcohol,
eating meat, sleeping on her back, and disobeying
elder women. She is also advised not to undergo
pañcha karma (until the eighth month), excessive
uncomfortable travel, excessive or irritating noises.
Many activities of the parents can cause harm to
their newborn child. Both husband and wife cause
these troubles before conception (i.e., foods, lifestyle
habits). During pregnancy, the actions of the woman
mainly cause these unhealthy results through her
foods and lifestyle. Of course external factors can
also influence her health.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 511
Activities Causing Diseases in the Child
Harmful Activity and the Results in the Child 1.
Constantly sleeping on her back. Result: umbilicus
twists around the neck of the fetus.
2. Sleeping in the open air or traveling alone at night.
Result: mental illness.
3. Verbal and physical abuse. Result: epilepsy.
4. Excessive cohabitation. Result: rudeness, lacking
will.
5. Constant grief: Result: fearfulness, thinness, short-
lived.
6. Thinking ill of others. Result: anti-social behavior,
envious, weak-willed.
7. Stealing. Result: laziness, maliciousness.
8. Anger. Result: deceitfulness, jealousy, anger.
9. Excessive sleep. Result: dullness, lethargy, poor
digestion.
10. Alcohol addiction. Result: thirst, poor memory,
fickleness.
11. Eating pork. Result: red eyes, respiratory
problems.
12. Eating fish. Result: eye closure problems.
13. Sweets addiction. Result: urinary disorders,
diabetes, mental disorders, obesity.
14. Addiction to sour things. Result: bleeding, skin,
and eye disorders.
15. Salt addiction. Result: kidney and urinary
disorders, ojas depletion.
16. Addiction to pungent tastes. Result: weakness,
reproductive problems.
17. Addiction to bitter tastes. Result: emaciation,
weakness.
18. Addiction to astringent tastes. Result: gray
complexion, constipation, gas, distention.
Wholesome Therapy During Pregnancy
* During the seventh month, the fetus causes pres-
sure on the chest, leading to itching and burning sen-
sations. Therapy: To relieve this condition, eat 12
grams of butter, boiled with sweet herbs. Breasts and
abdomen are anointed with sandalwood paste (herb
powder and water), musta, mañjißhóhá, and triphalá.
A gentle oil abhyañga (massage-like) is given. Small
quantities of sweet foods are to be taken every 3 to 4
hours to alleviate Váyu. Fats and salt should be
avoided.
** In the ninth month, abhyañga is done to soften
the placenta, pelvis, waist, and the sides of the chest
and back; to expel gas, for easy elimination of urine
and stools; to soften skin and nails; to give strength
and enhance the complexion; to create an easy deliv-
ery of a healthy child.
If the right side of a woman’s abdomen is more el-
evated, and she first gets milk in her right breast, pre-
fers things using her right side, longs for masculine
activities, and dreams about them., it is said that she
will give birth to a male child. If the opposite fea-
tures are noticed, including more feminine charac-
teristics, desires to dance, play, or sing, enjoy aro-
mas, and flowers, she will give birth to a female.
     Before the 9th month, a special room or  apart-
Month
Therapy
1
cold milk
2
boiled milk with sweet tasting
herbs (e.g.
3
boiled milk with honey and ghee
4
milk with 12 grams of butter
5
ghee
6
(sweet) herbal ghee (e.g.
7
same as 6*
8
milk, easily digested grain broth,
and ghee
9
medicated oil enema, oleation of
uterus and genital tract, daily body
oil abhyañga **

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
512
ment should be constructed for the woman. Pleasant
aromas, colors, foods, and herbs are placed in the
room. At the onset of the 9th month, female relatives
and midwives attend to the pregnant women in the
apartment. Auspicious days and times, favorable
moon and constellation positions determine when
sacred fire rites for peace and good fortune should be
performed by bráhmanas (priests). The priests use
mantras, grass, food, water, and cows in the ceremo-
nies.
Impending Delivery Signs
The Áyurvedic scriptures suggest that either on
the day before or on the day of delivery, the expectant
mother exhibits will show signs of fatigue, looseness
of the abdomen and eyes, heaviness in the lower parts
of the body, loss of appetite (or taste), and increased
salivation. She may feel pain or discomfort in the
thighs, waist, abdomen, back, heart region, bladder,
groin, and vaginal tract. Other symptoms include
tearing pain, pricking, pulsating, and fluid discharge,
followed by the onset of labor pains, discharge of
fluid from the womb, and increased frequency of
urination.
Once these signs are experienced, she observes
auspicious rites, holds masculine-named fruit, is given
an oil abhyañga and a warm bath. Following this,
she drinks thin, easily digested grain soup, with ghee.
Then she lies on a hard bed, with legs bent. Her body,
especially the lower belly, is continuously rubbed with
warm oil. Her female attendants console her as well.
Some authorities suggest that she inhale herbal snuff,
including cardamom (elá), vachá (calamus), and
chitrak. This promotes an easy delivery by helping
the fetus detach from the upper belly region and move
to its lower region.
Once the fetus has detached from the heart region
(upper abdomen), labor pains will increase and the
fetus will have turned. The woman should lie on a
bed. Mantras are then recited in her ears by one of
her attendants.
“May the five elements, Vißhòu and Prajápati
always protect you, the pregnant one, and help the
delivery of the child. O auspicious one, may the
delivery take place without any distress, either to you
or your child, who has the brilliance of the divine
warrior [Kartik], and be protected by Kartik .”
The attendants console her, advising her not to
strain when there are no labor pains, as it causes
difficult breathing, cough, enlarged spleen, and
wasting diseases. When labor begins, she is advised
to increase pressure slowly and gradually. When the
child appears, the women announce the delivery and
the gender of the baby to give the new mother relief,
joy, and help her regain strength. She is then fanned,
sprinkled with water, and drinks water as well.
Post-Partum Therapies For New-Born Baby
(Bálopacharaòíya Ahyáya)
Immediately after birth, the baby’s skin is
cleansed using rock salt and ghee. Then, to relieve
the fatigue of its birth, the baby is anointed with
(medicated) balá oil. Finally, two stones are hit
together at the root of the baby’s ears and a sacred
hymn is chanted into its right ear by the father or
mother:
“You have been born from every organ of the body
and mind’s heart (h^idaya) of your parents. You are
we in the form of a (son/daughter); may you live for
a hundred years. May you attain long life. Let the
stars, the quarters, nights, and days protect you.”
After the child settles down, the umbilical cord is
tied with a thread 4-finger’s width above the navel,
then severed. The cord is fastened around the baby’s
neck (without causing harm). The umbilicus is next
massaged with kuähthá oil and then given a bath with
a decoction of tree barks with milky sap or water
boiled with fragrant herbs. The water can be boiled
with silver or gold in it as well.
A cloth soaked in sesame oil is placed over the
baby’s head while the baby is fed an herbal sweet
(e.g., bráhmí, vachá, ¤ha´kh pußhpí, harítakí,
ámalakí, ghee, raw honey, gold). The dose is no more
than that which fits in the baby’s palm. This confection
will stimulate the development of intelligence, long
life, and strength. Prayers for the baby to develop
these qualities are chanted while the baby eats.
The baby is made to vomit the uterine fluid by
eating ghee mixed with rock salt. Then religious rites
are performed for the baby.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 513
Breast Feeding
The milk of the mother is not considered ready for
nursing for the first 3 or 4 days after delivery owing
to the dilation of the milk duct orifices. Thus the child
is fed the juice of dúrva mixed with honey and ghee
(quantity the size of the child’s handful), 3 times a
day for the first 3 days. Mantras or prayers for the
baby’s protection, health, intelligence, and longevity
are recited over the meals.
On the 2nd and 3rd days, the baby is given ghee
with white kaòókárí (or ginseng—aralia qinquefolia)
for all three meals. On the 4th day, the child eats only
two meals (morning and noon). In the evening,
mother’s milk is given from the right breast after
squeezing a little bit of the milk out; reciting a mantra
over the breast. A pitcher of water impregnated with
mantras is kept near the child’s head and the baby
licks some fresh butter. This procedure is followed
before all nursing meals. Hereafter, the baby nurses
twice a day.
A mantra is recited over the breast as follows, “O
beautiful women, may the four oceans of the earth
contribute to the secretion of milk in your breasts for
the purpose of improving your baby’s physical
strength. O you with a beautiful face, may the child,
reared on your milk, attain a long life like the gods
made immortal from their ambrosia drinks.”
Should the mother be unable to breast-feed, two
wet-nurses or women who can breast feed, substitute
for the mother. These women should be affectionate,
healthy, observing celibacy, of the same doßha as the
mother, eating foods and living a lifestyle in
accordance with their doßha, and have children of
their own.
Breast Milk
Breast milk can become deficient as a result of
grief, anger, fasting, and exertion. Happiness, love,
nutrition, and rest increase breast milk. Milk, dúrba,
and fennel, also increase breast milk. If breast milk is
not available, the child can drink cow’s or goat’s milk
boiled with the 5-herb group known as h^isva
pañchamúl (b^ihatí, kaòókárí, gokßhura, ¤háliparñí,
and p^isnaparòí).
Breast milk diseases occur from eating before the
last meal is digested, eating unsuitable or
incompatible foods, irregularity and excess of meals
and habits. Other causes include regularly ingesting
of salty, sour, pungent, and stale foods; mental and
physical stress, staying up late, taking naps after lunch,
and excess mental work. Further causes include
suppressing and forcing natural urges, ingesting meat,
fat, and wine; lack of exercise, injury, and anger. Other
causes include weakness or wasting due to illness.
The channels carrying milk cause eight forms of
disorders.
Symptoms:
Váyu causes abnormal tastes, excess froth, and
roughness. Pitta causes abnormal color and malodor.
Kapha causes oiliness, sliminess, and heaviness.
1. Váyu affects the taste of milk, causing slow growth
and weight loss.
2. Váyu, churning the milk, produces excess froth
that causes difficult milk flow. Upon drinking this
milk, the child will develop a weak voice and will
retain urine, stool, and gas. Váyu headaches or colds
with mucus (coryza) are also common.
3. Váyu dries up the unctuous nature of the milk,
causing the child who drinks it to becomes debilitated.
4. Pitta, causing abnormal coloration of milk (e.g.,
blue, yellow, black), will create a poor complexion,
sweat, thirst, diarrhea, constant fever, and no desire
to drink from the breast in the child.
5. Pitta causes the milk to spoil, giving the child who
drinks it anemia and jaundice.
6. Kapha makes the milk too oily; and the child

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
514
 drinking it develops vomiting, abdominal distention,
salivation, sleepiness and exhaustion, difficulty
breathing, cough, excessive discharge, and a
pervading sense of darkness.
7. Kapha causes the milk to become slimy. The child
will salivate, develop swollen face and eyes, and
become dull.
8. Kapha causes heaviness of the milk, causing heart
disease.
General Milk Cleansing
The mother or wet-nurse is first oiled and
fomented, then undergoes emesis with a neem,
calamus, and kuþaj decoction. After resting, eating,
and digesting her food, she is massaged with oil. Then
the woman is purged with a harítakí and/or triphalá
decoction with raw honey. Afterwards, she follows
her Áyurvedic diet. This cleansing prepares her for
nursing. Cleansing foods include rice, barley, cane
sugar, vegetable soup, green legumes, lentils, made
with neem, ámalakí, t^ikatu, and rock salt. Herbs
include guæúchí, a¤hwagandhá, and ginger.
General:
Váyu: Da¤hmúl decoction is drunk for three days.
Thereafter one drinks Váyu-reducing medicated ghee,
followed by beer foam to lubricate the body. A mild
purgative is then given, followed by enema and sweat
therapy. The woman then eats cedar, cardamom,
ajamodá mixed with ghee and rock candy.
Pitta: Mother and child both drink a decoction of
guæúchí, ¤hatávarí, neem, sandalwood and cedar.
Alternatively, they can take a decoction of triphalá,
mustá, bhúámalakí, and kaóuká. Ghee can be taken
with these herbs. Pitta-reducing purgatives, abhyañga
(massage-like), and lepa (body pastes) are also
required.
Kapha: The child licks ghee mixed with powder of
licorice and myrrh, or myrrh and pippalí. Madanaphal
is made into a paste with honey and applied to the
mother’s breasts and baby’s lips. This will easily cause
the baby to vomit (thereby removing excess Kapha).
The mother should follow emetic therapies discussed
in Chapter 7. After emesis, mother and child drink a
decoction of cedar, kuóaj, and tagara and follow a
Kapha-reducing food plan. The mother follows the
post-vamana food plan in Chapter 7.
Tridoßha: This is a difficult disorder to heal. First
mother and child practice emesis described above for
Kapha. Herbs include vachá, licorice, turmeric,
ginger, cedar, myrrh, mustá, and guæúchí.
Children are by nature more Kapha from
drinking milk and ghee. Thus, if emetics (for
vomiting) are needed, mild herbs and doses are given
without oleation (oil) therapy (normally required for
adults). Children that only nurse or those that nurse
and eat solid food are made to vomit after they are
content from drinking breast milk. Children who no
longer breast feed, first drink peyá (thin gruel—see
Chapter 7) with ghee until sated, before making them
vomit.
Enemas are given to children when purgative
therapy is required (for adults) to heal a disorder. Nasal
therapies (pratimarßhá), purgation and other required
therapies are given only to the mother.
A paste of pippalí and raw honey or paste of
dhátakí and ámalakí are applied to the ear lobes of
the child.
Specific Milk Therapies
1. Abnormal taste: One drinks Kañchanar, licorice,
vachá (calamus) and khadir mixed in warm water.
Paste of ¤hatávarí, triphalá, and kút is applied locally
on the breasts, allowed to dry and then washed off.
This purifies the milk.
2. Frothy: A paste of ginger, bilwa, da¤hmúl, and
¤hatávarí with warm water is drunk. The mother or
wet nurse takes a decoction of ginger, guæúchí,
nágke¤har, dhátakí, lotus seed, and vachá to alleviate
milk defects and apply barley, wheat, and mustard
paste to the breasts.
3. Rough/Dry: One drinks milk or ghee with
¤hatávarí, wild yam, vidárí kand, a¤hwagandhá, and
balá. Paste of t^ikatu, príya´gu, and ámalakí is applied
to the breasts for purification.
4. Abnormal Color: A paste of mañjißhþhá, ámalakí,
¤hatávarí, neem, and kulattha (horsegram) is taken
with cold water. Apply a paste of hibiscus petals on
the breasts. When it dries, milk is taken out.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 515
5. Foul Odor: One takes a paste of triphalá, turmeric,
and calamus with cold water. Alternately, the mother
or wet nurse takes harítakí and t^ikatu with honey to
remove malodor from the milk. Other therapies in-
clude eating a wholesome diet. A paste of mañjißhþhá,
sandalwood, neem, bibhítakí, and sarsaparilla are
applied to the breasts.
6. Oily: One eats a paste of musta, t^ikatu, da¤hmúl,
nágke¤har, and príya´gu. Rock salt with warm water
is used to purify the milk.
7. Slimy: Persons drink a decoction of harítakí, musta,
ginger, vachá, and karañj to purify breast milk.
8. Heavy: One drinks a decoction of guæúchí, neem,
triphalá, motha (fenugreek), patha (cissampelos
pareira, linn.), and ginger, or a paste of pippalí, balá,
ginger, chitrak, ginger is applied to the breasts for
purification.
All diseases require mild doses. Except for
emergencies. Purgatives are strictly avoided.
Additional Ceremonies
On the sixth night rites are offered to protect the
child from evil spirits. Parents and relatives of the
child stay awake all night making sure the baby
remains in a pleasant frame of mind. Certain herbs
are placed around the birth room to protect the baby,
and broken rice and mustard grains are spread
throughout the house. For the next 10 days, a fire
ceremony (yajña) is performed throughout the day.
At the end of the 10th day, other ceremonies are
performed. The baby is anointed with sandalwood.
The baby is also given two names by a priest, after
proper ceremonies. The names are chosen, based on
the constellation (nákßhatra) the child is born under,
and the family name.
If the family name starts with a
“g, gh, j, jh, dr, drh, d, dh, b, and bh”,
and ends with a
“ya, ra, la, va, sha, sa or ha,”
the name relates to the past three generations and
is a famous name. A name with an even number of
letters may also be given.
In the first 10 to 12 days after childbirth, the women
attend to the wife, and kind and pious people are
entertained in the house. Music, food, and drinks are
provided for all to enjoy.
The baby always wears auspicious amulets and
herbs, such as bráhmí and vachá, on its hands, neck,
and head. These bestow long life, intelligence,
memory, health, and protection. During the sixth to
eighth month, a ceremony is conducted to for the
punching of the earlobes.
A baby should not be frightened or threatened, even
if disobedient, because spirits can take possession of
a frightened baby. Medicated ghee made with bráhmí,
vachá, kuähthá, and myrrh bestow voice, intelligence,
memory, and long life and protect against sins, evil
spirits, and cures insanity from possession by spirits.
Weaning (Stanyáparaòa)
Once the baby’s teeth begin to appear, a gradual
weaning from breast milk begins. Cow’s or goat’s
milk are easily digestible foods and are gradually
begun.
Sweet balls made with raw honey, parched rice
paddy and sugar candy develop a content baby. Bilwa
and elá are given to kindle digestion. A nutritive drink
(tarpaòa) is made with dhátakí, parched rice paddy
and cane sugar stops diarrhea.
Healing Childhood Diseases
(Bálámaya Pratihedha)
Nonverbal Communication
A child may constantly touch (sometimes press
hard) on its diseased parts or organs when ill. When
another person touches that area (even gently), the
child will cry.
Head Disorders: If any head disease occurs, the
child cannot raise or move its head and its eyes will
remain closed.
Heart: Biting the tongue and lips, difficult
breathing, and clenching fists.
Abdomen/Colon: Constipation vomiting, biting
mother’s breast, intestinal gurgling, gas, bending the
back, urine and stool retention, discolored
complexion, and abdominal distention.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
516
Bladder/Genitals: Urine retention, thirst, pain,
frightened look, and occasional fainting.
Systemic Disease (i.e., throughout the body): The
child will cry constantly and cannot be consoled.
Therapies
Herbs used for specific disorders (discussed
throughout the book) are taken in small quantities by
the nursing mother. The child will receive the herbs
through the milk. After the first month of the child’s
life, a pinch of herbs is also given along with ghee.
For children nursing and also eating foods, herbs
are taken with food as well as given to the mother
(dose: several pinches of herbs). When children are
only eating food (and no longer nursing), herbs are
given as decoctions, but not given to the mother (dose
= 1/16 teaspoon).
Dosing Details: From birth to one month, herbs
should be taken with milk, honey, syrup or ghee, the
amount of two rice grains. Then each month the size
is gradually increased by two grains in size until the
child is one-year-old. Thereafter the child takes about
20 grains or 1/16 of a teaspoon until age 15.
Elixirs: These herbs improve the health, strength,
intellect and longevity of the child.
Nursing: Ghee cooked with a decoction of white
mustard seeds, vachá, apámárga, ¤hatávarí, bráhmí,
pippalí, kuähthá, myrrh, and rock salt.
Nursing and Food: Ghee cooked with a decoction
of licorice, vachá, chitrak, pippalí, and triphalá.
Food (no nursing): Ghee cooked with a decoction
of bráhmí, da¤hmúl, milk, tagara, black pepper,
viæa´ga, honey, and drákßhá (medicated grape wine).
[Cow’s or goat’s milk is important for the child.]
Diseases of Growing Teeth (Dañtobheda Roga)
Áyurveda notes that all diseases can be caused by
the eruption of new teeth, but especially fever,
diarrhea, cough, vomiting, headache, conjunctivitis,
herpes, and styes. The whole body can experience
pain. Therapies are followed according to the doßha(s)
involved. Therapies are the same as adults, only doses
are much less.
Medicated ghee with vachá, b^ihatí, laghu-páóhá,
kaóuká, cane sugar, milk, and raw honey are excellent
promoters of healthy growth of teeth.
For all diseases arising from newly growing teeth,
balá, atibalá, bilwa, dhátakí, milk, and the watery
portion of yogurt are used. For fever, diarrhea, difficult
breathing, jaundice, anemia, and cough, cedar,
pippalí, b^ihatí, and dill are used; these herbs also
promote strength and a healthy complexion. Once
teeth have completely grown in, all associated
diseases subside.
If the child is born with teeth or develops the upper
teeth first (sadañta janma), a propitiatory rite is
performed, money is donated to priests and prayers
are offered to Naigameßha (the protector of children).
Oversleeping During the Day (Bála £hoßha)
Excessive napping, drinking cold water or
drinking Kapha-excessed breast milk causes the
child’s plasma tissues (rasa dhátu) to become blocked
by Kapha. This results in loss of appetite, excess nasal
mucus, fever, cough, emaciation; greasy and white
face and eyes develop.
Herbs to heal this condition include myrrh, vachá,
pippalí, b^ihatí, kákolí, musta, vásák, dhátakí, and
ámalakí mixed with honey and ghee. Licorice,
pippalí, tálispatra, sandalwood, and myrrh eliminate
emaciation. Abhyañga (massage-like) and bath
include medicated oil of vachá, tagara, and sesame
oil.
Vomiting
General: Kadira, arjuna, tálispatra, kuähthá, and
sandalwood mixed with ghee and boiled in milk. After
Nursing: Herbs include kaòókárí, ginger, and
raspberry.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 517
Tálukaòóaka
Kapha becomes increased in the palate muscles,
and the skull becomes depressed at the palate region.
The baby develops an aversion to food, has difficulty
suckling, and passes watery stool. Babies become
thirsty, develop irritations in the mouth, eye pain,
vomiting, and have difficultly holding their necks
straight.
Therapies call for pressing a paste of ginger, myrrh,
and honey onto the palate. The paste of harítakí,
vachá, kuähthá , and honey are taken with breast milk
to heal this disorder.
Rectal Ulcer (Guda Vraòa)
Sweat or the sticking of feces causes an excess of
blood and Kapha that gives rise to an ulcer. The ulcer
is copper-colored with itching and is associated with
secondary complications in the rectum. It is also called
Mát^ika doßha, Ahipútana, P^ißhóáru, Gudakuóóa, and
Anámaka.
The mother’s breast milk needs to be purified with
Pitta- and Kapha-reducing herbs. Herbs used for Pitta
ulcers (Chapter 16) are boiled and then cooled, mixed
with honey, and used as a drink. The rectum is bathed
by sprinkling of triphalá decoction and by the
application of dry triphalá powder. If redness and
itching are severe, blood-letting is used.
Mud-Caused Disorder
(M^it Bhaksaòaja Roga)
If the child has eaten mud, medicated ghee with
musta, punarnavá, and bilwa are licked by the child.
Therapies for the New Mother
Some authorities suggest the first two days after
giving birth, herbs of safflower, myrrh, and saffron
should be taken to cleanse the uterus. Both the
Aßhþáñga H^idaya and Charak Saåhitá advise the
woman to take ghee and oil (to promote fat) and
various herbs including, pippalí and chitrak.
Sprinkling her with warm water is advised before
eating easily digested meals (when she is hungry). She
also receives an almond oil abhyañga (massage-like)
and is then tightly wrapped in cloth and given Váyu-
reducing herbs. This helps to prevent an imbalance of
Váyu in her abdomen, stretch marks, and to help return
the belly to its normal size. These therapies continue
for 5 to 7 nights, then a nourishing therapy begins.
She is served various herbs and foods to build her
immune system and increase the flow of breast milk.
Herbs include white musali, ¤hatávarí, bráhmí,
ámalakí, saffron, milk, ghee, and sesame oil. She
remains under care for 1 1/2 months, until she begins
her next menstrual cycle.
Nursery
The child’s room should be clean, beautiful, light,
without drafts (air entering only on one side), and
without pets. It should be comfortable and properly
prepared for the season (i.e., blankets in the winter,
air cooling in the summer). Antiseptic aromas like
guggul, frankincense, and cedar are burnt to fumigate
the room and fabrics. The child is given talismans of
jewels, and herbs to wear. There should be a variety
of toys of many colors and sounds. The child should
not be frightened or disciplined.
Miscarriage
Traditionally it was believed that girls under age
16 and boys under age 25 involved in conceiving a
child were more likely to have a miscarriage or have
a child with weak organs. The signs of impending
miscarriage are pain in the uterus, bladder, waist,
groin; and bleeding.
To prevent miscarriage, the person immediately
receives cold baths, cold water spraying, and
medicated plaster, followed by drinking boiled milk
with licorice and a¤hwagandhá. If there are unusual
movements of the fetus in the womb, one drinks milk
boiled with white lotus (puòæaríka), white water lily
(kumuda), and licorice.
Fetus displacement causes pain or spasms, burn-
ing, excessive discharge of blood or retention of urine
and stool. When the fetus shifts from place to place it

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
518
causes abdominal swelling. In both cases cooling and
soothing therapies are required.
For pain: Boiled milk with licorice flower and
kaòþkárí mixed with cane sugar and honey is drunk.
For stool retention or distention: Boiled milk with
asafoetida, salt, garlic, vachá is mixed with raw honey
and cane sugar and drunk. Other conditions follow
therapies discussed in their respective chapters.
In the event of a miscarriage, herbal
emmenagogues are used to cleanse the uterus,
including aloe vera gel, myrrh, turmeric, and
mañjißhþhá. This therapy continues for 1 to 2 weeks.
Rest is essential to recover from the loss.
Childhood Planetary Influences
(Grahákriti-Vijñánan)
There are 9 diseases of infancy exist related to
the 9 planets (graha), Skandá-graha, Skandá-
pasmará, ¤hakuni, Revati, Putaná, Andha-putaná,
¤hita-putaná, Mukhamandiká, Naigameßha
(pritigraha).
Causes: These diseases result from improper breast
feeding, poor hygiene, cruel treatment, and a poor
spiritual environment. During these times the
planetary (evil) spirits enter the child.
Symptoms:
Skandá graha: Swollen eyes, distorted facial features,
aversion to breast milk.
Skandá-pasmará-graha: The child’s body emits a
bloody smell, one eyelid becomes motionless. It has
a frightened look, clenches fists with slight moans,
rolls the eyes, is constipated and subject to fainting
fits, convulsive leg and hand jerks, foaming mouth,
yawning, passing gas while excreting stool and urine.
£hakuni: Loose limbs, body odor.
Revati: The child is filled with terror, secreting ulcers
or vessel eruption with burning sensation all over the
body (which eventually develop pus and burst of their
own nature). The child will have a reddish face, green
stool and urine, deep yellow or dark brown
complexion, fever with an inflamed mouth, bruising
pain all over the body, and will frequently rub the
nose and ears. Putaná: Loose limbs, troubled day or
night sleep, loose stools, body odor, vomiting, goose
bumps, thirst.
Andha-putaná: Aversion to breast milk, develop
dysentery, cough, hiccups, vomiting, fever, a
discolored complexion, swollen skin, and will always
lie face down.
£hita-putaná: Constantly frightened and startled,
excess shivering, comatose sleep, constant diarrhea,
body odor.
Mukha-mandiká: Incessant crying, intestinal
rumbling, emaciation, shiny, swollen lines of the face
and body, fearful, large appetite, net-like abdominal
veins, a urine-like odor.
Naigameßha-graha: Frothy vomit, bent over, anxious,
crying loudly, gazing upwards, emaciation or fever,
body odor, fainting.
If a child appears stupefied, with aversion to breast
milk, constant fainting spells, and full development
of all symptoms, the situation is grave and not
healable. When symptoms are milder or of more
recent origin, healing is possible.
Origins of the Nine Planets (Grahas)
[Grahotpatti-Adhyáya]
The nine presiding deities (of the nine infant
diseases) are ethereal. They were created by the gods
Agni, Mahádeva (£hiva), the goddess Krittiká and
Umá, for guarding the newborn god, Guha. Newborns
need to be guarded for approximately 40 days. The
female deities were created from the essence of the
goddess Gangá, Umá, and Krittiká.
The Naigameßha graha has the face of a sheep
and was created by the goddess Párvati as the friend
and protector of the child Guha.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 519
     Skandápasmára was created by Agni (the fire god).
He is as bright as fire, and a constant companion of
the god Skandá. He is also known as Kartik and
Vißhakha. Skandá, born of £hiva and Párvati, is also
known as Kumára (lit. a child, viz., of £hivaji). Skandá
is known as the Divine Warrior, the ensurer of Di-
vine love.
The deities of the nine childhood diseases asked
Skanka how they will survive. Skandá looked to his
father, £hiva for the answer. Mahádeva answered,
‘Gods, men, and animals live under the principle
of give and take; they are linked by the bonds of
service to one another. The gods minister to the needs
of humans and animals by ruling the seasons of the
year and by controlling the rain and air.
‘Humans return the favor by propitiating the gods
through meditation, prayer, offerings. All services and
their compensation between the gods and humans
are complete, so there is nothing left for you.
Therefore, your means of sustenance will be in the
life of an infant. It is true that this form of
compensation will be tainted with the tears of the
anxious and haggard parents.’
‘Thus, the children of the families in which the
gods, ancestors (Pitris), the Bráhmans, pious,
preceptors, elders, and guests are not properly
worshipped, respected and served, where the rules of
cleanliness and virtues are not observed, when the
family members do not make daily offerings to the
gods and donate money and food to the less fortunate,
and those who eat food that belongs to others, are the
proper persons whom you can strike with impunity,
and by your malefic influence, cause them these
childhood diseases.
‘It is your duty to see that the payment of the
parents’ iniquities appears in their children. The
parents will be forced to worship you and give you
offerings, to return the childrens’ health. Thus, you
will have ample sustenance.’
The nine grahas (planetary deities) accepted these
words. These childhood diseases are difficult to heal.
When disease is caused by Skandá, the most dreadful
of all the planets, there may be permanent damage,
even if the child is healed. If a fully developed disorder
occurs from any of the other planets, the disease will
be incurable.
This planetary section may sound less scientific
and more mythological. For this reason, it may be
more difficult to believe, or at least, harder to
understand. Simply put, to prevent childhood diseases
(and all diseases), live ethically, virtuously, cleanly,
and spiritually according to your own path. Be kind,
generous, charitable, gentle, and always make time
to meditate or pray according to your own spiritual
beliefs.
Therapies
General: The child should be kept in a clean and
purified room, and massaged with ghee. Mustard
seeds are spread on the floor and a mustard oil lamp
is constantly lit. Cardamom, sesame and barley, and
sandalwood are constantly placed in the fire with
garlands of flowers. Mantras are also constantly
recited, “Reverence to thee, lord of the fire, honor to
thee, goddess Krittiká, obeisance to thee, lord Skandá,
reverence to thee, lord who has cast this malefic effect.
In deep respect and humility, I beseech your favor.
May my child be rid of this disease, make (him/her)
strong and healthy again.”
Skandá-graha:
Herbs: Decoctions of bilwa, a¤hwagandhá, balá,
cardamom, yogaraj guggul, and other Váyu-reducing
herbs are sprinkled on the child’s body. The same
herbs, along with sesame oil, guæúchí are used to
massage the body. Ghee cooked with cedar and
frankincense is mixed with milk and ingested.
Offerings: Mustard seeds, vachá, frankincense, cedar,
ghee are burnt and the smoke is used to cover the
child’s body. Bilwa, guæúchí, and anantmúl are strung
together and worn as a necklace. The person taking
care of the child bathes in the night (chanting the
Gáyatrí mantra). They pray to lord Skandá for three
consecutive nights, offering red flower garlands,
saffron or rose incense, grains, and rice. Bells are rung.
Mantras: Daily prayers to Skandá (the Divine warrior)
are said,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
520
     “May the eternal, changeless Skandá, the receptacle
of all energies gained by austerities, fame, valor, or
vital energy be favorable to thee (the child). May
almighty Guha, head of the army of the gods, planetary
lords, and destroyer of their enemies, protect thee from
all evils. May he who is the son of the supreme, whose
mothers are Gangá, Umá, and the Krittikás give thee
health and comfort. May the beautiful god who with a
single shaft, pierced the heart of mountain Krouncha
and who is resplendent with red rays of his own divine
person, smeared with red sandalwood paste and
wearing red flower garlands, protect thee from all
dangers.”
Skandá-pasmará Pratißhedha:
A bilwa leaf decoction subdues Váyu. Sprinkling
with this decoction is useful. An oil decoction of bilwa
root with herbs from the sarvagandha group (i.e.,
aromatic herbs like sandalwood, tulsí, guggul, frank-
incense) neem, and guæúchí is pasted on the child’s
body.
Fumigation: Mustard seed, vachá, and ghee are
burned around the body of the child. Twigs of guæúchí
and bilwa thorns are strung on a necklace and put
around the child’s neck. Anantmúl, sandalwood,
guggul, and tulsí aromas are used. Whoever is caring
for the child should bathe nightly and meditate to
Skandá, the ruler of Mars, for three successive nights
in the inner area of the child’s house. The bath water
should be purified by reciting the Gáyatrí Mantra
Aum bhúr bhuvaha swaha; Tat savitur warenyam;
Bhargo devasya dhí mahi; Dhiyo yo nah prachidayát
 Red-flower garlands, red flags, and red oils (e.g.,
kumkum) are offered in prayer. Fresh barley and rice
are also offered. Bells are rung and sacred fires are lit
with 3, 7, or 10 pourings of ghee.
Mantra: Daily recitation protects the body from
this malefic planet. “May Skandá, the eternal and
changeless deity who is the receptacle of all sorts of
energies produced by austerities, fame, valor or vital
energy be propitious to thee. May almighty Guha (the
commander-in-chief of gods and planets) protect thee
from all evils. He is the destroyer of the enemy of the
gods. May he who is the son of the supreme deity,
the god of the gods, and who acknowledges the ex-
alted motherhood of Gangá, Umá, and the Krittikás,
give thee health and comfort. May the beautiful god
who pierced with a single shaft right through the heart
of the mountain Krouncha and who is effulgent with
red rays of his own divine person smeared with the
paste of red sandalwood and decked with the garland
of red flowers protect thee from all perils.”
Skandápasmára-Pratißhedha:
A decoction of bilwa is sprinkled over the body.
Medicated oils of the sarvagandhá herb group (i.e.,
aromatics) are smeared on the body. Ghee cooked
with milk and a decoction of the barks of kßhírí trees,
and herbs from the ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, and
licorice are made into a paste and are eaten.
The child’s body is rubbed with vachá and hi´g
paste. Fumigation with the aromatic herbs (i.e., bilwa,
sandalwood, guggul). A bracelet of sandalwood, tulsí,
rudrakßha, or anantmúl is worn by the child. The
child’s caretaker, observing a fast, sits in a ditch and
offers milk and grains (food stuff). The child is bathed
at a crossroads while a mantra is recited:
“O thou, the trusted and beloved friend of god
Skandá, O Skandápas-mára, O thou ugly-faced one
whom the world knows by the epithet of Visákha,
may good befall this child in distress.”
Shakuni-Pratißhedha:
The child’s body is sprinkled with a decoction of
kapittha and ámra (mango). An oil decoction, using
sweet and astringent herbs, is used to anoint the body.
Plasters of madhuka, utpala, príya´gu, mañjißhþhá,
and sarsaparilla are pasted on the child.
Herbs and foods discussed in the ulcers section
and the fumigation described above for Skandá-graha
are also used here. £hatávarí, nágadanti (heliotrope),
kaòókárí, lakßhmana, and vrihati (Indian nightshade)
are worn as a charm by the child.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 521
Skandá, the ruler of Mars is meditated on by the
practitioner in a beech arbor. He is offered huskless
sesame seeds and flower garlands. The child is bathed
in the arbor as discussed under Skandá Graha.
Medicated ghee used for Skandá Graha is also used.
Flowers are offered to Skandá, and a mantra is
recited,
“May the ever down-looking sharp-beaked, keen
and farseeing-eyed goddess (£hakuni is decked with
a variety of ornaments) and who traverses the ethereal
sky in her flight, be propitious to thee. May the brown-
eyed, fierce-looking, huge-bodied, large-bellied and
spike-eared £hakuni, who strikes terror into the hearts
of people with her terrible voice, be pleased with thee.”
Revati-Pratißhedha:
A decoction of a¤hwagandhá, sarsaparilla,
punarnavá, and both sahá and vidárí kand are
sprinkled on the child’s body. Medicated oil of
kuähthá, guggul, and khus-khus are anointed on the
body. Medicated ghee cooked with lotus, dhátakí, and
a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, and licorice herbs are taken
internally.
Burnt kulattha (horse gram), powdered conch shell
(¤hank bhasma), and herbs from the sarvagandha
group (aromatic herbs) are applied as a plaster. The
child’s body is fumigated morning and evening with
barley, yava-phala (barley). A necklace is made for
the child from varuna, neem, or nirguòæí.
The planetary ruler of this disease is Revati, who
is meditated on in a cow barn by the practitioner.
White flowers, milk, and boiled rice should be offered.
The nurse and child are both bathed in the junction
of rivers. A mantra is recited:
“May the goddess Revati, of dark complexion,
who is clad in brightly colored clothes, with garlands
of multicolored flowers, and is anointed with various
aromas and with oscillating earrings, be pleased with
thee. May the goddess Revati, who is tall, drooping
and terrible looking, and who is the mother of many
sons be always propitious to thee.”
Putaná-Pratißhedha:
The child is washed with a decoction of the barks
of varuna, páribhadraka, and ásphotá Medicated oil
made with a decoction of vachá, bráhmí, and kuähthá
is used to anoint the child’s body.
Ghee is cooked with kuähthá, khadira,
sandalwood, licorice, ¤hatávarí, and a¤hwagandhá.
Cedar, vachá, kuähthá, hi´g, and aromatic herbs are
used to fumigate the child’s body. A bracelet made of
wild licorice other aromatic herbs is worn by the child.
The ruler of this planetary disease, Putaná, is
meditated on in a lonely room. Offerings include
boiled rice and sesame butter. They are placed on a
saucer and covered. The child is bathed with the water
used with the offerings.
The mantra recited is,
“May the slovenly shag-haired goddess, Putaná,
who is dressed in dirty clothes and who loves to haunt
lonely places, preserve this child. May the fierce-
looking frightful goddess, who is as black as a dark
rain cloud, who loves to haunt lonely and dilapidated
human dwellings, and whose body gives off filthy
odors, protect the child from all evils.”
Andha-putaná-Pratißhedha:
A decoction of bitter trees (i.e., neem or
chiráyatá) is used to sprinkle on the child’s body.
Wine, rice vinegar, ku¤há, and haritála should be used
with medicated oil. Medicated ghee is made from a
decoction of pippalí, a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, vidárí
kand, licorice, and raw honey (added after cooking).
A plaster of aromatic herbs is applied to the child’s
body. The eyes are soothed with cold water.
Fumigation is conducted with aromatic herbs. The
child wears a necklace of ¤himbi, anatámúl, mango,
neem, and other aromatic herbs.
The practitioner makes an offering of food at the
cross roads or inside the house. The child and nurse
are bathed with a decoction of aromatic herbs. The
following mantra used chanted:
“May the dreadful, brown-colored, bald-headed
goddess Andha-putaná, wearing red-colored clothes,
be pleased to save this child.”

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
522
£hita-putaná-Pratißhedha:
A decoction of kapittha, bilwa, and bhallátaka are
used to sprinkle on the child’s body. Musta, cedar,
kuähthá, and aromatic herbs are used as a medicated
oil. Medicated ghee is made with three parts of a
decoction of the herbs rohini, khadira, palásá, arjuna
bark, and one part milk. Neem, licorice bilwa, and
mango are used for fumigating the child. Gunja (wild
licorice), tulsí, sandalwood, and other aromatic herbs
are worn as a bracelet by the child.
The ruler Shitaputaná, is meditated on, and
offered rice and mudga (múngdal) (cooked together).
Wine is also offered. The child is bathed near a river,
pond, or pool. The mantra recited is,
“May the goddess £hita-putaná, who is fond of
rice and múng (mudga), who delights in drinking
wine, and who resides by the side of rivers, preserve
thee.”
Mukha-mandiká-Pratißhedha:
A decoction of kapittha, bilwa, vaå¤ha lochana,
jayanti, erand, and pátalá are used to sprinkle on the
child. Oil and ghee (in equal parts) is cooked with
the juice of bh^i´garáj, a¤hwagandhá, and ¤hatávarí
and anointed on the child’s body. Medicated ghee is
made with da¤hmúl and milk.
Fumigation with vachá, kuähthá, and other
aromatic herbs and mixed with ghee is ingested by
the child. A bracelet of sandalwood, tulsí, rúdrakßha,
or anantmúl is also worn. The ruler is offered food in
a cow barn. The child is bathed with water that the
mantra was recited over. The mantra is,
“May the beautiful and blessed goddess
Mukhamandiká, who wears ornaments, who can
assume different forms at will and who resides in
cow barns, preserve thee.”
Naigameßha-Pratißhedha:
A decoction of bilwa, agnimantha (clerodendron
p. or premna integrifolia), sarvira (sarsaparilla), and
whey are sprinkled on the child’s body. A medicated
oil is made with príya´gu, anantamúl, and ¤hata-
pußhpa (fennel) with yogurt whey and anointed on
the child. Medicated ghee is made with madhura
herbs, da¤hmúl decoction, and milk.
The child wears the same bracelet advised for
Skandápasmára. White mustard seed, vachá, hi´g,
kuähthá, parched rice, bhallátaka, and ajamodá are
used for fumigating the child’s body. Huskies sesame
seeds, garlands of flowers, and various foods are
offered to Naigameßha, the preserver of the child, at
the base of a banyan tree on the sixth day of the
fortnight. The child is bathed there also.
The mantra recited is,
“May the far-famed god, Naigameßha, the
preserver of children, who has a goat’s face with
moving brow and rolling eyes and who can assume
different forms at will, preserve the child.”
Male Reproductive System (Punster)
Defective Semen
Cause: Excess sex or sex at the wrong times,
masturbation, exercise, unsuitable foods, eating an
excess of rough, bitter, astringent, salty, sour and hot
foods, old age, anxiety, grief, suspicion, fear, anger,
exorcism, emaciation from disease, suppression of
natural urges, and wounds can lead to the
derangement of doßhas and tissues. This can reach
the semen-carrying channels, causing semen defects.
Semen is considered normal when it is oily,
viscous, non-slimy, sweet, non-burning, and white.
Symptoms: Defective semen is frothy, thin, rough,
discolored, slimy, malodorous, combined with other
tissues and premature.
Váyu: Air afflicts the semen causing frothy, thin and
rough, semen that is difficult to ejaculate (impotence).
Pitta: Fire affecting the semen is blue or yellowish,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 523
very hot, malodorous, and burns when ejaculated.
Kapha: Water obstructs the passage of semen making
it slimy.
Excessive Coitus, Injury, Wound: Bloody semen
develops.
Suppression of Urges: This causes Váyu to obstruct
the passage of semen, making it difficult to ejaculate,
feel knotted, or ejaculate prematurely.
Therapies: Herbs with the properties of aphrodisiacs
are used, such as ¤hilájit, ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá,
kapikachhú, and vidárí-kand. For bleeding, red
raspberry, ¤hatávarí, musta, mañjißhþhá, gotu kola,
aloe vera gel, and bh^i´garáj are used. Pitta-reducing
foods, drinks and lifestyle are advised.
Váyu: Herbs include ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá,
kapikachhú, vidárí-kand, sesame seeds, and almonds.
Non-oily enemas are also used.
Pitta: £hatávarí and balá are used.
Kapha: Pippalí, arjuna, and triphalá are suggested.
Foods: Ghee, milk, barley, rice, and wheat are advised.
Impotency (Víryalpata)
Causes: Loss or deficiency of semen and penile
strength and senility.
Defective Seed: This results from ingesting cold,
rough, mixed, incompatible, uncooked or insufficient
food, fasting, grief, anxiety, fear, terror, and sexual
intercourse. Other causes include exorcism, suspicion,
deficient plasma, doßha excesses, exertion, faulty
application of pañcha karma, and impaired semen.
These conditions are associated with pale complexion,
weakness, low vitality, erection difficulty, heart
problems, anemia, bronchial asthma, jaundice,
exhaustion, vomiting, diarrhea, colic, fever, and
cough.
Penile Weakness: This results from ingesting excess
sour, salty, heavy, incompatible and unsuitable foods,
drinking excess water, or overeating pastries. Other
causes are irregular meals, meats, excess yogurt or
milk, weakness from illness, coitus with a female
child, not in vagina, with lust, during menses, or
female tract malodor. Further causes include a defective
tract, excessive discharge, chronic illness in women,
with animals, not washing the penis, and injured
genitals.
Senility: Old age often causes diminished semen
related to a deficiency of the seven tissues, not using
aphrodisiacs, gradual loss of strength, energy, motor
and sensory organs; poor nutrition, physical exertion,
and mental exhaustion. This results in depleted tissues,
debilitation, poor complexion, and poor resistance to
disease.
Deficiency: From excess mental work, grief, fear,
anxiety, envy, curiosity, intoxication, agitation,
habitual rough and emaciating diet and herbs, fasting,
or insufficient amounts of plasma-foods by weak
persons. The diminished rasa causes deficiency in
other tissues (dhátus). This results in low resistance
to disease and can be life-threatening.
Therapies: General
Excess Sex, Doßha Imbalance: Enemas, ghee, semen-
promoting herbs, such as ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá,
balá, and kapikachhú are suggested.
Exorcism: Spiritual measures are used.
Impotence: Therapies should be administered in this
order: unction, fomentation, and oil purgative (e.g.,
castor oil). Next, a proper meal should be eaten. Later
non-oil enemas and oil enemas are used. Non-oil
enemas include the herbs, musta, patha, guæúchí,
balá, punarnavá, mañjißhþhá, p^i¤hinderòí, and
kaòókárí. The best oil enema to use is ¤hi goal oil.
The ingredients of ¤hi goal oil are black pepper, hi´gu,
saffron, and viola (cotton plant seed) herbs with
Spanish jasmine oil. A sustained enema containing
mastoid herbs is also suggested. Lastly, semen-
promoting herbs such as ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá,
balá, and kapikachhú are taken. The oil enema
promotes strength. Eating proper foods gives strength
and energy. In the same way, oil enemas restore
strength and energy to the local area and to the whole
body through colon absorption.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
524
Loss of penile strength: Anointing the genitals with
oil, sprinkling or blood-letting is used. Persons take
sesame oil, ghee, castor oil purgatives and enemas,
then non-oil enemas. Lastly, se-men-promoting herbs,
such as ¤hatávarí, a¤hwa-gandhá, balá, kapikachhú,
and ámalakí are ingested.
Senility & Semen Deficiency: Therapies include
unction and fomentation, oil purgatives and enemas.
This is followed with ghee and semen promoting
herbs, such as ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, balá,
kapikachhú, guggul, ¤hilájit, and sesame or castor
oil enemas.
Váyu: Deficient semen. Therapies include ghee,
sesame seeds, almonds, cooked garlic and onions;
semen-promoting herbs, such as ¤hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá, balá, kapikachhú, ámalakí, guggul,
and ¤hilájit.
Pitta: Burning semen. Herbs include aloe vera gel,
¤hatávarí, ámalakí, milk, sugar, and ghee.
Kapha: Loss of interest in sex, obesity, excess mucus,
desiring sugar as a substitute for sex. Herbs include
pippalí, garlic, cloves, t^ikatu, guggul, and ¤hilájit.
Enlarged Prostate (Vátáßhóhílá)
(see also Chapter 18)
Causes: This results from aging, excessive sexual
intercourse, and suppression of ejaculation.
Symptoms and Therapies:
General: Gokßhura, a¤hwagandhá, and ¤hilájit are
advised.
Váyu: Symptoms include low back pain, low energy,
and constipation. Therapies include Váyu-reducing
foods, cooked garlic and onions, balá, kapikachhú,
guggul, gokßhura, and a¤hwagandhá.
Pitta: Symptoms include infection, swelling, fever,
and dark yellow or red urine. Therapies include Pitta-
reducing foods, gokßhura, punarnavá, a¤hwagandhá,
lemon grass, and chyavan prá¤h.
Kapha: This results from water retention and excess
phlegm. Kapha-reducing foods, ginger, cinnamon,
¤hilájit, and guggul are advised.
Venereal Diseases (Upadam¤ha)
Genital Herpes, Syphilis , Gonorrhea
Causes: External injury, lack of cleanliness, excessive
sexual intercourse, or contact with a diseased vagina.
Generally this is a Pitta-excess disease, involving heat
in the liver. Pitta moves through the liver channels to
the urogenital region. Impure blood and excess bile
may clog the area, causing an accumulation of stress,
anger, and anxiety.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Dry skin, constipation, small, blackish painful
and hard pimples; low energy, and insomnia.
Pitta: Fever, thirst, red or black, swollen or painful
pimples that exude yellowish fluid; burning sensation,
pimples that discharge blood, and irritability.
Kapha: Pimples that exude white fluid, swelling,
itching, slight redness and pain, phlegm accumulates
in the body.
Tridoßha: Muscular tissue sprouts (resembling a
rooster’s crown), developing inside the foreskin, at
the junction of the glands or nearby; accompanied
with pain and exudation. This is difficult to heal.
Therapies:
General: Sarsaparilla, gotu kola.
Váyu: Váyu-reducing foods, milk, ghee, aloe vera gel,
turmeric, barberry, sandalwood, gotu kola,
a¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, and balá.
Pitta: Pitta-reducing foods, raw vegetables, múngdal,
basmati rice, milk, ghee; avoiding hot spices, alcohol,
sour, salty foods, sugar, and avoiding stress. Herbs to
cleanse the blood and liver include coriander or

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                     Chapter 23: Reproductive System
 525
cilantro, parsley, mañjißhþhá, musta, bhúámalakí,
gokßhura, aloe vera gel, punarnavá, ¤hatávarí,
kaþuká, and sandalwood. Sex should be reduced, and
rest is required. Sandalwood and coconut oil body
abhyañga (massage-like) is important. Purgation is
also useful. Sores are washed with chitrak, turmeric,
and sarsaparilla.
Kapha: Liver-cleansing herbs, such as aloe vera gel,
chitrak, turmeric, with hot spices like ginger, pippalí,
cloves, and t^ikatu.
Females: Aloe gel, myrrh, saffron, safflower, and
other menstrual herbs (see female genital tract
section).
Tridoßha: Therapies for all three doßhas.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
526

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 24: Immune System
 527
Chapter 24
Immune System
HIV/AIDS, Epstein Barr
mmune system disorders are becoming more
prevalent as modern society becomes faster
paced, orients itself more toward high tech-
nology, and departs from nature’s rhythms and nutri-
tional living. Technology itself is not an inherent evil.
Rather, it is the imbalance, the overreliance or the
idea of conquering nature, rather than learning to live
in harmony with it, that tips the scales toward an arti-
ficial or destructive lifestyle.
Áyurveda is aware of an immune system essence
or life-sap. This life-sap is called ojas, and has been
discussed throughout this book. It is this sap that cov-
ers and protects the immune system from harm. Ojas
can be likened to the sap of a tree. When the bark of
a healthy tree is cut, the sap oozes over the cut and
slowly hardens. Eventually the cut is healed and the
bark grows once again. Analogously, when some for-
eign body attacks the immune system, the ojas or
life-sap covers, protects, and eventually repairs the
damage. Healthy immune systems having an ample
supply of ojas can even protect the system, keeping
it healthy at all times.
Many of today’s habits quickly deplete the im-
mune system’s ojas. Excess travel, overworking to
the point of burnout, eating junk food, and excess
sexual intercourse—to cite a few noxious influ-
ences—all overtax the system and deplete the sup-
ply of ojas. Mental stress can also overtax the ner-
vous system, and cause a depletion of ojas. Excess
worry, fear, anger, and impatience can dry or burn up
ojas. Thus, immune system disorders are caused by
both mental and physical lifestyle factors.
In contrast to these ojas-depleting life-styles,
Mother Nature, being all-providing, has provided
various foods, herbs, colors, gems, and mantras that
have ojas-building properties: organic milk and yo-
gurt, ghee, whole cane sugar, maple syrup and raw
honey, almonds and sesame seeds are all natural foods
that are known to build ojas.
The gold ash formula, Survana Vasant Malti is
excellent for all immune disorders—1 pill in the
morning with 1/2 tsp. honey. For extreme immune
weakness (e.g., AIDS) a second pill can be taken in
the evening. In rare cases, some heartburn may occur.
For this, ávipattikar chúròa is used as needed.
Dairy: Milk is drunk after it is boiled and cooled.
Whole sugars and ghee are added to the milk. The
milk is drunk early in the morning or just before bed
(without other foods). Yogurt water (lassi) is drunk
with meals or between meals.
Nuts/Seeds: After a few almonds are soaked
overnight, the skin should be peeled before the nuts
are eaten. Sesame seeds, in the form of tahini (sesame
butter), are easy to digest.
Herbs: A¤hwagandhá and ¤hatávarí are two common
ojas-boosting herbs. Cardamom or cinnamon may
be added to aid digestion of these heavier herbs.
Gems: Diamonds and yellow stones such as citrine
boost ojas in the body.
Colors: These balance physical health by blanching
mental health. Gold strengthens the immune system
and ojas.
Aromatherapy: Aromas like lotus, rose, frankincense,
and sandalwood help to boost ojas while calming the
mind.
Persons should not engage in occupations that are lacking, or going contrary to the three
pursuits; righteousness; wealth, and pleasure...one should be moderate and avoid extremes
Aßhóáñga H^idayam Sú. Ch. 2: ver. 30

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
528
Mantras: The best mantra is the one given by one’s
personal spiritual guru (guide). Since many people
do not have such an opportunity, Áyurveda offers
mantras that heal the mind and body. Aum, Ram, and
Klím increase ojas.
Mental Peace: The health of the mind affects the
health of the body: ¤hiro dhárá (warm oil flow on the
head) relaxes the mind, nerves, and immune system,
providing individuals with a profound state of rest.
In this state, deep-seated stresses and diseases may
be released.
Spiritual Lifestyle: Reading scriptures, listening to
spiritual music, helping others, meditating, eating
properly, and working at a job one loves are examples
of life-styles that heal the mind and body and boost
ojas.
HIV/AIDS
In an ancient Áyurvedic text, Mádhava Nidán,
written around 700 A.D., the author, Mádhavakara
foretells a disease that will come to India. From its
description, we know it as HIV/AIDS. Its cure was
said to be ¤hilájit.
Causes: The main cause is deficient life-sap (ojas),
which causes an extremely weakened immune
system. When one has sufficient ojas, the HIV virus
cannot develop. Ojas is lost or diminished by excess
sex, improper diet, junk food, drugs, excess worry,
thinking, and insomnia.
Symptoms: Váyu and Pitta are primary factors, but
Kapha may present symptoms of congestion and lung
disorders.
Váyu: Weakness, low energy, nerve disorders,
constipation, anxiety, worry, fear, dry skin, vertigo,
palpitations, and nervous system disorders, such as
neuropathy.
Pitta: Blood, skin, and liver problems; nervous system
disorders caused by heating, burning, diarrhea, fever,
anger, impatience, and low energy-burnout. An
inflamed tongue (oral candida/yeast).
Kapha: (complications—not a primary cause of HIV/
AIDS) Congestion, mucus, and lung disorders. A
white-coated tongue (oral candida/yeast).
Therapies:
1) The main herb suggested in Mádhava Nidán is
¤hilájit (tridoßhic—for all doßhas). It boosts the
immune system (ojas) and is antiviral.
2) Váyu/Immune boosting herbs. £hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá, kapikachhú and chyavan prá¤h build
the ojas and balance Váyu.
3) Pitta reducing herbs.
A) Blood purifiers—gotu kola, mañjißhþhá,
turmeric.
B) Liver cleansers—gentle herbs are used if Váyu
is also high (i.e., weak or emaciated). They include
gotu kola, bh^i´garáj, musta ,and sandalwood
(antibacterial/antiseptic). When persons are strong but
still have infections, purpura (or other skin disorders),
then stronger liver herbs, such as bhúámalakí and
kaóuká, may be administrated.
C) Gokßhura may be used to treat burning or
infections of the urinary tract. It is also good for
seminal debility and nerve disorders.
D) Herbal antibiotics like guæúchí and turmeric
can also be used to treat infections.
4) Kapha-reducing herbs. Hot spices are used to treat
congestion.
5) Antiviral herbs. In small doses, or when mixed
with Váyu-reducing herbs, jasmine is a gentle antiviral
herb. £hilájit also has antiviral properties, but is not
used if the uric acid count is high.
A Váyu- or Pitta-reducing diet and lifestyle are
required; spicy, sour, bitter, and astringent tastes are
not recommended. Foods that are wholesome, pure
(sattwic), and ojas-building are used (e.g., sesame
oil and seeds, almonds, chick-peas, boiled milk,
yogurt/water, and ghee). Sesame oil should be applied
externally. Bráhmí and sandalwood oil should be

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                              Chapter 24: Immune System
 529
applied on the head. £hiro dhárá is efficacious in
relaxing the nervous system and boosting the immune
system. Sex is also to be avoided because it drains
the body of ojas.
Ojas-boosting mantras include Aum, £hum, and
£hrím. Yellow stones, moonstone, and pearl all in-
crease ojas.
Thrush:
Coriander or fennel (1/8 tsp.) between meals.
Epstein-Barr Virus/ Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome
Western medicine describes Epstein-Barr Vi-
rus (EBV) (Chronic Fatigue Syndrome) as a ubiqui-
tous herpes virus related to B-lymphocytes and the
nasal and pharynx cells. Áyurveda suggests that this
low-grade infection is caused by a depleted immune
system, as discussed earlier in the introduction to this
chapter. Western medicine suggests that primary EBV
infection occurs in people of all ages. Fifty percent
of children under the age of five may possibly carry
EBV, but it is almost always in a dormant stage.
In the past decade or so a pattern of EBV has been
seen in adults, ages 20 - 40. The symptoms include
fatigue, low-grade fever, mild thinking
dysfunction, and lymphadenopathy (lymph node in-
flammation that can lead to diseases related to the
lymphoid system).
Although EBV is sometimes called Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome, the symptoms are not always the
same.
Therapies: Generally, this is viewed as a Pitta excess,
often caused by burnout and overwork. Áyurveda
recommends a two-fold therapeutic approach.
1) Immune-boosting herbs that do not aggravate
Pitta (e.g., ¤hatávarí, ¤hilájit).
2) Pitta-reducing herbs to reduce infection and
virus, and cleanse the blood, liver, gall bladder, spleen,
and lymphoid system (e.g., mañjißhóhá, turmeric,
bhúámalakí, kaóuká, yellow dock, and bh^i´garáj).
A Pitta-reducing diet and lifestyle are also
essential for healing and rejuvenation.
Fibromyalgia
This is another condition that has become
prevalent in more recent years. Therapies include yoga
postures, ¤hiro dhárá, abhyañga, mahánáráyan oil
for pain, and survana vasant malti (gold) pills as an
immune booster. Other herbs include ¤hatávarí and
a¤hwagandhá. This condition takes a long time to
heal.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
530

531
Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                            Chapter 25: Metabolic System
Being mindful of the nature of people,
deal with them in a way that best pleases them.
Become well versed in the art of adoring others.
Aßhóáñga H^idayam Sú. Ch. 2: ver. 26-28
Chapter 25
Metabolic System
Edema, Tonsillitis, Gingivitis, Dental Abscess,
Goiter, Hypo/Hyperthyroid, Gout, Thirst
Edema (£hopha or £hotha)
Non-Inflammatory
auses: General causes occur from increased
doßhas. All three doßhas are involved in
the development of all three types of edema
(Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha), yet the predominating
doßha determines what doßha should be balanced.
Specific causes result from debilitating diseases, fast-
ing, sudden overeating, or unhealthy foods. Other
causes include eating foods that are hard to digest,
fatty, heavy, hot, sharp, cold, salty, or from excessive
use of diuretics or elimination therapies, leafy veg-
etables that are penetrating or too hot. Drinking wa-
ter to excess, oversleeping, lack of sleep, eating mud,
excess yogurt, dry meats, and uncooked foods also
cause edema. Further causes include over-exertion,
long distance walking, excessive travel, and eating
mutually contradictory foods (e.g., fish and milk).
It may also develop from difficult breathing, cough,
diarrhea, hemorrhoids, enlarged abdomen, menor-
rhagia, and fever. Other causes include simultaneous
vomiting and diarrhea resulting from indigestion,
undigested food remaining in the stomach, vomit-
ing, pregnancy, herpes, and anemia. This can also be
caused by other diseases improperly tended to, lack
of exercise, irregular delivery, abortion, or miscar-
riage.
External causes result only when the superficial
skin layer is afflicted by injury.
Development: Edema is either organic or traumatic
and may pervade the body or remain localized. It may
be hard and wide, raised, or knotted/glandular.
These conditions will cause Pitta, blood, and Kapha
to enter the outer channels and obstruct the circula-
tion channels (Vyán Váyu). This causes localized
swelling in the skin and muscles. There are 9 types
of edema: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/
Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, Tridoßha, external (two causes:
trauma/injury, and poison).
When the doßhas are in the chest, they pro-
duce upper body swelling. When they are found in
the urinary bladder, the lower body swells; in the
middle of the body, the middle swells. Doßhas found
throughout the body cause the whole body to swell.
When it occurs in the throat or palate, edema remains
localized.
Premonitory Signs:
Fevers, burning sensations, dilated veins at the site
of edema, heaviness.
Symptoms:
General: Heaviness, appearing and disappearing (i.e.,
unstable or variable); swelling, rising temperature,
thinning vessels, hair standing on end, discoloration
of skin on the extremities.
Váyu: Swelling moves from place to place, is dry
with rough hair; reddish or black; thin, constricting,
pulsating, tingling, pricking, puncturing or cutting
pains, or a lack of sensation. Swelling quickly rises
and subsides and spreads to other parts. Can subside
by massage with fatty and hot materials. It will be
mild at night and severe during the day. May also be
mildly burning or tingling. There may be numbness.
When the skin is pressed the swelling disappears, but
when the finger releases from the skin, the swelling

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
532
rises again.
Pitta: Black, pink, yellow, or reddish white swelling
with copper-red hair, malodorous, quick swelling, and
subsiding. First appears in the middle of the body
with thirst, burning fever, perspiration, sweating,
thirst, giddiness, toxicity, and dizziness. Persons
wanting cold things have painful diarrhea.
Kapha: Itchy swelling, yellowish-white hair and skin,
hard, cold, oily, smooth, firm, and thick. It is
associated with excessive sleep, vomiting, and weak
digestion. Pressing and releasing fingers from the
swelling leaves an indentation (i.e., the skin does not
rise). This is known as “pitting edema.” Edema is
slow to appear and heal and swells more at night.
When pricked, it exudes slimy fluid. Other symptoms
include heavy limbs, localization of the edema. Touch
and warmth are pleasing to the person.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas appear
simultaneously.
Trauma: Results from cutting, splitting, hitting,
banging, being in a cold breeze or sea breeze. It
spreads from place to place, is hot to touch, blood-
red color. Other Pitta symptoms pertain.
Poisons: Causes include bites, claws, contaminated
things, feces, urine, semen, poisonous trees, wind,
gas, and smoke. It is soft, moveable, drooping, quickly
rising, burning, and painful.
Recently occurring edema without secondary
complications can be healed.
Therapies:
If undigested food toxins (áma) have caused the
edema, then fasting and laxatives are first suggested.
When food is taken, it should only be fresh and whole-
some. It is important to avoid dried vegetables, heavy
and burning foods and drinks, naps, sexual inter-
course, sweets, alcohol, and fried foods. Take cane
sugar and fresh ginger (equal quantities—totaling 125
mg.) on the first day. Increase the dose by 125 mg.
daily for 10 days. Continue to take this amount for 1
month. When this recipe is digested, take boiled milk,
and when it can be easily digested take vegetable and
ghee soup. Thick barley (powder) gruel with
¤hatávarí, ámalakí, vidárí kand, arjuna, coriander,
chitrak, and bilwa are fried in ghee (1 part herbs to 2
parts ghee) and eaten.
Váyu: Da¤hmúl, punarnavá, harítakí, pippalí with
boiled milk.
External therapies: This includes 2 or 3 drops of
da¤hmúl and mahánáráyan oils ingested and/or
applied externally to the edema. The oils may also be
cooked with cardamom, musta, pippalí, and coriander.
They may also be applied as a paste (lepa) and
massaged into the skin. Afterwards, a warm bath with
vásák, musta, and sandalwood is useful.
Burning and pain- da¤hmúl oil and paste.
Pimples and burning- licorice, musta, sandalwood,
viæa´ga, neem, chitrak, triphalá, and da¤hmúl as oil
and paste.
Váyu and constipation: Nirúha enema and castor oil,
ghee, and cane sugar before meals. If circulatory
blocks, poor digestion, or anorexia exist, fermented
barley drinks are essential.
Váyu/Pitta: Triphalá, musta, sandalwood, arjuna,
licorice, ginger, black pepper, turmeric, guæúchí, and
castor oil.
Pitta and diarrhea: Drink 1/2 cup yogurt with 1/2
cup water; mixed with ginger, chitrak, black pepper,
and pippalí with raw honey.
Pitta external therapies: Sandalwood, guæúchí and
gokßhura are made into a paste and applied to the
body. The same herbs may be cooked with oil and
used for abhyañga (massage-like). Afterwards, a bath
in warm water with sandalwood and musta is
recommended.
Kapha: Triphalá, rhubarb, black pepper, pippalí,
ginger, t^ikatu, punarnavá, and da¤hmúl are ingested.
Kapha external therapies: Pippalí paste or sand
massages are useful. Water mixed with ginger may
be poured on the body (or bathed in). Afterwards,
one applies sandalwood oil to the body.
     When edema is located in the lower part of the

533
Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                            Chapter 25: Metabolic System
body, purgation is advised. If the edema is found in
the upper part of the body, emetics are used.
     Should edema be caused by improper oleation
therapy, then dry herbs and foods are used to coun-
terbalance this effect. For symptoms of fainting,
dislilking everything, burning, and thirst, boild mik
is given.
Meningitis
This results from external factors. A meningococ-
cal virus infects the brain and membranous sheath of
the spinal cord. This disease was not present during
ancient Vedic times. It is difficult to heal. It is called
“brain edema” and is caused by Váyu and Kapha.
All three doßhas become deranged. This is a very
serious condition.
Therapies: The best herbs include jaóámáò¤hí, gotu
kola, vachá, chitrak, t^ikatu, small cardamom, pippalí,
and punarnavá. They are ingested, used as
aromatherapy, and nasal oils, to evacuate the head
from the excess doßhas. Also useful are ¤hiro dhárá
and ¤hiro basti.
Quinsy or Throat Edema  (a Váyu/Kapha dis-
order); may develop into meningitis.
     Therapies: Herbs to heal this condition include
t^ikatu, da¤hmúl, jaóámáò¤hí, and guggul.
Tonsillitis (Bidáliká)
When edema occurs in the throat it is called
bidáliká or tonsillitis. The swelling causes redness
and burning, impairs the breathing, and causes great
pain. This is a Pitta/Kapha condition. If the swelling
surrounds the entire neck, it is very serious.
     Therapies: The same therapies as quinsy are used.
Other herbs include kañchanar, triphalá, and t^ikatu.
Palatal abscesses (Tálu vidradhi)
This is an abscess with burning, redness, and  oozing
in the throat. It is caused by all three therapy, then
dry herbs and foods are used to doßhas.
     Therapies: Herbs include sitopaladi, kañchanar
fainting, disliking everything, burning, and thirst,
guggul, and also general treatment of Vidradhi is
boiled milk is given.followed (see Chapter 16 on ab-
scess and sinus).
Acute superficial glossitis (Upajihviká)
This condition is located in the back of the tongue
(Kapha/Váyu), whereas sublingual abscesses or
adhijiviká (caused by Kapha) are found on the bottom
of the tongue.
Therapies: Herbs used include t^ikatu, guggul,
licorice, kút, and vachá.
Gingivitis (Puakußha)
This is caused by excess blood and Pitta. The con-
dition is an inflammation of the gum muscles.
Therapies: Herbs used include sesame oil, elá (car-
damom), licorice, and cane sugar.
Dental abscesses (Danta-Vidradhi)
This is an inflammation in the muscles around the
teeth. It is caused by excess Kapha and blood in that
area.
     Therapies: Herbs include turmeric, small carda-
mom, chestnuts, kayaphal. The best herb is
badradanti.
Goiter (Galaganda)
This is a single swelling (cyst) in the throat. When
a chain of swellings around the lower neck (i.e., neck-
lace-shaped) develops it is called cervical adenitis or

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
534
gandamálá. Both diseases can be healed. However,
if they are associated with chronic rhinitis (pínasa),
chest pain (párßhva ¤húla), bronchitis, vomiting, and
fever, then they are incurable.
     Therapies: Herbs include kañchanar, guggul,
sitopaladi, t^ikatu, and vachá (calamus). Other
therapies include emesis and purgation to eliminate
the doßhas from the body; therapeutic smoke
inhalation, and fasting. If the swelling is in the mouth,
then the herbs are made into a paste and rubbed onto
the swelling from inside the mouth.
Hyperthyroidism
(Graves’ Disease falls under this category.)
Symptoms of hyperthyroidism include enlarged
thyroid, nervousness, hypersensitivity to heat,
palpitations, fatigue, increased appetite, weightloss,
tachycardia, insomnia, weakness, diarrhea or frequent
stools; and difficult breathing. It is caused by all three
doßhas, but mainly Pitta.
Therapies: Kañchanar guggul is the main herb
used. Other herbs include triphalá and t^ikatu.
Endemic Goiter: Symptoms include an enlarged
thyroid gland with almost no function. It begins subtly.
Persons can develop dull facial expression,
hoarseness, slow speech, puffiness, intolerance to
cold, drooping eyelids, sparse, coarse, and dry hair.
Other indications are dry, scaly skin, weight gain, poor
memory, psychosis, constipation, carpal tunnel
syndrome in wrists and ankles. Further symptoms
include slow reflexes, menorrhagia, mild anemia,
difficult breathing, umbilical hernia, slow bone
growth.
This is a Váyu disorder, usually found in iodine-
deficient areas as endemic goiter. It is often found in
persons living in land-locked, mountain areas, where
there is no iodine from the sea salt and fish.  Iodised
salt is used as preventive therapy. Hot spices, such as
t^ikatu, pippalí, and ginger, are useful.
Hypothyroid
     Herbs include t^ikatu, shilájit, and iron and min-
eral ashes (abhrak and múkta bhasmas)
Thyroid Therapies
For all thyroid conditions: Irish moss (insufficient
hormones), t^ikatu, yogaraj guggul (Váyu), kaißhore
guggul (Pitta) or pure guggul (Kapha). Mustard oil
can be applied externally on the throat.
Granthi (hard, small, benign tumors)
These tumors are caused by excesses of any of
the doßhas. If they occur in the muscle tissues, they
are large swellings. If they occur in the fat (medas),
they are painless, oily, and movable. If surrounded
by bleed vessels, they pulsate.
Therapies: Surgery is recommended. If very
young or very old persons have large and rough
tumors in the pelvic area, abdomen throat, or in any
vital organ, surgery is not advised. Cancer and
(large) tumors are treated like hard (small) tumors
(see Chapter 22).
Alají
This is a painful eruption that is copper-colored
and emits a discharge from the mouth.
Therapies: Include ámalakí, ¤hatávarí, and
turmeric.
Edema between the skin and nails
(without ulceration)
This form of edema is caused by excess muscle
tissue (máåsa) and blood. It is called whitlow or
charmanak-hántara ¤hotha.
     Therapies: Herbs used include guggul, triphalá,
viæa´ga, ginger, and black pepper.

535
Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                            Chapter 25: Metabolic System
Cysts in the armpit after fever
These are painless, difficult to touch and are ex-
pansive (called vidáriká). It is caused by vitiated Váyu
and Kapha.
Therapies: Include da¤hmúl, guggul, and t^ikatu.
Therapies for Alají, charmanak-hántara, and
vidáriká suggest blood-letting through surgical mea-
sures.
Skin abscesses (reddish pus eruptions-vißhpatake)
These appear all over the body, along with fever
and thirst. This is a Kapha/Pitta derangement.
Therapies: Herbs include punarnavá, neem, and
mañjißhþhá.
Gout (Váta-ßhonita or Váta-rakta)
Causes: Eating foods that cause burning during
digestion, incompatible foods, excess sleep, not
sleeping, improper sexual intercourse, trauma, not
undergoing purificatory therapies, and cold breezes,
all weaken Váyu and blood. Aggravated Váyu,
prevented from moving in its normal path, moves in
the wrong directions owing to the excessed blood.
Váyu first vitiates the blood, then causes Váyu
excessed blood diseases. This generally occurs in
weak-constitution people who do not walk much. It
first affects legs from prolonged sitting. Eight types
of gout exist: Váyu, Blood, Pitta, Kapha, Váyu/Pitta,
Váyu/ Kapha, Pitta/Kapha, and Tridoßha.
Premonitory Signs: Skin is very smooth, hard to the
touch, discolored, burning, itching, debilitated, loose-
ness of the body, throbbing, pricking, intermittent,
and splitting joint pain. There is heaviness and loss
of sensation. Symptoms may subside and reappear
intermittently.
Symptoms: Beginning in the feet (sometimes in the
hands), symptoms slowly and steadily spread
throughout the body. Gout occurs in the skin and
muscles, with symptoms of itching, various pains,
and colors, stretching, severe burning, and heat. Later,
swelling, hardness, and ulcers may occur. If not tended
to, Váyu quickly moves into the joints, bones, and
marrow, causing sharp pain and curvatures of the
bones and joints. Eventually, it can make persons lame
in one or both legs.
Váyu: Throbbing and pricking pain, dry swelling,
black or blue color, increasing during Váyu times and
decreasing at other times. Constriction of arteries and
tendons in the finger or toe joints can occur along
with sharp body pain, severe joint pain, aversion to
cold, stiffness, tremors, and loss of feeling.
Blood: Swelling with great pain, pricking, coppery
color, tingling sensation, itching, and oozing. It does
not subside with either oily or dry things such as nuts
and granola respectively.
Pitta: Burning, delusion, perspiration, fainting,
toxicity, thirst, sensitivity to touch, pain, redness,
swelling, ulceration, and severe heat.
Kapha: Inactivity, heaviness, loss of feeling, oily and
cold skin, mild itching, and pain.
Dual/Tridoßha: Symptoms of the related doßhas
appear simultaneously.
Healing Outlook: Gout recently caused by one doßha
can be healed. When caused by two doßhas, it is
containable. Gout caused by tridoßha, that is oozing,
immovable or leading to malignant nodules, cannot
be healed.
Ávarana Váyu: When Váyu quickly spreads into the
channels of the blood in the joints of the extremities,
it cannot function normally. Váyu and blood produce
different kinds of pain and become life threatening.
Práòa Váyu: Dryness occurs as a result of a lack of
fat, over-exercise, fasting, eating, trauma, long-
distance walking, forcing the elimination of or
suppression of natural urges. It causes many diseases
or symptoms including sensory organ disorders, nasal
mucus, facial palsy, thirst, cough, and labored
breathing.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
536
Udána Váyu: Excesses occur by suppressing
sneezing, belching, vomiting, and not sleeping;
carrying heavy loads on the head, overindulging in
emotions (e.g., crying, laughing). This results in
diseases of the neck and head, including throat
obstructions, mental disorders, vomiting, loss of taste
and appetite, nasal mucus, and enlarged neck glands.
Vyána Váyu: Vyána becomes aggravated from
excesses of walking, sexual intercourse, worry, or
exercise. Other Váyu aggravations include improper
exercise, eating incompatible and dry foods.
Emotional causes include fear, joy, and sorrow. This
causes loss of virility, enthusiasm, strength, swelling,
mental disorders, fever, and paralysis of the entire
body. Other developments include intermittent pain,
hair standing on end, loss of sensation, skin diseases,
herpes, and other systemic diseases.
Samána Váyu: It becomes excessed by eating
improper or uncooked foods; foods causing
indigestion; cold, too much sleep or too little sleep.
This causes abdominal pains or tumors, duodenal
diseases, and other intestinal or alimentary tract
diseases.
(Air with toxins) causes stupor, inactivity, heavi-
ness, oily body, poor digestion, loss of taste or appe-
tite, lassitude, cold, swelling, and a desire for pun-
gent, dry foods.
Apána Váyu: This is vitiated by eating dry, heavy
foods, suppressing or forcing the elimination of urges,
excess travel, sitting, and walking. This causes
diseases of the colon, urinary or semen disorders,
hemorrhoids, rectal prolapse.
Tissues (Dhátus) Obstructing Váyu:
Blood (Rakta) Obstructions: Symptoms include
burning, severe skin and muscle pain, red swelling,
and skin patches.
Muscle (Máåsa) Obstructions: Hard swellings,
oozing, hair standing on end, feeling as though ants
are crawling on the body.
Fat (Medas) Obstructions: Soft, oily, moveable body
swellings. Healing is difficult.
Bone (Asthi) Obstructions: The body is over-heated,
severe pricking pain, weakness. It is relieved by
massage.
Marrow/Nerves (Majjá): The body parts bend, excess
yawning, wanting to wrap the body with clothes, pain
(relieved by massage).
Reproductive (£hukra) Obstructions: Semen is
ejaculated with great force or not at all, or it may not
result in fertility.
Food Obstructions: Abdominal pain shortly after
eating that disappears after digestion.
Urine Obstructions: Non-elimination with urinary
bladder distention.
Feces Obstructions: Constipation causes sharp colon
and rectum pains. Ingested oil or ghee is quickly
digested causing gas and dry feces.
All Seven Tissue Obstructions: When Váyu is
obstructed by all the tissues, there is pain in the pelvis,
groin, and back. Váyu moving in the wrong direction,
causes poor health and severe heart pain.
Pitta Obstructing Práòa Váyu: Occurs during
digestion and causes dizziness, fainting, vomiting,
burning, thirst, pain, diarrhea, momentary blindness,
burning in the alimentary tract from pungent, hot,
sour, and salty foods, and a desire for cold things.
Pitta Obstructing Udána Váyu: Internal burning, loss
of strength.
Pitta Obstructing Vyána Váyu: Burning everywhere,
exhaustion, hindered movement with fatigue and pain.
Pitta Obstructing Samána Váyu: This causes profuse
perspiration, restlessness, thirst, burning. Pitta
Obstructing Vyána Váyu: Yellowish feces and urine,
excess menstrual bleeding or heat discomfort from
increased temperature in the female and male genitalia
and the rectum.
Kapha Obstructing Váyu: Debility, stupor, loss of
appetite and taste, vomiting, expectoration of mucus
or saliva, excess sneezing and belching, labored
breathing, heaviness, cold, pain. It can be comforted
by pungent, hot, sour, and salty things; fasting,
exercise, dry or hot foods.
Kapha Obstructing Udána Váyu: Heaviness, loss of
taste or appetite, difficulty speaking, weakness, and
a pallid complexion can develop.

537
Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                            Chapter 25: Metabolic System
Kapha Obstructing Vyána Váyu: Sharp throat, joint
and bone pain, heaviness, impaired walking.
Kapha Obstructing Samána Váyu: Physical coldness,
lack of sweating, poor digestion.
Kapha Obstructing Apána Váyu: Kapha in the urine
and feces.
The five Váyus become mutually obstructed or in
various combinations.
Práòa Obstructing Udána: Labored breathing,
mucus, sharp head pain, heart pain, dry mouth.
Práòa Obstructing Udána: Loss of complexion,
enthusiasm, and strength.
The imbalances of práòa, Váyu, Pitta, and Kapha
may occur alone or together, creating an almost
infinite number of diseases. Therefore, one needs to
note:
1) onset of the symptoms,
2) location of symptoms, and
3) increases or decreases of bodily functions to
determine causality.
Práòa Váyu is the main source of life, although
Udána Váyu is the main source of strength. When
one of these symptoms is not clearly detectable or
has lasted for over a year, they are difficult to heal.
Therapies should begin as soon as possible to avoid
secondary complications, such as abscesses, enlarged
spleen, heart disease, abdominal tumors, or poor
digestion.
Therapies:
General: Blood-letting is useful for burning, piercing
pain and redness, numbness, itching, prickly
sensation. If the disorder moves around, it is
eliminated by venesection or scarifying. Váyu doßhas
should not undergo blood-letting.
First, persons take oil (internally and externally),
and a rough or mild purgative. Enemas are used
frequently as well. Sprinkling, pastes, abhyañga
(massage-like), poultice, and Pitta-reducing foods are
advised.
Váyu: Sesame oil, abhyañga, milk enemas with ghee,
warm poultices, Váyu-reducing lifestyle and foods,
ghee, ¤hatávarí, balá, kapikachhú,sugar cane,
punarnavá, guæúchí, da¤hmúl, and boiled milk are
used. Purgatives include triphalá and castor oil.
Gokähura and pippalí are also useful. (Deep-seated
diseases with affected blood are treated as Váyu
excesses.)
Váyu With Pain: Boiled milk with da¤hmúl or
sprinkling warm ghee removes pain. Pastes made of
green lentils, rice, boiled milk, ghee, and sesame oil
are applied to the body. Alternatively, sesame and
mustard are applied as a poultice.
Convulsion, Stiffness, Pain: Sprinkled with ghee or
grape juice and cane sugar.
Pitta and Blood: Purgatives, ghee, boiled milk,
sprinkling, enema; cooling herbs—ámalakí, guæúchí,
gokähura, ¤hatávarí, pittapapra. Pitta-reducing foods
and lifestyle are recommended. Purgatives include
triphalá and castor oil.
Burning: Sandalwood and floral essential oils mixed
in water and sponged on body parts; wearing a
moonstone, pearl, red coral, or a sandalwood
necklace.
Burning and Pain: Barley flour and licorice or milk
and ghee.
Burning With Redness and Pain: blood-letting,
followed by an application of paste of dúrbá, aloe
vera gel, and mañjißhþhá.
Bleeding or Pus: Incision, cleansed then healed with
the above Pitta/Blood measures.
Kapha: Mild emesis, mild external oil application,
sprinkling, and warm pastes, Kapha-reducing diet and
habits. Herbs for all these therapies include guggul,
¤hilájit, pippalí, gokähura, guæúchí, ginger, triphalá,
calamus, cardamom, musta, chitrak, viæa´ga, vásák,
with ghee and boiled milk.
Tridoßha: Triphalá, guæúchí, pippalí, ¤hilájit,
gokähura, and punarnavá.
Kaißhore guggul is the best for all types of gout. It
helps to purify the blood of cholesterol and uric acid.
Thirst (Trißhná)
Causes: There are 6 causes of thirst: Váyu, Pitta,
Kapha, Tridoßha, a type resulting from loss of plasma,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
538
and those resulting from other diseases, such as TB,
diabetes, fevers, and wasting. Thirst may develop
from dryness at the root of the tongue, throat, palate,
channels supplying water, or the pancreas.
Symptoms: General experiences include dry mouth,
unquenchable thirst, aversion to food, weak voice,
rough throat, lips and tongue, swollen tongue,
exhaustion, nonsensical conversation, mental
wandering, emaciation, debility, deafness, delusion,
giddiness, or heart disease.
Váyu: Emaciation, helplessness, pain in temples,
dizziness, loss of smell, bad taste in the mouth, teary
eyes, insomnia, physical weakness, thirst that is
increased when drinking cold water.
Pitta: Fainting, bitter taste in the mouth, reddish
eyes, constant dryness in the mouth, burning
sensation, hot fumes.
Kapha: As aggravated Kapha overflows and
obstructs Váyu in the channels providing water,
Kapha dries up. This results in a thorny feeling in the
throat, oversleeping, sweet taste in the mouth, gas,
dull headache, lethargy, vomiting, loss of taste and
appetite, lassitude, and indigestion.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas occur.
Toxins (áma): Caused by Váyu/Pitta. Results from
fasting or starvation.
Heat Exhaustion/Cold: Thirst occurs when one
contracts heat exhaustion from fire or sun, then
suddenly plunges into cold water. This prevents heat
from leaving the body—forcing it into the abdomen—
causing Pitta thirst problems.
Food/Drink: Excess alcohol or wine or eating too
much fatty foods by persons with very strong digestive
fires, produces Pitta-thirst problems. Excess oily,
indigestible, sour, or salty foods causes Kapha thirst.
Plasma: When plasma is reduced, one experiences
dryness, fatigue, emaciation, exhaustion without
exertion, and a distaste for noise.
Therapies: All types of thirst relate to the
predominance of Váyu and Pitta and plasma loss
(dehydration).
Plasma Loss: Cool honey water relieves thirst as
does boiled water with rock candy, barley flour, cane
sugar, and honey. Soothing foods include barley
sweets with honey and cane sugar, basmati rice; for
all foods, add honey and cane sugar, boiled milk, ghee,
avoid sour and salty foods and liquids; green lentils,
and other types of lentils.
Ghee is massaged on the body. Short baths in cold
water are taken, followed by drinking boiled milk
with bitter herbs (e.g., chitrak, kaóuká, neem, aloe
vera) honey, and cane sugar. This milk concoction
may also be sprinkled over the body. Ghee may also
be used as nasya (nasal massage). Paste made with
ámalakí ginger, sandalwood, licorice and ghee may
be applied to the heart, face, and head to alleviate
thirst, fainting, and giddiness. Pastes of these herbs
can also be applied to the head.
One may also gargle with milk, sugar cane, honey,
and water to heal a dry palate. Drinking yogurt/water,
barley with ámalakí is recommended. External thirst-
relieving therapies include wet cloth wraps, gentle
massage, cool baths, and wearing wet clothes.
Wearing moonstones or pearls, visiting or visualizing
beautiful, cool oceans, rivers or streams, imagining
cool breezes, and moon bathing may also relieve
thirst..
Váyu: Soft, light cold, Váyu-reducing herbs (e.g.,
¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, and ámalakí), foods and
drinks, with ghee.
Váyu/Pitta: Soft, light, cold, Váyu- and Pitta-
reducing herbs, foods, and drinks, with ghee, and
rejuvenatives (e.g., ¤hatávarí).
Pitta: Water with sandalwood, guæúchí, cane sugar
and honey, basmati rice.
Kapha: T^ikatu, calamus, bitters, such as chitrak,
kaóuká, neem and aloe vera, astringents, such as
raspberry, and ámalakí (sours) are ingested. If thirst
is related to stiffness, anorexia, indigestion, lassitude,
or vomiting, emesis with yogurt, honey, salt, and hot
water are used.
Triphalá: Boiled in water and allowed to cool be-
fore drinking.
     Astringents, such as red raspberry, turmeric,

539
Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                            Chapter 25: Metabolic System
ámalakí, ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, bráhmí, vásák,
aßhoka, with ghee, cane sugar, honey in boiled milk,
or barley may be taken.
Alcoholism Thirst: Cold baths, then alcohol with
1/2 water, ámalakí, rock salt, aromatics, wine with 1/
2 water, cane sugar and water with gotu kola.
Anorexia Thirst: Thin gruel, ghee, boiled milk.
Excess Intake of Fat: Thin gruel, guggul, ghee,
Although improper use of foods can lead to disease or even death,
drinking alcohol additionally leads to loss of self-worth, life path,
wealth, true pleasure, intelligence, and courage.
Aßhþáñga H^idayam;
Nidánasthána Ch. 6; ver. 11
boiled milk, cane sugar.
Thirst resulting from eating heavy foods: Emesis,
ghee, milk
Fainting complications: Mañjißhþhá, gotu kola,
chitrak, kaóuká.
Thirst after severe disease: Plain water is dan-
gerous. Coriander water with cane sugar and raw
honey is useful.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
540

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                                 Chapter 26: Miscellaneous
 541
Education is not a matter of always seeing new things;
education means seeing the same things in a new light.
Unknown
Chapter 26
Miscellaneous
3 Vital Organs, Dangerous Spiritual Practices, Herbs for Tissues
and Organs, Definitions of Glands, Organs and Doßhas,
When to Take Herbs, Herbal Recipes, Acupuncture
3 Vital Organs (Mahá Marmas)
efinition: There are 107 vital body
parts. Of these, three organs are paramount:
the urinary bladder, heart, and head. They
are considered the main sites because they are the
seats of the vital breath (práòa) and Váyu that can
cause immediate death if wounded.
Cause & Development: Downward moving air
(Apána Váyu) in the colon becomes excessed from
eating and drinking pungent, bitter, astringent, and
rough foods, suppressing natural urges, fasting, and
sexual intercourse. These actions bring about obstruc-
tions and retention of stool, gas, and urine, and ulti-
mately cause air to move in the reverse direction.
This results in frequent and intense pain in the pel-
vic and heart area, abdomen, ribs, and back. Obstruc-
tions cause abdominal distention, nausea, cutting and
piercing pain, indigestion, cystitis, stool retention,
enlarged organ membranes, and upward-moving
Váyu (Udána Váyu). The stool is dry and difficult to
pass. The body is rough, coarse, and cold with fever,
difficult urination, dysentery, heart, and digestive dis-
orders. Persons may experience vomiting, blindness,
deafness, headache, mental disorders, thirst, internal
bleeding, anorexia, and tumors. Other experiences
include cough, labored breathing, facial paralysis,
chest pain, cold, Váyu mental disorders, váta ¤hthílá
(prostate disorders), and many other serious disor-
ders.
Therapies: Oil abhyañga (massage-like) with sesame,
mahánáráyan and pañchaguòa oils. Fomentation
(moist heat) should be applied to the troubled area.
Once the illness is balanced, oil and dry enemas, sup-
positories, purgatives, carminatives, and other Váyu-
reducing herbs are used. Suppositories are made with
oil, t^ikatu, viæa´ga, pippalí, and cane sugar. Foods
include barley, Váyu-reducing (steamed) vegetables,
fresh ginger, sesame oil, and ghee. Should the condi-
tion resolve, but gas and stool retention continue to
exist, an oil enema is used. For hard bowels, colic,
heart disease, tumor, indigestion, weak spleen, and
upward-moving air; vachá, harítakí, pippalí, chitrak,
and viæa´ga are used.
Hard bowels are caused by áma, arising from
stiffness, heaviness in the head and abdomen,
retaining belches, and mucus. It is healed through
emesis, reduction therapies, and digestive herbs.
Vital organ diseases include dysuria, diseases of
the heart and head (including mouth, hair, eyes, ears,
nose, and throat), and anorexia. These are discussed
in detail in their respective chapters.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
542
     When each of these three sites is afflicted, various
diseases occur.
Heart Disorder (H^idaya)
Therapies: Arjuna, ginger, pomegranate, rhubarb,
harítakí, asafoetida, black salt, barley, Váyu- and
Kapha-reducing 
foods 
and 
life-styles.
Urinary Bladder (Basti)
Váyu: Becomes excessed from suppressing urine.
This causes retention, distress, and itching. This is
called vátabasti. Retention results in excess Udána
Váyu in the urethra. A feeling of pierced, torn, and
stiffening of the urethra occurs during urination. Other
symptoms include breaking pain, heaviness, cramps,
extreme pain, and retention of urine and feces.
In persons who are debilitated and have roughness,
Váyu may cause the stool to be reversed in its pas-
sage and enter the urinary canal. Thus, urine is passed
with feces accompanied with malodor and straining.
This is called vidvigháta.
Váyu with Pitta: Drying up the urine causes the pass-
ing of red or yellow urine, with difficulty, and burn-
ing in the pelvis and perineum.
Váyu with Kapha: This affects the blood and pro-
duces a hard nodular mass in the opening of the uri-
nary bladder, resulting in difficult urination. This con-
dition is called mútragranthi.
Pitta: When Pitta afflicts the bladder, symptoms in-
clude burning sensation, pain, and abnormal color.
Organ
Governs
Heart
práòa, apána, mind, intellect,
consciousness, mahábhútas
Head
senses
Bladder
(Basti)
scrotum, raphe, vas deferens,
middle of the rectum, and
uterus: governs urine, and is the
stabilizer of all fluid channels.
Organ
Diseases
Heart
cough, labored breathing, debility,
dry mouth and throat; contraction
of the stomach, protracted tongue,
epilepsy, insanity, delirium,
vacant-mindedness
Head
stiff neck, facial paralysis, rolling
eyeballs, confusion, cramps, loss
of coordination and movement;
labored breathing, lockjaw, loss of
voice, muteness, stuttering, ptosis,
quivering cheeks, yawning,
salivation, crooked face
Basti
retention of gas, urine and stool;
pain in groin, penis, and urinary
bladder; stiffness, spasm in the
navel, lower abdomen, anus, hip;
udvarta, phantom tumors. These
three vital spots are to be
especially protected from Váyu
disorders as Váyu is the cause of
the other doähas, and the root
cause of the vital breath. The best
therapy for this is basti.
Váyu-Reducing Therapies
Organ
Therapeutics
Heart
asafoetida, rock salt, sour liquid,
sugar
Head
abhyañga, sweating, poultices,
ingesting unctuous items, snuff,
juice pressing (in nostrils), smoke
(dhúma)
Basti
moist heat, suppositories,
nonunctuous enema, urethra
douche, bilwa, dúrbá, gokßhura,
barley, turmeric, ghee, ¤hatávarí,
guæúchí, lodhra, balá, vásáka,
vachá, páßhana bheda
No other therapy equals (unctuous) enema
for protecting the vital parts
                                   Charak; Si., Ch 9 v7

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                                 Chapter 26: Miscellaneous
 543
Kapha: When Kapha afflicts the bladder, symptoms
include heaviness, swelling, unctuous, and white and
rushing urine.
Pitta and Kapha: When both these doßhas obstruct
the urethra, the condition cannot be healed.
External: Fast traveling, jumping, exertion, injury, and
pressure may cause the bladder to bulge and remain
extended, making one look pregnant. The bladder is
painful, quivering, and burns. Urine passes in drops;
however, if the bladder is pressed, urine passes in a
stream. The bladder feels stiff with cramping. This
severe condition is called bastikundala.
Depending on the doßha causing these disorders,
diuretics, enemas, and urethral douches (see Chapter
7 on pañcha karma/basti section) can be used.
Head Disorders (£hiro-roga-Vijnáñiya)
There are 11 head diseases: Váyu, Pitta, Kapha,
Tridoßha, blood, wastes, parasites, suryávarta, anan-
taváta, ardhávabhedaka, ¤hamkhaka.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Violent headaches occur without cause.
Symptoms worsen at night and are relieved by
pressure or head fomentation (moist heat). Pitta:
Violent burning and aching head pain; a feeling of
hot coals on the scalp; burning vapor from nostrils
(diminishes at night or when applying cold packs to
the head).
Kapha: Headaches; a sticky mucus-coated palate and
throat that feel cold and heavy; swollen face and eyes.
Tridoßha: Symptoms of all three doßhas.
Blood: The same symptoms as Pitta; and head pain
is unbearable even when touched lightly.
Wastes (Kßhayaja): Waste in the fatty substances in
the body tissues (e.g., máåsa, medas, majjá), brain
areas, and semen causes unbearable head pain. This
condition is aggravated by fomentation, fumigation,
nasal therapies, emetics, and blood-letting.
Parasites (K^imija): Pricking, tingling head pain; with
liquid secretions mixed with blood and pus from the
nose occur from parasites in the nose.
Suryávarta: Tridoßhic excesses, suppression of urine
with indigestion, vitiation of blood, and brain
involvement from Váyu can cause severe eye and
eyebrow pain at sunrise. This condition worsens as
the day progresses, and subsides in the evening. It
may be reduced from cold things (and sometimes
warm things). The morning sun liquefies the excesses
in the brain causing headache. Resolidification occurs
after sunset.
Ananta-Váyu (trigeminal neuralgia): Severe pain in
the two nerves at the back of the neck and in the
carotid arteries. This then spreads to the eyes,
eyebrows, and temples, causing throbbing in the
cheeks, and paralysis of the jaw bone and eye. It is
associated with excesses of all three doßhas. This
condition develops from excess fasting (or insufficient
food), grief, or cold. All three doßhas become
excessed. Symptoms also include twitching near the
cheeks, lock jaw, and eye disorders.
Ardhávabhedaka: Excruciating piercing, or aching
pain in one half of the skull; causing giddiness when
Váyu becomes excessed from ingesting rough food,
overeating, eating with indigestion, or from exposure
to easterly winds and dew. Excessive coitus,
suppressing natural urges, overexertion and exercise,
or Kapha excesses also upset half of the head. It may
recur at intervals of 10 to 14 days or at random. Some
authorities say it is caused by all three doßhas.
Symptoms include severe, cutting, head pain;
churning in one carotid artery, eyebrow, temple, ear,
eye, and forehead; trembling. Severe cases may result
in loss of sight and hearing.
£hankaka: Severe head and temple pain due to local
Váyu combined with Pitta, Kapha, and blood. Pain
may spread to the temples, causing severe swelling,
great pain, burning, and redness. This can be fatal.
Healing it is difficult. After three days, therapies may
be given, including head evacuation, sprinkling, and
other anti-erysipelas therapies.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
544
Apatantraka: Udána Váyu, moving upwards in
excess, reaches the heart, head, and temples. This
causes convulsions and confusion, labored breathing,
stiff/closed eyes, unconsciousness, and groaning.
Therapies:
Váyu: Head diseases caused only by Váyu doßha are
relieved by the same measures for the nervous system
(Váyu-Vyádhi—Chapter 20). Sesame oil, ghee, boiled
milk (taken tepid), and pungent and hot herbs are
taken before bed. Milk cooked with ¤hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá, and balá is used to wash the diseased
area. A lukewarm plaster of the same is applied to
the scalp. Afterwards, oil, ghee, and Váyu-reducing
herbs are cooked together and used as a nasal oil.
Váyu-reducing foods and lifestyle, aromatherapy
(sandalwood oil on the forehead), hot-oil head
abhyañgas (¤hiro dhárá/¤hiro basti), and gotu kola
oil (3 drops in the nose followed by gentle massage)
are useful therapies. Poultices made from the herbs
and foods listed below may be wrapped around the
head.
Herbs: Vaμ¤ha lochana, guggul, harítakí, gotu
kola, gokßhura, a¤hwagandhá, bibhítakí, bh^i´garáj,
balá, da¤hmúl, t^ikatu, bráhmí ghee.
Foods: Almonds (soaked and peeled), sesame
tahini, ghee, sesame oil, boiled milk, basmati rice,
whole wheat, barley. Yogurt/water (lassi) is also useful
for soothing nerves. If excess impurities develop, and
the disorder is not healed from the preceding
therapies, one takes mild oil purgatives (e.g., castor
oil) to help the evacuation process. Warm carminative
herbs such as cardamom, ginger, cinnamon, cloves,
and turmeric help dispel gas, improve digestion, and
assist absorption of undigested foods that cause
impurities. Weak persons should use non-oil enemas
and digestive herbs and foods instead of purgatives.
Pitta and Blood: Plasters of cool herbs (vetasa,
sandalwood, licorice, musta) and ghee are pasted on
the scalp and used as cooling head washes. Pitta and
blood visarpa (erysipelas) therapies are also used:
chiráyatá, kaóuká, neem, aloe vera, gentian,
mañjißhþhá, barberry; first purgation then blood-
letting is used.
     A¤hwagandhá, vidárí kand, ¤hatávarí, licorice, and
maßhparni are used. Oil or ghee is used as nasal
therapy nasya. Dry and oily enemas (basti) are also
employed. Basti herbs include madanphal, príya´gu,
licorice, bilwa, and danti (baliospermum a.) root.
Kapha: Emetics, head purgatives, inhaling aromas,
and gargles are useful. The clear upper part of ghee
is ingested and frequently used as fomentation to the
head. Herbs include frankincense, myrrh, cedar,
calamus, and kuähthá. Meals include barley or
basmati rice taken with hot spices like t^ikatu
(mixture).
Tridoßha: Therapies related to the imbalances of the
three doßhas are used.
Wastes (Kßhayaja): B^iμhaòa enema (nourishing—
honey, sesame oil, dry ginger, rock salt in hot water).
Ghee is mixed with ¤hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, and
licorice. Váyu-reducing herbs are used as nasal
therapy and as drinks (bráhmí ghee).
Parasites (K^imija): Inhaling powder and smoke of
viæa´ga and musta.
Suryávarta: Nasal oils, plaster, gargles, eating boiled
rice, drinking milk with ghee, vaμ¤ha lochana, vachá,
licorice, sandalwood, honey; ingesting ghee after
meals. Then, snuffs of ghee and ¤hatávarí,
a¤hwagandhá, and licorice are used.
Other therapies include plasters of licorice,
kuähthá, sarsaparilla, ghee, and sesame oil; purgation,
milk, and sprinkling with ghee .
Ananta-váyu: The same therapies as suryávarta are
used. Blood-letting, Váyu- and Pitta-reducing foods;
and sweets made with wheat, cane sugar, milk, and
ghee are also suggested. Other therapies include
ingesting ghee after meals, head evacuation,
purgation, milk and ghee sprinkling, ingesting
vitalizing herbs mixed with 8 times as much milk as
snuff.
Samkhaka: Ghee taken internally and as a snuff.
Boiled rice with ghee is recommended. Plasters may
be made of ¤hatávarí, black sesame seeds,

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                                 Chapter 26: Miscellaneous
 545
licorice, dúrvá, punarnavá. Cooling washes and herb
powder nasal therapies are also soothing.
Apatantraka (a form of epilepsy): Cleanse channels
obstructed by Váyu and Kapha by blowing irritating
powders such as black powder, viæa´ga, harítakí,
asafoetida, black salt, and barley powder into the nasal
passages. Bráhmí has been found to control epilepsy.
Note: Heart, bladder, and head disorders deal with
physiological diseases. Mahá marma is important for
surgery and for wartime injuries. The surgeon must
be aware of the mahá marmas when surgery is
conducted on the head. Knowledge of mahá marma
is contained within the martial arts. Soldiers are
trained to aim at these three vital points (heart, bladder,
head) to kill an enemy.
Headache/Migraine
Causes: Many situations can cause headaches:
indigestion, constipation, colds, flus, poor posture,
suppression of urges to urinate or pass stool, muscle
tension, mental conditions such as nervousness,
worry, anxiety, anger, and high blood pressure.
Migraines can be caused by heartburn, congenital
factors and other conditions. The climate can further
aggravate migraines.
Symptoms:
Váyu: Anxiety, depression, dry skin, constipation,
and extreme pain.
Pitta: Red complexion and eyes, light sensitivity,
burning sensation, anger, irritability, and nose bleeds.
Liver and blood toxicity are often associated with
these symptoms.
Kapha: Dull headache, heaviness, fatigue, nausea,
white or clear phlegm, vomiting, and excess
salivation. Respiratory disorders are often associated
with these symptoms.
Therapies:
Váyu: Triphalá as a purgative, jaóámáò¤hí,
bráhmí, and rest. £hiro dhárá (hot oil head massage)
is very beneficial.
Pitta: Purgatives (e.g., aloe vera gel, rhubarb, and
fennel), liver cleansers (e.g., bhúámalakí and bráhmí),
sandalwood oil on the third eye, temples, heart, and
under the nose, walks in the full moon and by water;
and flower gardening reduce Pitta causes of
migraines. Overexertion, heat and sun should be
avoided. £hiro dhárá (hot oil head massage) is also
highly beneficial.
Kapha: T^ikatu, bráhmí, tulsí tea, inhaling
eucalyptus oil, vomiting, exercise, nasal snuff of
ginger or pepper. £hiro dhárá (hot oil head massage)
is also very helpful.
Cough, Cold, Flu, Allergy-Caused: Decongestant/
expectorant herbs—Váyu and Kapha excesses
(ginger, black pepper, licorice, viæa´ga, etc.) are
ingested or used as nasal snuff. Tulsí tea and inhaling
eucalyptus oil are also very helpful. Ginger paste can
be applied under the nose, and on the temples and
forehead. Vomiting (if the person is strong) will help
rid the head of congestion and pain arising from it.
Migraines (Ardhávabhedaka): The same therapies as
suryávarta (above). Medicated oils or ghee, using
guæúchí, balá, and a¤hwagandhá; fomentation, and
saturating snuff are also advised. Long-term healing
includes chyavan prá¤h, bráhmí, and a¤hwagandhá.
£hiro dhárá (hot oil head massage) is also beneficial.
This is usually a Váyu and Pitta excess, caused by
lack of sleep, overwork, stress, worry, poor digestion,
muscular tension, heartburn, or high blood pressure.
Arthritis/Rheumatism (Ámaváta)
Modern medicine recognizes more than 100 types
of rheumatic diseases. Causes are attributed to injury,
infection, metabolic conditions, or tumors. In many
cases the causes remain unknown to western
medicine. Some disorders a related to age, gender,
and climactic conditions (i.e., cold or dampness).
Áyurveda also cites causes related to digestive

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
546
disorders. See Chapter 15.
Causes and Development:
Eating incompatible food combinations and
following incompatible life-styles, lack of exercise
or exercising after eating fatty foods—or with poor
digestion, produces áma (undigested food toxins).
Áma associated with Váyu quickly moves to different
seats of Kapha in the body, filling them (and blood
vessels) with waxy material. Thus, áma associated
with all three doßhas blocks tissue pores and passages.
This causes weakness and heaviness in the heart,
which becomes the seat of the disease. Joints are
simultaneously affected, causing stiffness and many
other disorders. It can also be considered an
autoimmune disorder.
Symptoms:
Joint pain, loss of taste, thirst, lack of enthusiasm,
heaviness, 
fever, 
indigestion, 
swelling
(inflammation).
Váyu: Severe, throbbing, cutting pain that is
variable and migrating in nature; becomes worse in
cold weather or when cold water comes in contact
with the affected joint(s). Other symptoms include
dry or scaly skin, stiff or cracking joints, bone
deformities, constipation, gas, abdominal distention,
low back pain, nervousness, fear, and insomnia.
Pitta: Burning sensation, redness, swelling,
inflammation; becomes worse in hot weather or when
hot water comes in contact with the affected joints.
Other symptoms include diarrhea, anger, irritability,
and sweating.
Kapha: Loss of movement, itching, joint swelling,
and edema (without inflammation); becomes worse
in cold and damp or humid weather. Other symptoms
include dullness, heaviness, aches, oily skin,
congestion, or mucus in the stool.
Therapies:
General: If only one doßha is involved, the con-
dition is easy to heal. When two doßhas are impli-
cated, it becomes difficult to heal. When all three
doßhas are involved, and if swelling involves every
joint in the body, healed will not be possible.
First toxins should be digested by balancing the
digestive fire. Eating animal products will aggravate
the condition, especially pork, red meat, and dark
poultry. Heavy, áma-increasing foods will also
increase arthritic symptoms. Many people report
improvements by following these dietary suggestions.
Mahánáráyan oil improves flexibility, stiffness,
muscle fatigue, and removes pain. It is mixed with
sesame oil (1:1) and applied to the painful areas. This
oil also breaks up blockages and begins to heal locally.
After oil application, warm heat, yoga, bath, or mild
exercise further improves this situation. Náæí sweda
(local steam application; see Chapter 4) with da¤hmúl
can be applied locally.
Náráyan oil is good for muscle and joint pain, lower
body circulation, and reversing imbalances caused
by aging. Bráhmí and sandalwood oils (mixed
together) are very beneficial for Pitta types of arthritis.
Avipattikar chúròa is good to ingest for rheumatism.
Váyu: Hot spices like cinnamon and fresh ginger.
Yogaraj guggul is the best herb for this condition; it
cleanses bone tissue, strengthens bones, and improves
flexibility. Castor oil or triphalá help keep the colon
cleansed.
Pitta: Kaißhore guggul, sandalwood, guæúchí, aloe,
turmeric, saffron. Musta and nirguòæí relieve pain.
Kapha: Pure guggul is best for this condition. Hot
herbs are also helpful, such as cinnamon, dry ginger,
turmeric, t^ikatu. Musta and nirguòdí relieve pain.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                                 Chapter 26: Miscellaneous
 547
Dangerous Spiritual Practices
Channeling, especially for Váyu persons (or Váyu-
minded persons), may render them too ungrounded.
Allowing another entity to enter your being can be
very dangerous.
Kuòæaliní (spiritual energy)—yoga and other tech-
niques artificially open chakras (spiritual energy cen-
ters) before a person may be prepared. This can lead
to numerous and serious physical and mental disor-
ders. [This does not apply to persons naturally rais-
ing their kuòæaliní through meditation and yoga, but
to those who target specific chakras for their manual
opening.] Practicing a natural form of meditation that
allows for the gradual and holistic opening balances
the entire person.
Hypnosis is a psychically induced state in which
a subject responds to suggestions from the hypnotist
(within certain limitations). If the subject is not natu-
rally ready to respond, even though they may want
to, hypnosis may cause subtle anxiety and weaken-
ing of the mind-body coordination. Some modern
hypnotherapists however, utilize a method whereby
the client is in complete control of their choices. This
may be a more natural approach to this practice.
Práòáyáma (breathing practices) can also be harm-
ful if done with force, breath retention, or in excess
without a proper teacher for guidance.
Tissue (Dhátu) Building Herbs
Plasma (rasa): £hilájit, punarnavá, vidárí kand, kßhír
kákolí
Blood (rakta): Green leafy vegetables, radish,
punarnavá
Muscle (máåsa): A¤hwagandhá, ¤hatávarí, mahá
medha, ghee.
Fat (medas): The same
Marrow (majjá): The same
Bone (asthi): Pravál pißhti, vaμ¤ha lochana,
¤hatávarí, sesame, black dal, milk.
Semen (¤hukra): £hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá.
Organs and Herbs
Kidney problems: Pitta/(Váyu secondary). Best
herb—¤hilájit.
Pancreas: Kapha/Pitta: Glyceric acid (Pitta), insulin
(sweet/Kapha). Best herb—gurmar.
Ojas: This means life sap, metabolism, and will
power. It is not actually something that is found in
the body. £hatávarí, a¤hwagandhá, guæúchí, saffron.
Brain: Váyu/Kapha secretions, cerebral spinal fluid.
Bráhmí, jaóámáò¤hí, a¤hwagandhá, ¤ha´kh pußhpí,
tulsí, bh^i´garáj. Nerves: Váyu/Pitta- práòavaha,
raktavaha and majjá srotas. Reduce Pitta to purify
the nerves. Reduce Váyu to tone the nerves. Bráhmí,
jaóámáò¤hí, a¤hwagandhá, ¤ha´kh pußhpí, tulsí,
bh^i´garáj.
Gall Bladder: Paßhana bedha, dandelion
Liver: Punarnavá, bhúámalakí
Blood purification: Mañjißhþhá
Lymph: Kaißhore guggul, yellow dock, jasmine for
Pitta and Kapha; bayberry for Váyu.
Adrenals: Kapha/Pitta—bráhmí. Secretes adrenaline.
Develops the mind and affects spiritual development.
Spleen: Pitta—Punarnavá, kaóuká
Tendons, ligaments: Kapha—turmeric
Veins: Pitta - mañjißhóhá (cleanse/circulate)
Marrow: Fluid—Kapha; Váyu—space and pushing
effect; color—Pitta (due to gall bladder). Herbs
according to doßha. Á¤hwagandhá, balá, bh^i´garáj,
gokähura, musta, pippalí, vaå¤ha lochana
Lungs: Váyu brings Pitta (from peritoneum secre-
tion of the heart) [carbonic acid] to the respiratory
system, hemoglobin, red blood cells, and supplies
oxygen in the body parts (Váyu). Kapha relates to
fluids. Vásák, balá, harítakí, bibhítakí, pippalí.
Gland Definitions
Exocrine: Channels that open into the organs,
gastrointestinal tract, bloodstream, etc. (e.g., salivary
glands, intestinal or digestive glands, mammary
glands).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
548
Endocrine: Secrete directly into the bloodstream or
the surrounding tissues. They do not have any
channel, such as the exocrine glands. Examples are
hormones.
Thyroid: Responsible for the growth, calcium, and
metabolism in the body. Thyroxin discharge
(Kapha) digests the seven tissues (dhátus) and
develops the mind and body.
Hyperthyroid: Disturbs the mind and body, increases
the reflex action, causes fine tremors and
palpitations, exophthalmic goiter, and neurosis.
Hypothyroid: Causes slowed thyroid functioning.
Symptoms include anemia and Váyu obesity; low
heart rate, infertility, neuritis, goiter, exophthalmia
(protrusion of the eyeball), photophobia (fear of
light), and sweating.
Parathyroid: Regulates the calcium metabolism level
in the body.
Pineal: (Kapha) Controls the brain.
Thalamus: Responsible for the early childhood
growth until approximately age 15.
Hypothalamus: (Váyu) Located in the brain,
controlling the pituitary gland and other hormones.
Pituitary: (Pitta/Kapha) Controls all other hormone
functions and levels in the body. It sits on top of the
sußhumòá (the spiritual tube inside the spine),
anterior, and posterior lobes. It is in the spinal
column
Suprarenal: This secretes the hormone that controls
the fight or flight response. Thus, muscular activity
and glucose in the blood are increased.
The vagus nerve is controlled by the thalamus. It
runs from the brain to the stomach. Vagus is the 10th
cranial nerve supplying the heart, stomach,
diaphragm, sensory-motor skills, voice, breathing,
pharynx, and esophagus. These areas are affected by
all three doßhas. When there is any reflex or response
from any of these organs, it signals the brain. The
response from the brain is transmitted back to all the
organs (not just the one signaling trouble). In this way,
if one organ is ill, it affects the functioning of all the
other related organs.
Hemispheres
of the brain
Space
(Váyu)
Vagus Nerve
Vagus nerve
on stomach
Vagus nerve
runs from 
brain down
to the stomach

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                                 Chapter 26: Miscellaneous
 549
Peritoneal Layer: This is a membranous sheath cov-
ering all the visceral organs, and protecting them
against friction, separating them, etc.
Sub-Doähas Organs: All five Pitta sub-doähas disturb
one’s spiritual life. Sadhaka Pitta and Avalbaka Kapha
create the most energy disturbances on one’s spiritual
path.
The combination of the two is called Sam
Awostha (balance period). Bodhak Kapha relates to
the taylin (mucus gland).
Times And Methods To Take Herbs
Stomach disorders are healed by ingesting herbs.
Head disorders are removed through the nose.
Colon diseases are healed through enemas.
Strong persons take herbs in the morning on an empty
stomach.
Weak persons mix herbs with a light meal or snack.
Stool, urine, gas, semen, menstrual, and pregnancy
herbs (apána) Herbs are taken before meals (i.e.,
disorders related to the lower body).
Pervasive ills (samána) Herbs are taken during lunch.
Vyán disorders Herbs are taken after breakfast and
lunch.
Udán diseases Herbs are taken after dinner.
Práòa ills Herbs are taken between bites of food.
Cough, thirst and difficult breathing Herbs are used
frequently.
Liver (P)
Gall Bladder (P)
Duodenum
upper (K)
lower (P)
Pancreas
insuline (K)
acid (P)
Ascending Colon (V/P)
Appendix (K/P)
Small Intestine (P)
Descending Colon (V)
Spleen (P)
Stomach (Tridoßhic)
Thyroid (P/K)
Parathyroid (V/K)
Heart (P/V)
Lungs (Tridoßhic)
Tonsils/Adenoids (K)
Adrenals (K/P)
Kidneys 
acid (P)
2nd - (V)
Urinary Bladder (V)
Torso Organs and Their Ruling Doßhas

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
550
Hiccup: Herbs are taken with delicious foods.
Some practitioners say for Váyu conditions, herbs
are taken before meals to quickly reach these lower
areas; Pitta conditions require herbs with meals to
affect the middle portion of the body (Pitta organs);
herbs are used immediately following meals for
Kapha conditions to help with upper torso conditions.
Herbal Recipes
Arteriosclerosis: Yogaraj guggul, turmeric, aloe,
safflower, myrrh.
Athlete’s foot: Pitta (infections), Kapha (white).
Turmeric and guæúchí for infections; Tea-tree oil for
Kapha (internally and externally).
Broken bones: Mañjißhþhá, arjuna, comfrey,
Solomon’s seal, horsetail (internally and externally);
yogaráj or pure guggul).
Cholesterol: Purified guggul.
Circulation (poor): Saffron, turmeric, cinnamon, black
pepper, ajwan, cloves; t^ikatu for Váyu or Kapha
(yogaráj guggul for Váyu; pure guggul for Kapha);
Kaißhore guggul, turmeric, mañjißhóhá, saffron,
coriander for Pitta. Other herbs that help circulation
include bráhmí, ámalakí, and balá.
Colic: Fennel, chamomile.
Dandruff: Multani mitti or curd and sesame oil
Depression: Saffron, jasmine, patchouli, and ylang
ylang aromas.
Ear disorders: Nirguòæí, ghee ear baths.
Eczema: Bráhmí, bh^i´garáj.
Encephalitis (brain inflammation): Jaóámáò¤hí,
bráhmí, sandalwood; 2 to 6 drops of ¤hadbindu oil.
Eye disorders: Nirguòæí, triphalá, guæúchí, ¤hweta
punarnavá.
Food allergies: Foods that increase one’s doßha often
cause allergic reactions. Allergies are also related to
a weak immune system. Therefore, eating foods and
taking immune boosting herbs according to one’s
doßha is advised.
Gangrene: Echinacea.
Gums (bleeding): Massage gums with coconut oil or
drink juice of 1/2 lemon in a cup of water.
Hang nail: A Váyu excess (Váyu-reducing herbs)
Hemorrhoids: 1/2 cup aloe vera juice 3 times daily.
Triphalá is also useful.
Hodgkin’s: Jasmine.
Immune: Bráhmí, guæúchí.
Incontinence: Skullcap (V+), nutmeg (P+).
Liver: bhúámalakí, aloe vera gel, kaóuká, guæúchí,
bráhmí, bh^i´garáj, chiráyatá.
Mastitis: Marshmallow, balá.
Meningitis (brain edema): Jaóámáò¤hí, yogaraj
guggul, bráhmí, musk, badam (almonds) .
Menstrual Cramps: 1 tablespoon aloe vera gel with
1/4 teaspoon black pepper 3 times daily.
Mononucleosis: Chyavan prá¤h and jaóámáò¤hí.
Mouth disorders: Triphalá.
Nail deposits (under nail): Váyu and Kapha (local
mucus). Váyu/Kapha-reducing herbs.
Pain, aches, arthritis, back pain, strains, etc.: Ginger
and water paste compress; or mahánáráyan oil
equally mixed with sesame oil; saffron, turmeric.
P/K Áma: Six cloves of garlic well chopped, boiled
in a cup of milk until it is reduced by half. Add cane
sugar. Taken once daily for 1st week; every other day
for the following week. After that, once or twice a
week until áma is cleared.
Pleurisy: Licorice and honey to prevent Kapha ex-
cess.
Psoriasis: Bráhmí, mañjißhþhá, barberry.
Shock: Sinus congestion—inhale one pinch of vachá
powder.
Sore throat: Gargle with hot water mixed with tur-
meric, guggul, pippalí, ginger, triphalá, and black
pepper.
Sprue (grahaní): [áma causes constipation or
diarrhea]. Herbs include kuþaj, bilwa, ginger.
Stings & Bites: Drink cilantro juice and apply
sandalwood paste externally.
Swollen knees/ankles: 2 lb. salt bag heated in a pan
and kept on the swelling for 5 minutes a day.
Swollen legs: Castor oil and half cooked rice mixed
into a paste and massaged on the swelling. TB: Vásák,
vaμ¤ha lochana.
Toothache: Apply 3 drops of clove oil to tooth.
Varicose Veins: (Váyu) Shoulder stands (10 minutes
daily).

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                                 Chapter 26: Miscellaneous
 551
Mutually Contradictory Foods
Milk and Fish (hot and cold, respectively) vitiate the
blood and obstruct circulatory channels.
Meat with honey, sesame seeds, sugar, milk, lotus
stalk, or grains, causes deafness, blindness, trembling,
loss of intelligence, causes voice to sound nasal, may
cause death.
Milk after radish or garlic may cause obstinate skin
diseases.
Milk with sour foods and drinks
Honey and ghee in equal quantities or honey, ghee
and water in equal quantities, causes a subtle toxic
reaction.
Drinking hot water after taking honey is
contraindicated.
With very few exceptions, mutually contradictory
foods cause sterility, blindness, skin diseases, ascites,
eruptions, insanity, fistula, fainting, and intoxication.
They can also cause tympanitis, throat spasms,
anemia, áma poisoning, sprue, edema, acid
indigestion, fever, rhinitis, fetal diseases, and death.
These diseases are healed through emesis, purgation,
antidotes, and can be prevented by protective
measures.
The exceptions to mutually contradictory foods
include, milk with garlic, and hot water after honey
for emesis.
Herbal Preparation and Use
Fresh Juice (Swarasa)
Extracting the juice from fresh herbs (by crushing
or pounding) has the most potent healing effect. With
few exceptions (e.g., ginger and cilantro), it is difficult
to obtain fresh Áyurvedic herbs for juicing. Each of
the remaining preparations have slightly less potency
than the previous, with confections containing the
least degree of potency.
Decoctions (Kwátha)
Decoctions are made by boiling herbs in water over
a low flame until 1/2 the amount of water remains.
Decoctions are best suited for roots, stems, bark, and
fruit, because it takes longer to transfer the energies
from these parts of the plant to the decoction liquid
(flower and leaf energy is quickly transferred).
Decoction Recipe: 1 part dry herbs to 16 parts water
or 1/2 ounce of herbs to 8 ounces of water. The 8
cups of water are boiled over a low flame until half
the amount (2 ounces) remains. The herb’s energies
are now transferred to the liquid from the dry herb.
Herbs are then strained and the decoction is taken.
Sometimes milk decoctions are especially useful
for enhancing herbal properties as for a¤hwagandhá
and ¤hatávarí. A traditional recipe for a¤hwagandhá
milk decoction is 1/4 ounce a¤hwagandhá to 1/4 cup
milk to 1 cup water. This mixture is boiled over a low
flame until the water evaporates. Less water can be
used when using herbs in powdered form.
Hot Infusions (Pháòóa)
One ounce of herbs is mixed with 8 ounces of water
(1:8 ratio) for hot infusions. After the water has boiled,
the flame is turned off, and herbs are added to the
water. The herbs are allowed to steep up between 1/2
hour to 12 hours, during which time their energies
are transferred to the water. Then, herbs are strained
before drinking the infusion.
Aromatic herbs, non-woody plants, leaves, and
flowers are best suited to hot infusion because their
energies are easily transferred and would be destroyed
through boiling. When a formula requires a mixture
of herbs (e.g., roots and flowers), the roots are boiled
and the flowers are added and steeped.
Cold Infusions (Hima)
Herbal powders release their energies more
quickly than raw herbs, so they are left to steep in
cold water from 1 hour to overnight (overnight is the
preferred time). As with hot infusions, cold infusions
are best for delicate parts of the herbs. This method
offers the further advantage of preserving herbs which
have cooling or refrigerant properties. Pitta-reducing
therapies are best suited to this method of preparation.
Herbs include jasmine, sandalwood, mint, etc.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
552
Wet Pill, Paste, Bolus (Kalka)
Fresh or dried herbs are rubbed on a stone and
mixed with a small quantity of water until they
become a soft paste. This preparation is applied
externally as a paste to heal wounds, sores, etc. It can
also be taken internally. Some recipes call for the
addition of sweets or liquids. Twice the amount of
raw honey, ghee, or oil may be added to the paste; an
equal amount of jaggery may be added, and 4 times
the amount of any other liquid is added.
Powders (Chúròas)
Dried herbs are ground in a mortar and pestle or
with an herb grinding machine; and strained into a
fine powder. They are easily mixed with other herbs
and have quick acting properties in the body. However,
they stay in the body for only a few hours, and their
shelf life is not as long as that of pills and other
compounds.
Traditionally powdered mixtures used 20 or more
different herbs per formula. Powders are best taken
with ghee, raw sugar, or raw honey; which transport
the herb’s energies to all seven tissue layers. The ratio
of herbs to vehicle is 1:2. If milk or water is used as a
vehicle, they are used in a ratio of 4:1 to herbs.
Powders work best for the gastrointestinal tract and
on the plasma tissue (rasa dhátu); with the exception
of rejuvenative herbs like a¤hwagandhá, triphalá,
¤hatávarí, etc., that work on all seven tissues.
Traditional powdered (chúròa) formulas include
lavaò bháskar, triphalá, sitopaládi, hi´gwasták, and
sudarßhan chúròas.
Pills (Guói and Vaói)
Pills not only include herbs, but also powdered
herbal extracts and burnt minerals and metals. These
make the pill more potent, offering a quicker and more
effective healing process. Pills also remain in the body
longer than powders and have a longer shelf life.
When pills are made with burnt metals and minerals
(bhasmas), the longer the pills are stored the more
potent they become.
Traditional pills include laßhunadi vaói,
chandraprabhá vaói, kuóajghan vaói, yogaráj guggul,
and kaißhore guggul.
Confections (Avaleha)
This is the solid mass obtained from boiling a
decoction. Sugar or liquid is added in 4 times the
quantity, while jaggery is only double the quantity of
the mass. This makes a confection. They are best taken
with boiled milk, cane juice, or decoction. Chyavan
prá¤h is perhaps the most well known confection.
Being sweet in nature, children like to eat the
confection. Often avalehas are used as tonics and
rejuvenatives. Different confections help different
disorders.
Medicated Ghee and Oil (Sneha)
Oils work primarily on the skin, blood, lungs, and
colon; they cannot reach the deeper tissue layers
because their heavy nature is difficult for the liver to
digest (the colon will have some effect on the nerves,
however).
The recipe for sneha is 1 part herb paste to 4 parts
ghee or oil to 4 parts of any decoction (or 16 parts
water). They are cooked over a low flame for 4 to 8
hours until the water evaporates. When water is
sprinkled into the oil or ghee, it will crackle; the
preparation is now ready.
When the delicate parts of the plant (i.e., leaf or
flower) or aromatic herbs are used they may be
directly added to the pre-cooked oil or ghee and left
to sit for 24 to 48 hours before they are strained.
Herbs are empowered by this process, providing
quick and strong healing or rejuvenation. Snehas are
used internally, in the nose, eyes, head, as enemas,
and elsewhere. Traditional oil formulas include
bráhmí ghee, bráhmí, mahánáráyan, da¤hmúl, anu,
mahábh^i´garáj, triphalá ghee, piòæa oil, and ¤had
bindu.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                                 Chapter 26: Miscellaneous
 553
Medicated or Fermented Wines
(Ásavas, Árißhóhas)
Ásavas are prepared in cold water without boiling
the herbs. Árißhóhas involve boiling the herbs. Fer-
menting agents are added to these mixtures (e.g.,
jaggery, dhátkí) which are then stored at specific tem-
peratures for a number of days, weeks, or months.
This form of herbology is the Áyurvedic version of
western liquid extracts, only more potent. These wines
are easily and instantly absorbed into the blood stream
(even if one has trouble digesting herbal pills or pow-
ders); improve digestive fire, and contain no alcohol.
Traditional wines include balásava, kuóajárißhóha,
drákßhásava, arjunárißhóha, pañchásava.
Extracts
Herbal powdered extracts along with or instead
of plain herb powders have become the industry stan-
dard. Extracts can offer a guaranteed potency of more
than 3 to 6 times the power of plain herbs. Giloy
Sattwa is a traditional Áyurveda powdered of extract
of guæúchí. Purified guggul is another common ex-
tract. In the U.S., many extracts are now offered in-
cluding garcinia (tamarind) and turmeric.
There are 2 approaches to extraction. The com-
mon method is to take the active ingredients out of
the whole herb. Newer methods to extract the whole
plant yet guaranteed potency levels have been devel-
oped by Zandu Pharmacies of Bombay. This approach
is more in line with Áyurvedic thinking because it
uses the entire herb. In this method, one receives the
properties of whole herb as mother nature has in-
tended.
By only using so-called “active ingredients,” we
are assuming that the other ingredients play no role
in the healing process when they may actually pre-
vent side effects or direct the healing effects of the
herb to its appropriate site. Thus, the whole plant ex-
tract retains the integrity of the herb, ensuring safety
and efficacy.
Minerals and Metals (Rasas)
Seven metals are used along with herbs in certain
powerful preparations. The 7 metals (gold, silver,
brass, copper, lead, tin, and magnetic iron-ore) relate
to the 7 dhátus (tissue layers). These 7 plus 2
additional metals relate to the nine planets: copper/
Sun, silver/Moon, brass/Mars, lead/Mercury, gold/
Jupiter, tin/Venus, steel/Saturn, bronze/Rahu,
magnetic iron-ore/Ketu. These metals undergo precise
purification processes to remove toxins and make
them digestible.
When the metals undergo these alchemical
processes they are used for rejuvenation (rasáyanas)
therapy. For example, therapies for healing amebic
parasites include antiparasitical herbs and immune-
boosting herbs. Formulas sold in India include kuóaj
(antiparasitical) and mercury bhasma (immune-
boosting ash). Bhasmas (metal, mineral, and gem ash)
are common to many Áyurvedic products in India.
Some of the bhasmas have not yet been approved for
use in the U.S. by the FDA. Many European countries,
however, allow importation of these bhasmas.
Metals, gems, minerals (mica, red coral, sea shells)
are burnt into ash (bhasma) in a very specific process,
thereby removing all toxic properties. If these items
are improperly prepared, ingesting them can be life-
threatening. Even in India, only a few Áyurvedic
companies are viewed as reliable manufacturers of
bhasmas. So caution is strongly advised when
considering the use of certain bhasmas.
Mercuy conquers all diseases
and confers strength.
£hár´gadhara Saåhitá:
          Ch. 12; verse 1
Herb Mixing
Dose: The herbal dose depends on many factors,
e.g., the strength of the person, the herb, the disease
or disorder, the season, and geographic location. For
example, doses given to person in India are generally
2 to 4 times higher than those required or tolerated

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
554
by persons in the U.S. For mild conditions found in
the U.S., 1/4 to 1/2 tsp. of powdered herbs; 3 times
daily is adequate to produce desired healing results.
For more chronic mental or physical problems, 1/2
to 1 teaspoon, 3 times daily is needed. Yet even in
these cases, it is wise to allow gradual build-up from
smaller doses to the full dose so that the system can
adjust to the herbs. In extreme conditions (e.g.,
cancer), 1 to 3 ounces daily are required for certain
tissue layer (dhátus) healing.
Children’s doses have been discussed in Chapter
23. From birth to one month, herbs are given in
quantities of approximating 2 rice grains, with raw
honey, milk, ghee, or syrup (herbs may also be
received through breast milk). This quantity is
augmented by 2 grains each month until age 15 to a
maximum dose of 1/16 teaspoon.
Pet Care: Pets (horses, cats, dogs) respond extremely
well to herbs. Animals are so intuitive they often at-
tack the bag or bottle of herbs before their owner can
even give them the product. At our U.S. center, we
have found that pets only require 1/16 to 1/8 teaspoon
of herbs for most disorders; even chronic ones. Since
it is difficult to take the pulse of a pet, deciding on
appropriate therapies is achieved through observing
symptoms and medical reports prepared by the vet-
erinarian.
Mixing: Mixing herb powders is a fairly simple pro-
cess so long as the tridoßhic theory is followed. Keep
in mind the effects each herb has on a particular doßha,
disorder, organ, and tissue layer. For example, if a
Váyu doßha person needs a brain tonic, Váyu-reduc-
ing or tridoßhic brain tonic herbs are used, such as
a¤hwagandhá, jaóámáò¤hí, or bráhmí. An herb like
skullcap, although useful for insomnia and nervous-
ness, will aggravate the Váyu doßha if used in ex-
cess. Thus, skullcap can be completely avoided or
mixed with warming herbs such as cinnamon to bal-
ance out its cooling effect.
     Another example of herb personalization is high
blood pressure. Although garlic is a well-known herb
for hypertension, in Áyurveda it is helpful for Váyu-
and Kapha-caused hypertension; it will aggravate
Pitta-related high blood pressure. If a person is a dual
doßha, herbs that increase the third doßha are used.
For example if a person is a Pitta-Kapha doßha and
has a Pitta-Kapha health concern, such as bronchitis
(Kapha symptoms) with an infection (yellow or green
mucus/Pitta secondary symptoms), then Váyu-in-
creasing lung herbs are used (e.g., vásák). The Váyu
energies cool the excess Pitta (infection), dry the ex-
cess Kapha (phlegm), and the herb directs these en-
ergies directly to the lungs. When looking at this bal-
ancing effect from the view of the six tastes, the bit-
ter taste is responsible for healing. Bitter herbs often
have antibiotic proprieties (e.g., goldenseal).
When tridoßhic disorders are involved (all three
doßhas are present), tridoßhic herbs are required. If
these herbs are not specific enough to affect healing
then herbs are used to heal (reduce) the doßha causing
the most problems. As this condition improves, should
another doßha become aggravated due to ingesting
the herbs being used, then herbs should be changed
to balance this newly developed condition.
Unquestionably, tridoßhic cases are the most difficult
situations to deal with.
Sometimes subtle uses of the herbs come into play.
If one has an opportunity to effect healing using
sattwic (holy) herbs (e.g., bráhmí or tulsí,) instead of
tamasic or rajasic herbs (e.g., garlic, onions, valerian),
then subtler spiritual benefits can develop as well.
However, if needed for physical healing, tamasic and
rajasic herbs must be used for some time.
Directing herbs to the proper organ should also be
considered. Certain herbs, such as gokßhura break
up urinary stones. Coriander is mixed with gokßhura
to direct its healing effect to break up gallstones.
To summarize the rules discussed:
1) Use tridoßhic herbs.
2) Use herbs that reduce one’s doßha.
3) If using herbs that increase one’s doßha, add other
herbs that balance the herb’s effects (i.e., add sec-
ondary herbs that will reduce the doßha). Even if these
herbs are not specifically used for that condition, they
will balance the effects of the primary herb.

Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases                                                 Chapter 26: Miscellaneous
 555
4) Dual-doßha disorders require herbs that increase
the third doßha (i.e., reduce both doßhas)
5) When tridoßhic conditions require non-tridoßhic
herbs, constant switching of herbs is needed for bal-
ance depending upon the predominant doßha.
6) Antibiotic or other specific concern herbs can
be used.
7) Sattwic herbs are preferred over tamasic or
rajasic herbs as long as they affect healing.
8) Secondary herbs may need to be used to direct
the main herb to a specific organ or tissue.
The above chart explains how a Pitta/Kapha doßha
excess is balanced. Pitta and Kapha are in excess,
and Váyu is deficient. Herbs and foods that increase
Váyu and reduce Pitta and Kapha, are incorporated
into one’s life; whereas items that increase Pitta and
Kapha are avoided or reduced. Thus, the energies of
Váyu (e.g., cool, dry) will reduce the effects of Pitta
(hot) and Kapha (dampness, phlegm). This tridoßha
theory is discussed in detail in Chapters 3 and 6. Be-
low is a review of this theory.
If Pitta is in excess, heat is the main experience.
Herbs that are cooling (sweet, bitter, and astringent)
will balance the heat (i.e., reduce the heat). If Kapha
is excessed, moistness (phlegm) is predominant or
imbalanced in the individual. Herbs that are hot, pun-
gent, and bitter will balance or reduce the moisture
by their drying nature. When Pitta and Kapha are in
excess, heat and moistness are the predominant symp-
toms. Bitter-tasting herbs will reduce both Pitta and
Kapha doßhas (astringent tastes may aggravate the
earth element of Kapha, and pungent or hot tastes
will aggravate or increase the Pitta element). Thus,
bitter tastes will reduce Pitta and Kapha. See the tables
below.
* Sometimes astringent tastes will aggravate Kapha.
When choosing herbs for a specific health con-
cern, it is advisable to find an herb that works best
for the situation. For example mañjißhóhá is the best
blood purifier. Other blood-cleansing herbs can then
be added to the mixture, such as bráhmí and turmeric.
Two to 4 times as much of the main herb (mañjißhóhá)
is used with the secondary herbs (2:1:1). Conditions
associated with the main problem are also addressed.
Should the liver also need detoxifying, liver-cleans-
ing herbs are added to the mixture. Bráhmí also
cleanses the liver, so it helps both conditions. How-
ever, if the liver requires serious attention, bhúá-
malakí, the best liver cleanser, may be necessary to
add to the formula.
Excess
Balance
Deficient
Vayu
Pitta
Kapha
Pitta/Kapha Balancing



Taste
Quality
Doßha
Reduced
Sweet
moist, cool
Váyu/Pitta
Sour
hot
Váyu/Kapha
Salty
hot
Váyu
Pungent
hot
Kapha
Bitter
cold, light
Pitta/Kapha
Astringent
cold
Pitta/Kapha*
Doßha
Element
Qualities
Váyu
ether, air
cold, dry
Pitta
fire, water
hot, moist
Kapha
water, earth
wet, cold,
heavy

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
556
If blood purification is the predominating concern,
then less bhúámalakí is used (one or two parts). If the
liver needs as much attention as the blood, then equal
amounts of bhúámalakí and mañjißhóhá are used (2:2).
One part coriander can be added to the formula to
help digest the herbs, making them more effective and
quick acting. If mental stress has caused the disorder,
then bráhmí would also be added to the formula to
balance the mind.
If the person with this Pitta condition is a pure Pitta
doßha, this would be an acceptable formula. If they
are a Pitta/Váyu doßha, then bhúámalakí may be too
aggravating for Váyu. Bráhmí or bh^i´garáj can be
used instead of bhúámalakí. When herbs cannot be
found to heal a condition without aggravating one’s
doßha (in this example, Váyu) the rule is to choose
herbs that will heal the excessed condition (in this
case the blood and liver) and watch for any Váyu-
excess symptoms.
To summarize
1) The best herb for a condition should dominate
the formula.
2) Other herbs can be used in smaller amounts. 3)
Herbs used for secondary conditions are added in
lesser amounts.
4) If two conditions are equally predominant, use
the one herb that will help both conditions, or separate
herbs for both conditions and use them in equal
quantities.
5) Include herbs that digest the other herbs,
thereby saving digestive energy and improving the
absorption of the herbs.
Vessels and Cooking
The nature of the pot used to cook herbs (and
foods) affects the final preparation. Aluminum, for
example, is absorbed into the body as a poison. The
best cooking materials are:
Kapha-reducing: Clay and copper (scraping and
reducing properties)
Pitta-reducing: Brass or silver (cooling properties)
Váyu-reducing: Iron (grounding properties)
Cooking over a flame (gas or wood) is better than
using electric heat because it empowers the herbs and
foods, making them more easily digestible. Wood fires
are best, microwaves are not recommended.
Áyurvedic Acupuncture
(Bhedan Karma)
In the three major Áyurvedic texts, discussions
of surgery and marma points also involved Áyurvedic
acupuncture or “needling,” and moxibustion. The use
of needles was used for both surgical and non-surgical
healing. According to Dr. Frank Ross, author of The
Lost Secrets of Áyurvedic Acupuncture; acupuncture
was taught in Indian schools at least as early as 100
B.C. Students included Chinese visitors.
Very little information about Áyurvedic
acupuncture is available in India today. It was first
recorded in the Suchi Veda (science of needling) about
3,000 years ago. Since this is a very detailed science,
the topic is merely mentioned here. For a more
detailed explanation of the subject, please read Dr.
Ros’ book.

557
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
All human activities are meant for happiness of all living beings.
Such happiness is based on dharma (righteousness, right moral conduct).
Hence, every person should always adopt righteousness.
Aßhóáñga H^idayam Sú. Ch. 2: ver. 20
Chapter 27
Outer Healing
Beauty Care, Environmental Balancing: Jyotißh,
Vástu £hástra & Feng Shui, Scientific Research
            veryone has heard the sayings, ‘beauty is
                   only skin deep’, and ‘beauty is in the
                               eyes of the beholder.’ It is also
commonly said that people in love always look
beautiful. Áyurveda suggests that when persons
have high self-worth or see the Divine within, they
radiate true beauty. Thus, outer beauty is a
reflection of inner beauty.
     In Western cultures, the aging process of men
has always been seen as beauty (handsome).
However, the value and beauty of women more
than 40-years-old seem to be ignored. Beauty has
a much different definition in the ancient cultures,
where, as both males and females grow older (and
look older), beauty is said to grow. In other words,
wisdom that comes with age is valued as a deeper
beauty. This is a striking contrast to modern hi-
tech cultures that see superficial, youthful faces as
a sign of true beauty.
     Still, if persons take care of their health and
cultivate their ethics, health and inner beauty
radiates  even through the skin. Áyurveda adds a
spiritual dimension to the definition of beauty by
saying:
Inner peace brings outer beauty
     It is Divinity that is true beauty, that is, eternal
and Divine love. Mental peace is the source of
Divine beauty and develops as one realizes their
Divinity. As each person sees their inner Self as
Divine, they grow in beauty, both internally and
externally. There are 3 aspect to beauty: inner,
outer, and genetic or karmic beauty.
     Outer beauty relates to bone structure, skin tone,
muscle development, intelligence, hair quality,
youthfulness, and weight. The Vedic sciences, such
as Áyurveda and Vedic Astrology, discuss outer
beauty as an integrated by-product of inner beauty
and virtue.
     Karmic beauty results from genetic traits. Also,
each person has varying degrees of grace, which
enhance beauty. These karmic traits are enhanced
through being raised to develop compassion,
understanding, love, patience, sharing, and
nurturing that which is in harmony with nature.
This is a more fundamental aspect of beauty.
     Inner beauty mainly requires development of
virtue. One of the main Áyurvedic texts, the Charak
Saμhitá, specifically notes that longevity can be
achieved through being ethical and virtuous. This
aspect of character is a part of the process of
developing and maintaining beauty. It, too, is more
essential than mere outer beauty.
     Besides ethics and virtue, healthy eating habits
and life style are also necessary for inner beauty
to radiate into outer beauty. Cleanliness is next to
Godliness, and keeping the body clean is a twofold
process: Externally, one should wash and apply
healthy and nurturing cosmetics. Internal cleansing
is developed through eating foods according to
one’s Áyurvedic constitution, virtue, and prayer
or meditation. This helps develop a positive self-
image or healthy self-love.
     Further, one’s life habits must be considered.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
558
Avoiding staying up late, excessive work, and
overexposure to elements like sun, cold, and
dryness is essential. In short, one should take
control of or balance their outer and inner lives.
     The four areas of life have already been
discussed (health, harmonious career, spiritual
relationships, and direct spiritual development).
The truly beautiful person is then defined as one
who is healthy, loves their career, and has a
relationship that helps them grow spiritually. These
persons also find adequate time to develop their
inner spiritual Self.
     Thus, outer beauty cannot by itself bring true
and lasting beauty. Even those who are physically
beautiful must feel some inner connection—some
purpose to life to feel truly beautiful. Looking and
feeling beautiful are two separate aspects. An
ancient Vedic story tells of inner, spiritual beauty
being stronger than superficial beauty:
     Parvati was the loveliest goddess in all the
world. She wanted to marry £hiva, the Divine God.
Yet even with all her beauty, £hiva’s meditations
could not be disturbed. Seeing that mere physical
attraction was insufficient, Parvati underwent
developing her ethics, virtue, and health, and spent
many long years enhancing her own spirituality
through meditation.  One day, by the mere purity
of her soul, £hiva was aroused from His
meditations to see who it was who was so devoted
to God. When He saw the radiance of
her Divine beauty, He accepted her wish to be
married.
     Throughout this book, it is explained how to
develop inner beauty through meditation, proper
diet, ethics, a positive self-image, and various
therapies, such as aroma therapy, yoga, and
abhyañga (a massage-like therapy). These are the
essential ingredients for developing a true and
lasting aura of beauty.
     We will now spend some time discussing how
to develop and maintain outer beauty through
natural methods. For example, using makeup that
removes symptomatic signs of aging can harm the
skin and poison the body with chemicals. It will
eventually destroy one’s outer looks and undermine
one’s inner health and spiritual beauty as well. Just
as we have discussed foods that enhance and
balance a person, according to their constitution,
natural makeup, shampoo, and facials are also
available for each person’s constitution.
Skin: Sensitivity & Healing
     Besides the seven doßhas (Váyu-Air, Pitta-Fire,
Kapha-Water, Váyu/Pitta, Váyu/Kapha, Pitta/
Kapha, Tridoßhic (all three doßhas)), a special
category exists known as changing skin conditions.
Despite one’s doßha, skin conditions
change depending upon one’s diet, exercise, and
the climate. Sensitivity towards cold, dryness, and
the sun may exist. It is important to remember that
it takes the body between 3 and 5 years to adjust
to good or bad eating habits and climate.
     This is one reason that Áyurveda suggests
gradual changes towards building a healthier life-
style. It takes time for a toxic body to be
cleanses; new cells and tissues built; and a new
way of life and health to develop. Below are
some Áyurvedic beauty care tips.
Post-Surgery: When the skin becomes  scarred
from surgery, herbs help heal the tissues. Aloe vera
gel and mañjißhþhá are the main recommendations.
Acne: Not only do teenagers get acne, but also
many adults suffer from this condition. Acne is
generally an excess of Pitta (fire). Therefore,
Áyurveda approaches acne from both symptomatic
and causal levels. To remove symptoms, turmeric
creme and sandalwood soap, found in most Indian
grocery store, work very quickly.
     Simultaneously, one also should reduce the
causes—the excess fire and toxins inside the body.
If neglected, Pitta and toxins will cause
acne to reappear, or manifest as illness in  another
part of the body (e.g., eyes, liver, spleen, gall
bladder, heat, blood, and infections).
     For causal balancing or healing, persons should
follow a fire- (Pitta) reduction diet (discussed in
Chapter 6 and appendix 1).

559
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
Seasonal Conditions: Each season (see Chapter 12)
has a predominance of Váyu (air), Pitta (fire), or
Kapha (water). Áyurveda recommends that persons
protect themselves from these environmental
changes.
Facial Cleansing
Tridoähic Year-Round Cleansers
Váyu Cleansing Formulas
~ early evening/year-round cleansers ~
n
o
s
a
e
S
/a
h
ä
o
D
ss
e
c
x
E
s
m
o
t
p
m
y
S
h
ti
W
e
c
n
ala
B
retni
W
a
h
p
a
K
/u
y
á
V
r
o
o
p
,p
m
a
d/dlo
c
n
oitalu
cric
ht
m
ra
w
/atti
P
,slio
m
ra
w
s
d
o
o
f
,s
b
re
h
g
nir
p
S
reta
w
/a
h
p
a
K
-e
c
x
e/n
oits
e
g
n
o
c
s
nix
ot
ss
th
gie
w
re
v
o
atti
P
/u
y
á
V
,slio
y
r
d
,
m
ra
w
,s
b
re
h
,s
d
o
o
f
m
a
ets
re
m
m
u
S
u
y
á
V
/atti
P
,e
n
c
a
,y
r
d/to
h
s
e
h
s
ar
,tsio
m
/a
h
p
a
K
,sre
d
w
o
p
lo
o
c
,s
b
re
h
,s
d
o
o
f
s
m
a
erc
lla
F
dlo
c/u
y
á
V
,nik
s
y
r
d
,y
d
ni
w
s
n
gis
–
s
elk
nir
w
g
nig
a
f
o
a
h
p
a
K
/atti
P
,tsio
m
/
m
ra
w
,s
b
re
h
,slio
s
d
o
o
f
,s
m
a
erc
a
kir
d
n
a
h
C
p
a
o
s
cid
e
v
r
u
y
Á
p
a
o
s
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
ni
yln
o
e
s
u
a
h
p
a
K
(
)lla
F
/re
m
m
u
S
.z
o
4
tu
P
ík
atír
a
h
reta
w
f
o
.z
o
4
1
ni
re
d
w
o
p
s
e
m
o
c
e
b
reta
w
e
c
n
o
s
b
re
h
niart
S
.d
elio
b
litn
u
.slio
d
n
o
m
la
d
n
a
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
d
d
A
.dip
et
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
r
e
vli
S
)tn
e
g
nirts
a(
lio
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
.p
st
1
e
nire
c
ylg
elb
ate
g
e
v
.z
o
6
.s
bt
4
á
hóh
äijñ
a
m
reta
w
re
vlis
.z
o
0
1
sretra
u
q
re
vlis
w
e
n
r
o
,re
vlis
er
u
p
f
o
.z
o
1
e
s
U
reta
w
e
ht
fla
h
litn
u
lio
B
.reta
w
g
nir
p
s
.z
o
0
2
ni
reta
w
e
ht
e
s
u
d
n
a
re
vlis
e
ht
e
v
o
m
e
R
.s
nia
m
er
,reta
w
re
vlis
lio
B
.alu
m
r
o
f
g
nis
n
a
elc
e
ht
r
o
f
,á
hóh
äijñ
a
m
lo
o
c
d
n
a
e
v
o
m
e
R
.e
nire
c
ylg
d
n
a
niart
S
.dip
et
litn
u
.á
hóh
äijñ
a
m
m
ra
w
d
d
A
d
n
a
,re
v
o
c
,raj
ss
alg
a
otni
r
u
o
P
.lio
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
.e
c
alp
lo
o
c
a
ni
p
e
e
K
.ylth
g
u
o
r
o
ht
e
k
a
h
s
Váyu/Pitta Cleansing Formulas
~ early afternoon and early evening/
year-round cleansers ~
Pitta Cleansing Formulas
~ early afternoon/year-round cleansers ~
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
r
e
vli
S
)tn
e
g
nirts
a(
lio
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
.p
st
1
e
nire
c
ylg
elb
ate
g
e
v
.z
o
6
.s
bt
4
á
hóh
äijñ
a
m
reta
w
re
vlis
.z
o
0
1
sretra
u
q
re
vlis
w
e
n
r
o
,re
vlis
er
u
p
f
o
.z
o
1
e
s
U
reta
w
e
ht
fla
h
litn
u
lio
B
.reta
w
g
nir
p
s
.z
o
0
2
ni
reta
w
e
ht
e
s
u
d
n
a
re
vlis
e
ht
e
v
o
m
e
R
.s
nia
m
er
,reta
w
re
vlis
lio
B
.alu
m
r
o
f
g
nis
n
a
elc
e
ht
r
o
f
,á
hóh
äijñ
a
m
lo
o
c
d
n
a
e
v
o
m
e
R
.e
nire
c
ylg
d
n
a
niart
S
.dip
et
litn
u
.á
hóh
äijñ
a
m
m
ra
w
d
d
A
d
n
a
,re
v
o
c
,raj
ss
alg
a
otni
r
u
o
P
.lio
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
.e
c
alp
lo
o
c
a
ni
p
e
e
K
.ylth
g
u
o
r
o
ht
e
k
a
h
s

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
560
Kapha Cleansing Formulas
~ late morning/year-round cleansers ~
Váyu/Kapha Cleansing Formulas
~ late morning & early evening/
year-round cleansers ~
Pitta/Kapha Cleansing Formulas
~ late morning & early afternoon/
year-round cleansers ~
Press a warm (organic) cotton towel
on the face for several minutes
Eye Care
     Triphalá and rose water may be used internally;
and externally as eye washes. Boil one cup of
water; add one teaspoon of triphalá powder. Let it
sit for at least 3 minutes. Pour the triphalá tea
through a coffee filter into another cup. Let the tea
cool to room temperature before washing the eyes.
Rose water may be used as an eye wash without
boiling or straining.
Kajal is a black cosmetic creme that is placed on
the edges of the eyelids. This Áyurvedic
preparation keeps dust and pollution out of the
eyes, while enhancing their beauty.
     For more details on skin care and skin disorders,
see Chapter 21.
Jyotiäh - Vedic Astrology
     Jyotiäh means inner light. This science helps
reveal one’s inner Divine light. Áyurveda and
s
u
t
p
yla
c
u
E
r
e
p
p
o
C
lio
s
utp
yla
c
u
e
s
p
o
r
d
6
e
nire
c
ylg
elb
ate
g
e
v
.z
o
6
.s
bt
2
ála
h
pirt
reta
w
re
p
p
o
c
.z
o
0
1
e
b
n
a
c
s
ein
n
e
p
re
p
p
o
c
r
o
re
p
p
o
c
f
o
.z
o
1
w
ef
a
r
o
f
e
ciuj
e
m
il
ni
m
e
ht
g
nik
a
o
s
y
b
d
e
n
a
elc
.z
o
0
2
ot
m
e
ht
d
d
a
d
n
a
re
p
p
o
c
e
ht
e
s
ni
R
.sr
u
o
h
reta
w
e
ht
fla
h
litn
u
lio
B
.reta
w
g
nir
p
s
f
o
reta
w
e
ht
e
s
u
d
n
a
re
p
p
o
c
e
ht
e
v
o
m
e
R
.s
nia
m
er
,reta
w
re
p
p
o
c
lio
B
.alu
m
r
o
f
g
nis
n
a
elc
e
ht
r
o
f
,ála
h
pirt
litn
u
te
s
d
n
a
e
v
o
m
e
R
.e
nire
c
ylg
d
n
a
e
ht
niart
S
.dip
et
.ála
h
pirt
.lio
s
utp
yla
c
u
e
d
d
A
e
k
a
h
s
d
n
a
,re
v
o
c
,raj
ss
alg
a
otni
r
u
o
P
.e
c
alp
lo
o
c
a
ni
p
e
e
K
.ylth
g
u
o
r
o
ht
s
u
t
p
yla
c
u
E
-
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
S
lio
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
s
p
o
r
d
3
lio
s
utp
yla
c
u
e
s
p
o
r
d
3
e
nire
c
ylg
elb
ate
g
e
v
.z
o
6
.z
o
4
ála
h
pirt
reta
w
.z
o
4
1
f
o
.z
o
4
p
e
et
S
ála
h
pirt
f
o
.z
o
4
1
ni
re
d
w
o
p
e
ht
niarts
,dip
et
n
e
h
W
.slio
b
ti
litn
u
reta
w
d
d
A
.lio
b
a
ot
g
nir
b
d
n
a
e
nire
c
ylg
d
d
A
.s
b
re
h
litn
u
te
s
d
n
a
slio
s
utp
y
alc
u
e
d
n
a
d
o
o
w
la
d
n
a
s
e
k
a
h
s
d
n
a
,re
v
o
c
,raj
ss
alg
a
otni
r
u
o
P
.dip
et
.e
c
alp
lo
o
c
a
ni
er
ot
S
.lle
w
g
n
al
Y
-
g
n
al
Y
lio
g
n
aly
-
g
n
aly
s
p
o
r
d
6
lio
re
w
olf
n
u
s
.z
o
6
.z
o
4
ála
h
pirt
reta
w
.z
o
0
1
g
nir
B
ála
h
pirt
,dip
et
n
e
h
W
.lio
b
a
ot
reta
w
d
n
a
a
otni
r
u
o
P
.slio
e
ht
d
d
a
d
n
a
s
b
re
h
e
ht
niarts
ni
p
e
e
K
.ylth
g
u
o
r
o
ht
e
k
a
h
s
d
n
a
,re
v
o
c
,raj
ss
alg
.e
c
alp
lo
o
c
a

561
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
Jyotiäh were once a part of the same science, but
later developed into two separate forms of healing.
Although some may be skeptical towards astrology,
when practiced correctly, Jyotiäh is an excellent
tool for uncovering planetary-caused illnesses.
     This science follows the basic Vedic belief that
there are four fundamental areas of life—each
requiring attention: health, life-purpose or
meaningful 
career 
(dharma), 
spiritual
relationships, and tools for one’s spiritual path.
     By looking at the planets, the 12 houses and
their relationship in the astrology chart, one can
determine health tendencies, planetary causes of
disease, dharma, necessities for spiritual
relationships, and tools for one’s spiritual path.
     Every person has some strong and weak planets.
Each planet, when weak and influencing health-
related houses, can cause specific disease. Instead
of merely informing a person of what the chart says
through Vedic astrology; Jyotißh additionally
offers simple therapies to remove the troubling
effects of planets. Therapies include mantras,
yantras (talismans), meditations and rituals, herbs,
aromas, gems, life-style, and spiritual suggestions.
Therefore, like Áyurveda, Jyotißh offers therapies
so people can take control of their lives and effect
healing.
Planets
     Below are the nine traditional planets used in
Jyotißh, what they affect, and the corresponding
mental and physical disorders that each planet can
cause.
Sun: Father, ego, Soul, honor
     Physical; arthritis or weak bones; low energy
or resistance; pallor or anemia; cold limbs, poor
appetite or digestion; weak pulse or heart; poor
circulation or eyesight; edema or other disorders
of water accumulation.
     Mental; low self-esteem or confidence; lack of
motivation, emotional or material dependency;
sluggishness or dull mindedness; difficulty with
independence.
Moon: Mother, emotions, personality, socializing,
happiness, home, nurturing
     Physical; anemia, constipation, dry skin, weak
lungs or kidneys; female reproductive disorders.
    Mental; depression, moodiness, ungrounded-
ness, fear of intimacy or difficulty dealing with
others.
Mars: Brothers, friends/enemies, courage, injury,
energy, logic, law
     Physical; lack of motivation or energy; unable
to defend oneself or dominated by others; unable
to express anger, unable to see through people’s
motivations, overly passive, easily controlled or
abused (emotionally or physically).
     Mental; weak immune system; appetite or
absorption of nutrients; liver or small intestine
disorders; anemia, injuries or slow healing of
injuries; low male vitality.
Mercury: Healing, communication (writing,
computers, speaking), intelligence, childhood,
commerce.
     Physical; weak nervous system, anxiety,
insomnia, dry skin, palpitations or other nerve
conditions; allergies, weak lungs or heart.
     Mental; difficulty communicating, immaturity
or childishness; low intelligence, dependencies or
addictions; dullness or daydreaming.
Jupiter: Spirituality, guru, dharma, wealth, health,
creativity, music, husband (for women)
     Physical; weak immune system or vitality;
overly thin, liver or pancreas disorders; poor
absorption of nutrients.
     Mental; lack of faith, enthusiasm, meaning, or
will; feeling constricted, pessimism or depression;
moodiness or melancholy; anxiety, unfriendliness,
financial difficulties, low creativity.
Venus: Relates to the arts (e.g., music, dance, art,
song), love, vehicles, beauty, comfort, the wife (for
husbands)
     Physical; weak kidneys, bones, or reproductive
system; weak immune system or low energy;
chronic urinary tract disorders, bleeding
tendencies.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
562
     Mental; lack of grace, charm, beauty, taste, or
refinement; insensitivity or coarseness; feeling
unloved or romantic difficulties; low feminine
qualities.
Saturn: Obstacles, delays, separation, longevity,
spiritual discipline, spiritual oneness.
Physical; weak bones or nerves; constipation, poor
resistance or healing; mysterious diseases (e.g.,
cancer and epilepsy).
     Mental; agitation, stress, insomnia or
ungroundedness; weak or easily intimidated;
impractical, poor endurance or no long-term drive;
troubles making money or with government or
institutions.
Rahu (North node of the Moon): Disease, psyche,
illusion, mass trends, higher visions, new karma
     Physical; weak immune or nervous system;
insomnia, pallor, poor mind-body coordination;
easily contracts diseases.
     Mental; disillusionment or poor perception;
anxiety, moodiness, no self-identity, easily
influenced, spreads oneself too thin.
Ketu (South node of the Moon): Liberation,
constriction, loss, past karma
     Physical; poor digestion or circulation; ulcers,
muscular or nervous system disorders; anemia or
bleeding problems; mysterious diseases (e.g.,
cancer and paralysis).
     Mental; feeling constricted, attached to the past
or lost causes; poor perception, self-destructive,
injuries or violence; poor eyesight, low self-esteem.
Houses
     Just as Western astrology, Jyotißh uses the same
12 houses and signs. Each house relates to another
domain of life. Different astrologers (Jyotiähis)
have slightly different house interpretations. Below
is a brief summary of the houses and areas of
influence:
1. Personality, health
2. Education, livelihood potential, communication,
childhood
3. Courage, socializing, siblings
4. Home, mother, material possessions, faith, travel
5. Creativity, children, speculations, devotion
6. Physical health, injury, litigation, enemies
7. Long-term partner (e.g., spouse or business
partner)
8. Mental health, longevity, travel
9. Dharma (life purpose), religion, fortune, father,
honor
10. Profession, achievement, recognition
11. Material and spiritual gains
12. Loss, liberation
Charts
Two main chart styles can be used, Northern
and Southern, depending on one’s preference.
Examples follow.
NORTH INDIAN JYOTI§H CHART
SOUTH INDIAN JYOTI§H CHART
     This science delves deeply into life and fully
compliments Áyurveda. Read Astrology of the
Seers by David Frawley for more information on
the subject.
 
P E F G
H
I
J
L
M
N
O
K
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

563
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
Architectural Harmony:
Vástu £hástra (External Kuòæaliní)
     The focus of this book has been on healing,
prevention, and rejuvenation through Áyurvedic
balance. This balance is achieved by living in
accordance with nature’s laws. We have also
discussed how meditation raises one’s inner life
force or kuòæaliní £hakti. The raising of one’s
kuòæaliní is essential for Self-Realization. We
briefly discussed Vedic astrology (Jyotißh) as
another influence upon health, career, life-style,
and spiritual development.
     The Vedic science of architecture, Vástu
£hástra, integrates the sciences of Áyurveda and
Jyotißh by providing the link between humans and
the astrological influences. Vástu considers the
magnetic fields of the earth, the influences of the
planets and other heavenly bodies essential
elements when designing commercial or residential
buildings, temples, and even towns, villages, and
cities. It is believed that architectural structures are
alive, influenced by natural law, just as the health
of humans is influenced by nature. Thus, living in
a home (or working in an office) built according to
natural law ensures general health and prosperity.
     Vástu’s integration of astrology, earth, health,
science, and spirituality or religion is wonderfully
evident as one reads through the Vástu texts. For
example, in Hindu religion, the deity of the sun is
said to ride in a chariot pulled by seven horses or
deities. They are called the seven rays of the sun. It
is important to have these rays enter eastern
windows for health reasons. However, reading that
it is useful to have these seven deities enter the
home may raise the eyebrows of religious skeptics
or persons of other religions. Yet these seven deities
also happen to be called the seven visible colors of
the spectrum of solar white light. In other words,
violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red
are merely the scientific names of these rays;
whereas Vástu also uses their spiritual, religious,
or mythological names. Thus, Vástu offers insights
into the link between modern science and ancient
universal religion or spirituality. It is only a matter
of semantics whether to call the sun’s rays by the
names of deities or colors of the spectrum. This
semantic interchangeability of scientific and
religious names is found in Áyurveda and the other
Vedic sciences, as well as in most (if not all) ancient
religions.
     Vástu describes other deities (light wavelengths)
associated with the sun that cannot be detected by
modern scientific instruments. Thus, the rules of
Vástu offer deeper insights into the laws of nature
that modern science has yet to discover.
     Since the focus of Áyurveda is holistic (i.e., all-
inclusive), it is useful to consider harmonizing or
balancing the external influences involving
architectural structures.
     Vástu £hástra considers the quality of the soil,
the shape and elevations of the land, the direction
placement and the number of windows and doors;
the thickness and height of walls and doors. In
short, the minutest details of building are
considered.
    Like Áyurveda and Jyotißh, Vástu is also a
spiritual science. The house is divided into a certain
number of squares (e.g., 81 squares), and each
square is ruled by different a deity. Window
placement is determined according to the path of
the sun, in order to allow the seven solar rays (or
deities) to enter (bless) the house. For example,
there are more windows in the east to receive the
healing rays of the morning sunrise.
    Persons living or working in a Vástu-built
structure experience the enhancement of health,
general well being, and prosperity. This is due to

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
564
the external influences of natural law provided
through the structure.
     The diagram below is one representative version
of the blueprint that  is overlaid on a building site.
The rectangle represents the building. Each box
inside the rectangle is ruled by a different deity.
The four dark rectangles (made up of six smaller
boxes) are ruled by one deity per dark box.
     Finally, the nine small boxes in the middle of
the house are ruled by the main deity, Brahma.
Traditionally, one does not have walls or pillars in
the center of the house so as to leave room for
Brahma. Thus, the building is seen as a very holy
place.
     Further, the building is seen as a body. The head
is in the upper right boxes. The arms run along the
top and right outer boxes. The legs extend along
the left and lower outer boxes. The heart resides in
Brahma’s box. If one has a health problem, it is
believed that part of the structure pertaining to that
area of the house was not built in accordance with
Vástu natural law.
Air
         Water
zone
           zone
Earth
Fire
zone
zone
DIAGRAM: A 9 x 9 VÁSTU BUILDING BLUEPRINT
    Determining the size and shape of the house is
based on one’s Jyotißh (Vedic astrology) birth chart.
In this way, Áyurveda and Jyotißh are linked with
the home, earth, and the natural laws that govern all
things.
Feng Shui
The Chinese version of natural-home living (i.e.,
harmony with nature) is called Feng Shui (“fung
shway”). Its principles and goals are as universal
and as natural as Áyurveda and Vástu §hástra. In
fact, Feng Shui practitioners believe that this
science was adapted from India’s Vástu £hástra.
     Much more information is currently available
in the U.S. about Feng Shui. Further, there are many
Feng Shui practitioners in the states and through
the world. It is reported that in Hong Kong today,
people will not work for a company if the building
is not built or adjusted according to Feng Shui; so
strong is their belief in the science. Even U.S.
companies, such as Chase Manhattan Bank and
Citibank, with branches in Hong Kong, Singapore,
and Taiwan, reportedly had to build their offices
according to these principles before local
employees would agree to work in the buildings.
     In the U.S. as well, many companies use Feng
Shui in their offices. Even television shows and
newspaper cover this science (including Donald
Trump’s use of Feng Shui).
     In addition to providing guidelines on building
structures, Feng Shui also offers very practical and
Brahma

565
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
inexpensive methods to correct architectural
problems in a building without having to remodel
or rebuild. Extensive knowledge of Feng Shui and
the ability to remedy without expensive remodeling
make Feng Shui a very appealing. [In the late 1990’s,
information offered on Vástu £hástra suggested very
huge and expensive undertakings.  This made Feng
Shui more financially appealing. With the turn of
the century, there are more Vástu books and
practitioners who offer minor and inexpensive home
and business remedies, Vástu is becoming more
widely used.]
     The basic premise of Feng Shui is that the
structure (e.g., the home) has a life force of its own.
This external life force or chi (pronounced chee) is
the same as kuòæaliní. Although it is most important
to have one’s inner kuòæaliní raised for Self-
Realization, there is no harm (and it is helpful) to
ensure that the outer kuòæaliní or chi also flows
properly. To this end, a brief discussion of Feng
Shui follows.
     Various schools of Feng Shui exist. One school
works with a compass, using precise measurements
and calculations. Other schools rely on some basic
guidelines and then infuse intuition into the
decision making process. Still other schools have
more modern integrative interpretations. One
popular school of thought will be discussed here.
Its basic theory is simple and straight forward, and
has become a very popular practice over the last
decade.
    This intuitive form of Feng Shui was popularized
by author Sarah Rossbach. She is a student of Lin
Yun of the Tantric Black Hat branch of Tibetan
Buddhism, who is credited with making this
approach widely available in the West.
     Although it is always better to hire a trained
practitioner of Feng Shui, many simple therapies
can be done by reading Rossbach’s book, Interior
Design with Feng Shui. The do-it-yourself
approach to Feng Shui is simple and inexpensive.
     Simple remedies include rearrangement of
desks, couches, chairs, and beds. Structural
considerations, such as placement of stairs by the
front door, hallways, angled ceilings, and ceiling
beams require minor remedies. Three inexpensive
methods to remedy structural problems in the home
or office include mirrors, wind chimes, and small
crystal balls.
     One use of mirrors will be explained to provide
a basic understanding of the science. A structure
(e.g., a home) is divided into nine equal rectangles
(or squares) by applying a tic-tac-toe-like grid over
a drawing of the building. Each rectangle relates to
a specific area of one’s life (except for the center
rectangle—similar to Vástu). The placement of the
front door determines the personality of each
rectangle.
Feng Shui Building Blueprint
The front door is somewhere on this wall of the house.
     The diagram above shows a floor plan of a
building with  nine equal rectangles. Eight of  the
areas relate to eight different aspect of life. In this
drawing the front door is placed along the bottom
of the chart. Thus, areas of knowledge, career, and
helpful people will reside on the whichever wall
holds the front door to the house (or door you mostly
use ).
     To enhance any of these areas, a mirror can be
placed on the wall to symbolically reflect the positive
flow of life force of that domain of life. Some
companies sell inexpensive 3-inch hexagonal or
octagonal mirrors with the names of each domain
written on them both in English and Chines.
However any attractive mirror will work fine.
     Here is an example how to use the mirrors. If a
person has an unusual or severe health problem, a
health mirror is placed on the wall in the family/
health area. It does not matter what room of the
Wealth
Children
Family/
Health
Knowledge
Career
Helpful
People
  Marriage/
Relationship
Fame

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
566
house it is (e.g., bedroom, kitchen) The focus is on
the area itself as the domain of health (in relationship
to the front door). Thus, in addition to herbs, foods,
and other Áyurvedic therapies for healing, the
placement of the mirror will help harmonize any
external causes related to health.
     Career mirrors are also used for healing certain
health problems. Career troubles (such as job
dissatisfaction, fearing loss of job) can lead to
anxiety and worry. This mental tension can cause
mental and/or physical health disorders. In addition
to brain tonic herbs like bráhmí, to calm the mind, a
career mirror can be placed in this sector of the home
to bring positive changes in one’s career. Thus, Feng
Shui offers an additional healing therapy option.
     The layout of a building is also said to influence
each area of life. As an example, the diagram below
gives an example of a second-floor apartment.
     If the stairway rises up into the career area of the
apartment, it will cut out a large section of the space.
This can indicate trouble with career because that
part of the apartment is missing. It is likely that the
resident will have trouble keeping a job or finding a
good job. Placing a career mirror on the wall in this
area would help rectify this situation.
   Changes can occur in one of two ways.
Sometimes the change is very noticeable, such as
finding a job. In other cases, changes occur on the
level of thinking. For example if a person had
previously been resigned to the belief that they were
stuck in their job and there was no way out; they
may never have given a thought to changing jobs
or careers. After placing a career mirror in the career
area of their home, they may begin to consider job
improvement. In other words, before a job change
can occur, one must be ready for it; one should
consider the topic or be aware of it.
     Positive change means leading one a step further
from where one began when the mirror was placed.
Some people may be ready for a job or healing to
occur. Others may need further information before
making such choices or and allowing such
developments.
Healing Structural Problems
     Sometimes the actual structure of the home,
apartment or office blocks the proper flow life
force. Through the use of simple and inexpensive
therapies, such as mirrors and crystal balls, the flow
of proper life force can be restored. Three examples
are listed below.
     If the front door opens to face a wall, the life
force is blocked. It is psychologically cramping or
inhibiting to always feel one is walking into a wall
and leads to a life of struggle. To resolve this a mirror
is placed on the wall (see diagram A).
Door
Stairs
Apartment

567
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
DIAGRAM  A—WALL OBSTRUCTION AT FRONT DOOR
     Another structural problem involves having a
stairway facing the front door. This allows the life
force and money to flow out the door. The remedy
is to hang a crystal ball or wind chime between the
bottom stair and the front door. This improves the
life force.
     The entrance way or foyer should be well lit and
spacious; dark spaces are psychologically
depressing; narrow spaces evoke oppressive feelings
that choke the home owner’s luck and health,
leading to breathing problems. Placing a large mirror
on the wall gives a sense of depth to the foyer.
     Stairways should be well lit and wide, with high
ceilings. Hanging a mirror on the ceiling gives a
sense of spaciousness and brightens the stairs,
thereby preventing the feeling of constriction.
     Many other simple and inexpensive therapies
are available for slanted ceilings, long corridors,
aligned doors and windows, and more.
Furniture Placement
     The arrangement of furniture can also enhance
or hamper the life force. It is possible to set up living
room and office chairs that empower everyone.
Placement of the bed is crucial for health,
strength, and mental peace. A person’s head should
be able to see anyone entering through the bedroom
door. If a person doesn’t see someone entering the
room it may startle them. This shocks the life force,
causing nervousness and anxiety. The best bed
placement is to have the bed at an angle to the door.
Other helpful placements are shown below. Should
the room not allow for proper bed placement, mirrors
can be hung on the walls to reflect the door.
CATER CORNERED BED
HELPFUL BED PLACEMENT OPTION
HELPFUL BED PLACEMENT OPTION
     Feng Shui balances or harmonizes the outer life
Door
Wall
Door
Door
Door

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
568
force, enabling life to flow according to natural law.
Thus, it follows the same principles as Áyurveda, it
is considered a useful Áyurvedic therapy for
external influences on health.
Herbs and Their Effects
A New Paradigm of Healing
     In the light of modern science, persons may
wonder how such an ancient science compares with
the technological advantages of today’s medicine.
In fact, it is astonishing to see just how specific and
comprehensive Áyurvedic insights are.
     In addition to understanding herbal application
for doähas and specific disorders, it is interesting
to know that herbs send their healing energy to
specific organs. Pippalí, for example, has an
affinity for the liver. Guæúchí has a predisposition
for the blood tissue (rakta dhátu). Thus, herbs can
target specific sites for precise therapy.
     Further, if a preliminary site is blocked along
with a secondary site, an additional herb can be
used to remove the primary block so that the second
herb can travel to the latter site. For example, if
the blood tissue needs repairing, but the blood cell
receptors are unable to receive guæúchí, kaòókárí
is first used to correct the blood cell receptors. In
this way, guæúchí will be received by the cells and
will reach the blood tissue. This aspect of Áyurveda
falls under pharmacokinetics (the study of
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion).
     Another branch of Áyurvedic knowledge is
pharmacodynamics, or the study of the action and
effect of herbs on doßhas, dhátus, wastes (malas),
and channels (srotas).
     Pharmacotherapeutics is the study of matching
herbs to people. Specific conditions must be taken
into consideration: the size of the dose, the age of
the person, their level of strength and tolerance,
mental condition, and digestive functioning. Other
factors include the season, time of day, time of
collection, method of herb storage, the potency of
the herbs, the client’s diet, and whether the herbs
are fresh or dry. One herb can have many different
applications; seemingly unrelated disorders can be
healed from the same herb. For example, kuókí can
be used for heart disease, colic, painful urination,
respiratory conditions, convulsions, and insomnia.
Medicine should be considered to
perform diverse functions.
Charak Saåhitá: Sú. 4; verse 22
     This is very different from the modern idea that
one drug can be used for one disease; although this
idea is not entirely foreign to Western practitioners.
Sometimes, when studying many patients who are
taking a drug for one condition, it is found that the
drug also helps another condition. The reverse of
this finding is also true; various adverse side effects
can unknowingly develop from taking a drug. Here,
too, Áyurveda reveals the possible side effects of
herbs (if any), so there are no surprises. The main
principle of Áyurveda is to cause no harm. Armed
with knowledge of uses and side effects, Áyurvedic
practitioners can avoid such mistakes.
A therapy that helps some symptoms but
causes other symptoms is not a pure therapy.
- Aßhóáñga H^idayam: Sú. 12; verse 16
Holistic Interrelation
     Western thinking seems to focus on pieces,
remaining unaffected by the whole picture. For
example, illness and unhealthy organs are viewed
independently. Other symptoms, such as nutrition,
life-style, and career, are too often not taken into
account. Áyurveda, on the other hand, is founded
on the principle that all aspects of one’s life are
interrelated. The whole is greater than the sum of
its parts. This is clearly seen in the way drugs are
made, versus how herbs are prepared. Western
medicine isolates active ingredients from known
herbs to guarantee certain levels of active
ingredients in their drugs, ignoring the possibility
that our unknown active ingredients may also play

569
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
a part in the process; directing the ingredient to a
specific site or preventing side effects. Some holistic
practitioners have also fallen into this piecemeal
frame of thinking. Áyurveda encourages persons
to look at healing from the truly holistic vantage.
     Certain herbs perform unique actions and do not
follow the general rules. For example, many herbs
have been found helpful in reducing hypoglycemia
(mostly bitter and astringent tastes). Yet, why these
herbs perform this action cannot be explained
phytochemically, or taxonomically.
     In other words, no one active ingredient can be
said to effect healing. This example lends more
credence to the idea that much can be lost through
the extraction and use of only extracted parts of a
plant.
The aim of the herb’s action is the whole plant,
thus, examine the whole patient.
Charak Saåhitá: Vi. 8; verse 94
Healing the Unhealable
     Some diseases are considered incurable, and in
some cases untreatable. These include psoriasis,
certain liver disorders, obesity, malabsorption,
rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, asthma, skin
allergies, diabetes, epilepsy, MS, certain cancers,
and some mental disorders, to name a few. Patients
may be told by their doctors that not much can be
done other than live with the condition. In some
cases, drugs can lessen the symptoms, but healing
is not available.
   Áyurveda has found that many of these
conditions can be healed, so long as the conditions
are not genetic in origin. Even when heredity is a
factor, Áyurveda can at least contain, lessen, and
sometimes remove the symptoms; however,
persons may be required to remain on the herbal
and nutritional therapies for the rest of their lives.
     These statements are not being made to discredit
Western medicine; it has its place. The point here
is that Áyurveda offers valid complimentary
therapies that can help in many cases where
Western medicine presently has no answers.
Healing vs Curing
     It is useful to review the concept of curing versus
healing. Western terminology centers on the notion
of curing, as if one can achieve a permanent state of
health. Áyurveda suggests that health does not
necessarily mean the absence of disease or even the
absence of symptoms.
     Rather, if one achieves a state of homeostasis
or balance (i.e., a harmonious integration of all
mental and physical systems), a person will feel
healthy. The Áyurvedic view makes sense because
we know there are such things as viruses and
parasites within our system. When the immune
system is weak these elements cannot take hold
and cause disease.
     The mind and body continually undergo
rhythmic changes as a result of age, season, time
of day, and metabolism. Consequently, persons
must adjust to these internal and external influences
to maintain their balance. It does not make sense
that once a medicine is taken and the symptoms
are ‘cured’ that the body will no longer be
challenged.
     An example of how rhythms affect the
physiology is given in a study discussed in the
Principles of Áyurvedic Therapeutics by A.V.
Kumar. 
The 
chemicals 
acetylcholine,
catecholamine, and histamine were more
predominant in the blood of the subjects during
summer, rainy, and winter seasons. Thus, these
three chemicals, also related to Váyu, Pitta, and
Kapha respectively, increase and decrease in the
human body according to seasonal rhythms. This
is why Áyurveda suggests subtle changes in diet
and life-style according to the season.
Working With Natural Rhythms
     Áyurveda also delineates the best time of year
to collect herbs to ensure their maximum potency,
and also the best time of day to take the herbs
depending upon it’s properties. Below are two
tables discussing these rhythmic schedules.
      Further, when collecting thick roots, only the
root bark is collected. When roots are thin, the whole
root is collected.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
570
When To Take Herbs
Rejuvenation
     Other areas unique to Áyurveda include
rejuvenation, longevity, or age reversal
(rasáyanas). The concept of rasáyanas takes
healing to another level. Beyond healing and
prevention,  Áyurveda says that through special
herbs, diet, lifestyle, ethics, and spirituality, the mind
and body can actually rebuild new healthy cells and
tissues, thus slowing or reversing the aging process.
     Brain tonics like a¤hwagandhá, ¤ha´kh pußhpí,
and bráhmí have been found to prevent senility and
memory loss. Physically, the essential life sap in
the body that protects the immune system can
actually continue to develop through eating herbs
like ähatávarí and a¤hwagandhá.
     Rejuvenation is new to Western medicine.
Rejuvenation views the psychological,
neurological, endocrinological, and immunological
systems as an integrated whole. The key organ
studied in rejuvenation is the brain. The brain
influences its peripheral systems, the immune
system, and harmonizes body functions. Through
the use of special herbs, foods, and pañcha karma
practices, the chemical age of individuals can be
reversed.
Herbal Catalytic Agents (Anupanas)
     In addition to the advanced knowledge of herb
usage, Áyurveda offers various herbs, liquids, and
foods to empower the main herb, thereby healing
even more quickly. For many conditions, mercury
ash is suggested. Presently it is not allowed in some
Western countries in this form because it is
erroneously believed to be harmful. Mercuric
oxide, however, is used for healing styes in the U.S.
Although it is true that mercury in its natural state
is toxic, it becomes a powerful healing agent after
undergoing a specific burning process. Other
catalysts include:
y
tr
e
p
o
r
P
b
r
e
H
b
r
e
H
e
k
a
T
o
T
e
m
i
T
s
e
vita
d
e
s
cirts
a
g
h
c
a
m
ots
ytp
m
e
n
a
n
o
,s
cih
c
a
m
ots
s
cin
ot
rettib
d
e
b
er
o
fe
b
r
u
o
h
2/1
s
cite
m
e
e
v
o
m
er
ot(
g
nin
r
o
m
e
ht
m
o
rf
d
o
o
f
d
ets
e
gid
n
u
)th
gin
s
u
oiv
er
p
s
e
vita
g
r
u
p
g
nin
e
v
e
r
o
g
nin
r
o
m
s
citer
uid
nik
s
n
e
h
w
(
e
m
ity
a
d
)lo
o
c
tp
e
k
si
s
citer
o
h
p
aid
re
v
ef
g
nir
u
d

571
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
Knowledge vs Experience
     In the West, knowledge is most highly revered.
Experience and knowledge are equally important
in the East, but experience is seen as the crucial
validating factor. The essence of Áyurveda is to
remove the obstacles to health on one’s spiritual path.
Thus, the most important aspect of learning
Áyurveda is to learn to follow one’s personal
Áyurvedic regimen to achieve balance.
   Too often, in the name of helping others,
compassionate healers will ignore their own health
and lifestyle. Developing and maintaining balance
deepens one’s intuition, compassion, ethics, and
overall spiritual life; thereby ever improving one’s
abilities as a healer. In contrast, many Westerners
will absorb themselves in the intellectual study of
a subject (even Áyurveda), forgetting to include
themselves in the holistic picture.
Parallels: East and West
     Although we have discussed at some length the
unique aspects of Áyurveda, many parallels do
remain between East and West. In fact, one can
more readily accept the validity of the Áyurvedic
system when the anatomical, physiological, and
endocrine, systems discussed are found to be
identical to those known through modern science.
     One such example is the discussion of srota:
srotasmi, siras, rakta, and h^idaya. Although these
words may seem foreign, they are merely the
Sanskrit words for channels, arteries and arterioles,
capillaries, veins and venules. The blood flow
process (from the heart through the arteries and
arterioles, branching into the capillaries and
supplying nutrients to the body) is identical in both
Áyurvedic and modern medical descriptions. Thus,
as the Áyurvedic system is examined more
thoroughly, it will reveal many similarities to
modern medicine.
Áyurvedic Research
Modern Scientific Validation
     This book has been dedicated to the compilation
and presentation of Áyurveda, the   holistic healing
alternative from India. Throughout the chapters,
modern terminology has been added to reveal the
parallels between the ancient and modern sciences.
These similarities suggest just how credible this
ancient science is. Still, one may wonder whether
Áyurveda would be applicable in today’s society,
or in other cultures other than Indian. In short, can
holistic healing alternatives (e.g., herbs, meditation,
proper nutrition, yoga) offer solutions to diseases
in our time?
     Over the past decade, many studies focused on
just this question. This section offers a brief look
into the extensive research being done on
Áyurvedic herbs over the past 10 years.
Summations of the research from books and
journals, including studies listed for those who
wish to take a more scientific approach, are given
here.
    There are different forms of Áyurvedic research:
studying of the effect of herbs on humans, on
animals, and in vitro (isolated tissue cell or organ
preparation). Another group of herbal research
involves whole-plant versus isolated-active
ingredients; and whole plant versus herbal extracts.
In order to keep the integrity and spirit of
Áyurvedic holistic healing, it is important to
e
s
a
e
si
D
)
a
n
a
p
u
n
A
(
ts
yla
t
a
C
ytidic
A
e
e
h
g
ra
g
u
s
d
n
a
ai
m
e
n
A
y
d
n
a
c
k
c
o
r
d
n
a
rettu
b
aix
er
o
n
A
y
e
n
o
h
d
n
a
e
ciuj
re
g
nig
sitih
c
n
o
r
B
e
e
h
g
,y
e
n
o
h
y
s
p
elip
E
kli
m
rettu
b
y
sla
P
laic
a
F
y
e
n
o
h
a
m
re
d
o
k
u
e
L
lio
r
ots
a
c
s
ulu
cla
C
la
n
e
R
reta
w
to
h
d
n
a
y
e
n
o
h
m
sita
m
u
e
h
R
tijálih
¤
d
n
a
a
r
u
h
ß
k
o
g
sr
o
m
u
T
e
ciuj
n
o
m
el
,lio
r
ots
a
c

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
572
emphasize human research, whole plant research,
and whole-plant extracts. Human studies do not
inflict unnecessary cruelty on animals. Whole plant
and whole-plant extracts. Human studies do not
inflict unnecessary cruelty on animals. Whole plant
and whole plant extracts offer the entire preparation
made by mother nature. Anything less can
potentially cause harm.
     First, these herbs have been safely and
successfully used for thousands of years, and their
effects are fully documented in Áyurvedic texts.
To inflict illness, suffering and pain on animals
just to study these results seems cruel and
unnecessary. Further, effects on animals do not
automatically assume the same results will be found
in humans—it is a jump in logic. So research on
animals is not advocated.
     Second, in trying to prove the efficacy of
Áyurvedic herbs, some people try to make it fit
into the western allopathic paradigm of drugs. In
other words, find the active ingredient, isolate it,
and boost its strength—if something is good, more
of it must be better. It is this very process that has
led to the harmfulness of drugs. Isolated ingredients
—even from herbs—can cause side effects.
     Mother nature has added to each whole plant
part not only active ingredients, but also protective
ingredients. This is the value of holistic vision.
These days pharmacies and health food stores are
selling herbal products containing only active
isolated ingredients. This is just what drugs are.
This will be equally harmful. Further, making a
man-made version of an herb, it is now enhanced
by using only the extracted version—a more potent
version of this isolated herb. Thus, if there is
potential harm from the herb, the danger is not
increased exponentially.
     In short, it is hoped that future researcher will
consider keeping the integrity of Áyurveda in mind
when they design their tests. It is further hoped
that herbal and pharmaceutical companies will not
try to mold the integrity and value of Áyurvedic
medicine into the less effective and more dangerous
mindset of allopathic drugs. In an April 15,1988
JAMA article (pages 1200-1205), it was reported
that death due to allopathic drugs was the fourth
leading cause of death in the US for 1997.
     This is 21/2 times more deaths than from AIDS.
If AIDS is an epidemic, what do we call death due
to prescription drugs? One person figured out these
deaths are equivalent to a plane crash a day. Why
do we insist on molding herbal research to become
like allopathic drug research? Simple double-blind
studies on humans using whole plant herbs will be
safe, effective, and still produce acceptable and
reliable research. It is hoped that this information is
heeded before herbs are used in a way that makes
them as harmful as prescription drugs.
     Discussed below are some research studies. The
Áyurvedic herbal section includes studies using
various forms of research from human-whole plant,
to animal-active ingredient extracts. This small
sample of more than 2,000 Áyurvedic studies is
presented to show the efficacy of Áyurvedic herbs;
it is not meant to condone the various forms of
research that have potentially harmful outcomes
as discussed above.
     Another notion to keep in mind when
maintaining the integrity of the Áyurvedic system
is that Áyurveda uses herbs to heal the root-cause
of illness, not merely treating the symptoms. Also,
Áyurveda considers the whole person and their
lifestyle. To ignore this would be to weaken the
healing power of Áyurveda, as well as destroy its
spiritual link. Therefore, for all the above reasons,
researchers, herbal and pharmaceutical companies,
doctors, and practitioners are respectfully urged
to avoid attempting to fit Áyurveda into the mold
of modern medicine.
Research
    Modern research
has 
begun 
to
investigate the power
of 
prayer 
and
meditation, low-fat vegetarian diets, and haóha yoga
exercises. The results of the research suggest that
meditation or prayer, yoga, diet, and lifestyle

573
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
changes play an effective role in the healing and
prevention process. Further, scientific studies are
underway on various Áyurvedic herbs to determine
if the suggestions of the Áyurvedic texts are valid
for people of this era. Diseases presently be
researched using Áyurvedic herbs include the heart,
liver, cholesterol, asthma, osteoarthritis, and AIDS.
Alternative Healing and Arteriosclerosis
     Dr. Dean Ornish, in his book, Reversing Heart
Disease, has discussed scientific studies he had
conducted on reversing heart disease, specifically,
coronary artery disease (CAD) or coronary
arteriosclerosis. Because of his studies, many
health insurance companies have begun to offer
compensation
for coronary heart patients who enroll in Dr.
Ornish’s heart therapy program.
     In a 1-year, randomized, single-blind study, 28
patients were placed in an experimental group.
They were given a low-fat vegetarian diet and
stopped smoking cigarettes and drinking coffee.
They also began various “stress management”
routines (i.e., exercises of haóha yoga stretching,
práòáyáma breathing, moderate walking,
relaxation and visualizations, and group support
sessions). Another group of 20 patients comprised
the control group. This latter group followed the
currently recommended 30% fat reduction diet.
The experimental group improved significantly,
whereas the control group actually grew worse.
Specifically, in the experimental group there was
a significant decrease in cholesterol. Other
reductions include the frequency of angina, lesion
size, and apoli poprote in B. The control group had
increases in these areas.
     Stress management measures may have proved
effective owing to their ability to reduce emotional
stress that stimulates the sympathetic nervous
system. This increased stimulation may lead to
chemical reactions that cause coronary problems
and blood clots.
     It may also be that a holistic healing approach
(i.e., meditation, haóha yoga, breathing, diet, group
support) is a more effective way to recover and
prevent coronary heart disease. This is because
holistic health considers persons as a whole, beyond
an isolated physical organ. For example, all the
patients in the experimental group had a common
feeling of isolation or emotional loneliness. Thus, a
correlation may exist between emotional (e.g., a
breaking heart) and physical health. Group support
sessions helped remove the barriers causing
emotional isolation.
     Group support and the educationally motivating
aspects of the holistic approach worked to inspire
the experimental group to comply with the
program.
Prayer, Meditation, and Healing
     In Dr. Dossey’s book, Healing Words, he
discusses various studies on the use of prayer and
meditation by people to heal and prevent illness
from occurring, or becoming worse.
     In a randomized, double-blind study by Dr.
Randolph Byrd, an experimental group of 192
coronary patients (versus 201 control coronary
patients) arranged to have between 5 and 7 people
praying for them daily over a 10-month period.
No one prayed for the control group. The
experimental group was five times less likely to
require antibiotics and three times less likely to
develop pulmonary edema.
     None of the experimental group needed
artificial air tubes, whereas 12 people in the
“unremembered” group had this need; and fewer
people died in the experimental group (but this was
not statistically significant). The study was widely
respected, but inconclusive and requiring further
research and a larger study group.
     In another study by Braud and Schlitz, 62 people
(influencers) were asked to perform healing on 271
subjects, whose health concerns ranged from overly
emotional, hyperactivity, tension headaches, high
blood pressure, and ulcers. The influencers were
asked to perform mental imagery and self-calming
techniques; depending upon the needs of the
subjects. Influencers and subjects were subjects were
located in different rooms in the same building (20

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
574
meters away). Thirteen experiments were
performed. Results were strong,
 consistent, and replicable.
     Dossey also mentioned the Spindrift group, who
for more than 10 years has performed laboratory
experiments suggesting that prayer helps healing.
Two types of prayer were measured: directed (goal-
oriented or image, i.e., praying for cancer to be
cured) and non-directed (whatever is best for the
patient, or ‘let God’s will be done’).
     They found that both methods work, but the non-
directed approach was determined to be more
powerful. These findings suggest that a person need
not know how the healing process occurs, but pray
for healing to occur, however it is best for the
patient.
     Dr. Dossey cites a study by Dr. Daniel Benor
who investigated 131 studies on spiritual healing
done before 1990 (mostly nonhuman studies). In
56 of the studies, the positive findings were said to
be 1 in 100 to result from chance. In another 56
studies, between 2 and 5 in 100 were said to result
from chance.
     Benor found in 151 out of 194 fungus cultures
that growth was inhibited or retarded after 15
minutes of concentration. This took place from
about 1.5 yards distance away from the fungus.
This study was replicated when distances increased
to 15 miles away from the fungus cultures. Results
were replicated in 16 experiments.
     Another study found people with no known
healing abilities to retard and stimulate significant
bacterial culture. Other studies demonstrated the
ability to inhibit cancer cells in simple organisms
(e.g., one-celled algae, paramecia, and moth
larvae), plants, and animals.
    In light of this research, the relevance and
effectiveness of Áyurvedic therapies of meditation,
nutrition, haóha yoga, práòáyáma in healing and
preventing modern-day illness is most
encouraging. It suggests that medical technological
developments do not imply a more advanced
culture in terms of healing. Rather, it suggests that
the ancient healers were as adept (or more so) in
healing and preventing illness. This wisdom was
lost or overlooked for some time.
    In the coming decade, much scientific research
should validate the use and need for a more spiritual
and holistic approach to true healing. It is more
than likely that Áyurvedic wisdom will play a
significant role in this regard.
Áyurveda, Allopathy, and Health Care
     As discussed earlier, not only might alternative,
natural, Áyurvedic care be a useful complement to
Western medicine in terms of healing, but it can also
be financially practical. In a recent Yoga Journal
article about Dr. Ornish’s “reversing heart disease”
program, the difference in cost between traditional
heart care and a holistic approach, such as Dr.
Ornish’s, was staggering. Heart bypass operations
cost about $43,000, and the process of opening the
arteries through surgery (angioplasty) costs around
$18,000. Cholesterol lowering medicine alone, such
as Lovastatin, can cost up to $1,500 a year per
person.
     When compared with the $3,500 cost of
Ornish’s 12-week program, it is enough to make
any hospital administrator think twice, and in fact,
it has. David M. Liff, the Program Development
Consultant for Dean Ornish’s program said that
they are inundated with requests from clinics
around the United States to set up the heart disease
reversal programs. It is interesting to note that the
main Áyurvedic herb for cholesterol, guggul, may
only cost $150 for an entire year; making this the
most cost-effective cholesterol program.
     As more favorable research emerges on holistic
healing alternatives for modern diseases, hospital
administrators will want to expand their alternative
healing programs to include other diseases as well.
Áyurvedic Research
    In the Garden of Life, by Naveen Patnaik, several
studies on Áyurvedic herbs are discussed.
Bráhmí (gotu kola) was used in a double-blind
clinical test on 30 mentally retarded children (free
from epilepsy and other neurological conditions).

575
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
The study attempted to see if there was an effect on
their mental abilities. The results suggested that there
was a significant improvement in both general
mental ability and behavioral patterns after only 12
weeks.
Punarnavá (hogweed) was found to be an effective
therapy for nephritic syndrome (kidney) in 22
patients, producing an increased flow of urine,
reducing edema, and in an overall improvement of
albumin urea, serum protein rise, and decreases in
serum cholesterol levels.
Guggul (Indian bedellium) was used in preliminary
tests on 22 patients having hypercholesterolemia,
associated with obesity, ischemic heart disease,
hypertension, and diabetes. In all cases, the total
serum cholesterol and serum lipid phosphorus
levels diminished. A significant decrease in weight
was found in 10 of the patients. In later studies
involving 12 cases, guggul was found to reduce
serum turbidity and prolong coagulation in all
instances.
Other Áyurvedic Research
Bráhmí (gotu kola; Centella asiatica or hydrocotyle
asiatica). This herb was found to be useful for
cirrhosis of the liver, periodontal disease, peripheral
vascular disease, scleroderma, vascular fragility,
enhanced wound healing, enhanced connective
tissue structure of the vascular sheath, and reduced
sclerosis or hardening. It was found to reduce
feelings of heaviness in the lower legs, numbness,
nighttime cramps, swellings, spider veins and skin
ulcers, vein distensibility, and improve blood flow
through affected limbs in 80% of patients in clinical
trials.
     Bráhmí has been found to relieve depression,
anxiety, mental fatigue, and enhance memory.
[Journal of Research in Áyurveda and Saddai:
1980] It has also been helping mentally
handicapped and emotionally disturbed children.
[Indian Journal of Psychiatry: 1977]
     It has been found helpful in treating cirrhosis.
[Sem. Hop. Paris 55(37-8):1749-50, 1979] Bráhmí
has been reported to heal brain tumors as well.
[Herbal Gram No. 36]
Harítakí (Terminalia chebula), Keßharája (Eclipta
alba), Tulsí (Ocimum sanctum) were found to be
useful antibacterial herbs. Harítakí was the
strongest and had the widest spectrum of
antibacterial activity. Keßharája had the second
widest spectrum of effect. Additionally, salmonella
was treated by harítakí. Shigella was treated by
harítakí and keßharája. [Indian Journal of Medical
Sciences. 43 (5):113-7, 1988 May]
Ámalakí (Emblica officinalis, Gaertn.) was studied
in normal and hypercholesterololemic men. The
herb was taken for 28 days. Both normal and
hypercholesterolemic subjects showed a decrease
in cholesterol levels. Two weeks after stopping the
therapy, the total  serum cholesterol levels of the
hypercholesterolemic subjects rose significantly,
almost to initial levels. [European Journal of
Clinical Nutrition. 42 (11): 939-44, 1988 Nov.]
Neem (Azadirachta indica ADR) and Turmeric
(Curcuma longa) were tested to heal chronic ulcers
(external) and scabies. They were used as a paste
in 814 persons. 97% of the people were cured
within 3-15 days. There were no toxic or adverse
reactions. [Tropical and Geographical Medicine 44
(1-2): 178-81, 1992 Jan.]
£hatávarí (Asparagus racemosus) was used to test
dyspepsia and as a galactogogue. It was compared
with a modern drug (metoclopramide) which is
used in dyspepsia to reduce gastric emptying time.
The gastric emptying half-time was studied in 8
healthy males. £hatávarí was found to work as
effectively as the allopathic drug. [Postgraduate
Medicine 36(2): 91-4, 1990 April]
A¤hwagandhá (Withania somnifera, stem of Shallaki
(Boswellia serrata, rhizomes of Turmeric (Curcuma
longa) and a zinc complex (Articulin-F) were
studied in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, crossover study in persons with
osteoarthritis. First, a 1-month single blind study
on 42 persons with osteoarthritis was conducted.
Persons were randomly allocated to receive either

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
576
the herbs or a placebo for a period of 3 months.
After a 15-day “wash out” period, the two groups
switched therapies for another 3 months.
Evaluations were given every 14 days based on pain
severity, morning stiffness, Ritchie articular index,
joint score, disability score, and grip strength.
Erythrocyte (red blood cell) sedimentation rate was
monitored and radiological examinations were
compared. The herbs were found to cause a
significant drop in the severity of pain (P = .001)
and a disability score (P = .05). No significant
changes were noted in either group from the
radiological 
assessment. 
[Journal 
of
Ethnopharmacology. 33 (1-2) 91-5, 1991 May-
June]
     In another study, the adaptogenic mechanism
of a¤hwagandhá was compared to ginseng. A 40-
day double-blind study found a¤hwagandhá equal
or better than ginseng in the areas of improved
problem solving, physical performance, and
reaction time in healthy volunteers. [Indian
Medicine: 3 (2,3): 1-5, 1991 April-July]
   The effects of a¤hwagandhá were again
measured in a double-blind study on 101 healthy
persons, aged 50 to 59 years old. After taking
a¤hwagandhá for 1 year the volunteers showed
significantly reduced signs of aging compared with
the placebo group. Anti-aging was found in areas
of increased melanin (hair pigment that declines
with age that is responsible for graying) and
significantly lower levels of calcium loss
(measured in the nails) than the control group.
[Journal of Research in Áyurveda and Saddai:
247-258, 1980 - Kuppurajan, K., et al.]
     A¤hwagandhá has also been found to relieve a
reactive form of depression. [Journal of Research
in Áyurveda and Saddai, 1989]
Guæúchí (Tinospora cordifolia) was tested for its
immunosuppression activity associated with
deranged hepatic function and sepsis resulting from
poor surgical outcomes. Preliminary studies
suggested guæúchí contains hepatoprotective and
immunomodulatory properties in surgical
outcomes in patients with malignant obstructive
jaundice. This follow-up study tested 30 patients,
randomly divided into two groups (matched with
respect to clinical features, impairment of hepatic
function, as judged by liver function testes including
antipyrine elimination, and immunosuppression/
phagocytic capacities of neutrophils). The first group
received conventional treatment, namely, vitamin K,
antibiotics, and biliary drainage. Group two also
received guæúchí (16 mg/kg/day orally) during their
biliary drainage. Hepatic function was comparable
in the two groups after drainage, but the phagocytic
and killing capacities of neutrophils were
normalized only in persons receiving guæúchí.
Clinical evidence of septicemia was observed in
50% of patients in group one, whereas none was
found in the second group (P = .05). Postoperative
survival in groups one and two were 40% and
92.4%, respectively (P = .01). The conclusion
drawn was that gudúchí appears to improve surgical
outcomes by strengthening host defenses. [Indian
Journal of Gastroenterology. 12(1) :5-8, 1993 Jan.]
Turmeric (Curcuma longa) has been found to be a
strong antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antiviral,
antibacterial, antifungal, anticancer, and a
detoxifying herb. [Planta Med., 57: 1-7, 1991]
     Other research has found that turmeric’s active
ingredient, circuminoids, have significant
antioxidant activities in both prevention and
intervention. [Nutracon 95; Majeed, M., and
Badmaev, V.]. It was also found useful for the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis minus side effects.
[Ind. J Med Res 71:632-4, 1980)]
Triphalá (Ámalakí (Emblica Offic.), Harítakí
(Terminalia chebula), Bibhítakí (Terminalia
bellerica) have been found to improve digestion,
absorb nutrients, and assist the body’s metabolism.
It is also useful for psychosomatic conditions that
affect the gastrointestinal tract. [Journal of
Ethnopharmacology, 1990]

577
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
Bhúámalakí (Phyllanthus amarus) was tested in
persons with chronic active hepatitis resulting from
the chronic hepatitis B virus. In a 30-day study, a
significant number of persons using bhúámalakí
were rid of the viral antigen compared with the
placebo group. [Lancet, 1988]
Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna), Bibhítakí, and Harítakí
help protect the heart muscle. [Indian Drugs: 1990]
Pippalí (Piper longum), alone or in t^ikatu, has been
found to relieve asthma and chronic bronchitis. One
study measured 240 children of various ages who
frequently had bronchial asthma. Pippalí was found
to reduce the frequency and severity of attacks.
[Indian Drugs: 1984]
Balá (Sida cordifolia) has also been found to
effectively relieve bronchitis and asthma. [Lancet:
1984]
Guggul (Gugulipid- Commiphora mukul), was
found useful in healing acne vulgaris [Indian
Journal of Dermatology Leprol 56(1):381-3, 1990]
and atherosclerosis (cholesterol reduction). HDL
cholesterol gradually increased, whereas VLDL
and LDL cholesterol significantly decreased [J
Assoc Phys India 37(5):323- 8, 1989; Indian J Med
Res 87:356-60, 1988]
     The active components of gugulipid are Z-
guggulesterone and E-guggulesterone. This active
ingredient has been found to prevent Pitta- (heat)
related side effects, caused by using the pure, whole
resin. If Pitta conditions develop, it is useful to
research kaißhore guggul—Pitta-reducing guggul.
In this way, the benefits of avoiding side effects as
well as using the whole resin may be
simultaneously accomplished.
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra), has been found to
be effective in healing eczema [Br. J Clin. Pract.
12:269-79, 1958], peptic ulcer [Hepato-
gastroenterol 32(6):293-5, 1985], duodenal and
gastric ulcer [Scand J Gasterenterol suppl. 65: 85-
91, 1980], and dental plaque [Isr J Dent Sci 2(3):
153-7, 1989].
     Licorice may cause some side effects when taken
alone for more than 6 weeks. It may increase so-
dium and water retention, hypertension, hypokale-
mia, and suppress the reninaldosterone system.
Monitoring blood pressure and electrolytes and in-
creasing potassium intake is suggested. However,in
Áyurveda these side effects can be avoided by mix-
ing licorice in warm milk or using the de-
glycyrrhized form.To date,we have not found any
studies measuring these methods.
Cranberry (Vaccinium macrocarpon)- Drinking
cranberry juice has been found to effectively treat
urinary tract infections [JAMA 271:751-4, 1994;
J. Naturopathic Med 2(1):45-7, 1991; Southwest
Med. 47(1):17-20, 1966; Wisconsin Med. J.
61:282, 1962]
     It has also been found helpful in kidney stone
conditions, reducing the amount of ionized calcium
in the urine [Urology 1(1):67-70, 1973]
Í¤habgol (Plantago ovata) was found to help irri-
table bowel syndrome—diarrhea: [Acta
Gastroenterol Latinoam 17(4):317-23, 1987; Ir
Med J 76(5):253, 1983]. It has also been helpful
for constipation. [Gut 28(11):1510-13, 1987]
     Í¤habgol was found to be useful for treatment
of anal fissure (except in cases of advanced anal
stenosis). [Dis. Colon Rectum, 21: 8, 1978 Nov-
Dec, 582-3]
     When mixed with food, í¤habgol was found to
reduce blood glucose responses. [J Am Coll Nutr,
10: 4, 1991 Aug, 364-71]
Ginger (Zingiber officinale) has been found to re-
duce gastrointestinal complaints, atherosclerosis,
headache, nausea, vomiting, and vertigo (numer-
ous studies, including [Anaesthesia 45(8):669-71,
1990; Acta Otolaryngol 105(1- 2):45-9, 1988], os-
teoarthritis [Med Hypothesis 39:342-8, 1992],
rheumatic pain, and rheumatoid arthritis [Med
Hypothesis 39:342-8, 1992; Med 577 Hypothesis
29:25-8, 1989; ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat
Spec, 48: 5, 1986, 282-6]. It was also found to con-
tain high levels of anti-oxidants. [Chung Kuo

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
578
Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 17: 6, 1997 Jun, 36809, 373
backcover]
Garcinia Spp. (Malabar Tamarind) may help
reduce obesity. The dried fruit contains 20-30% of
the active ingredient (-)Hydroxycitric acid
(HCA). [Arch Biochem Biophys 135:209-17,
1969; J Biol Chem 245:599, 1970]. HCA has
been found to divert glucose from being used as
building blocks of fatty tissue and increase the
body’s supply of stored glucose, called glyco-
gen.    Glycogen also turns off food cravings.
[Alt. Comp. Ther. 1(4)
212-215, 1995]. In another study, insulin require-
ments for persons with diabetes mellitis decreased
along with fasting blood glucose and glycosylated
hemoglobin (HbA1c), and glycosylated plasma
protein levels. Serum lipids returned to near nor-
mal levels with GS water soluble extract,
glycosylated hemoglobin, and glycosylated plasma
protein levels remained higher than control group.
Enhances indigenous insulin. [J Ethnopharmacol,
30: 3, 1990 Oct, 281-94]
Gurmar (Gymnema sylvestre) was found to re-
move sweetness from bittersweet mixtures, in-
creasing bitterness. [J Comp Physiol Psychol, 93:
3, 1979 June, 538-47]. In another study gurmar
reduced sweet cravings. [Physiol Behav, 30: 1,
1983 Jan, 1-9]
Research by Disease
    In the book, Botanical Influences on Illness by
Werbach and Murray, research is cited on foods
and herbs that help various disorders. Some of the
following were described earlier in this book.
Atherosclerosis: (including coronary heart disease)
Foods and herbs found to help these conditions (in
scientific research) include alfalfa, artichoke, egg-
plant, berberine (from barberry), curcumin (from
turmeric), fenugreek, garlic, onion, ginger,
gugulipid, and garcinia camboga (Malabar Tama-
rind).
Bronchial Asthma: Numerous studies have found
herbs that help ease this condition including, aloe
vera, coleus forskohlii (containing forskolin), lico-
rice, onion, picrorrhiza kurroa (kaóuká)
Cancer: Research has found many useful herbs for
healing cancer, including barberry root (berberine),
garlic, onions, and turmeric.
Diabetes: Herbs and foods found to be helpful in
diabetes include aloe vera, bitter melon
(momordica charantia/Kerala), fenugreek
(Trigonella foenum graecum/methi), Gurmar,
(gymnema sylvestre/£harkunikha)
Psoriasis: Two herbs found useful in treating this
condition are Bákuchí (psoralea corylifolia)
[Pharmac Ther 34:75-97, 1987] and sarsaparilla
(Smilax sarsaparilla) [Br J dermatol 108:33-7,
1983; N Engl J Med 227:128-33, 1942]. Bákuchí
has also been found effective in treating vitiligo
[Pharmac Ther 34:75-97, 1987].
Collaborative Research
   Several cooperative studies between Zandu Phar-
maceutical Works, Bombay India and various re-
search institutions are discussed below. The herbs
contained in the following formulas are readily
available from many sources. This author is grate-
ful for Zandu for making these studies available.
Diabetes: One formula that includes gurmar, neem,
and £hilájit was tested on 20 persons with proven
maturity onset of diabetes over an 8-week period.
Eighteen persons had hereditary histories of dia-
betes. Ten people were randomly chosen as a con-
trol group. Both groups followed certain dietary
restrictions.
     All 10 people taking the herbal formula reported
subjective, as well as objective improvement of all
symptoms (polyphagia, polyuria, polydypsia, ex-
cessive sweating, dryness of throat, numbness, fa-
tigue, weakness, and constipation). Objective and
subjective symptoms of the control group remained
the same or increased.

579
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
    The group taking the herbal product) experienced
decreased mean blood sugar values, dropping from
204.1 mg/dL before the study to 119.65 mg/dL at
the end of the study. The mean blood sugar levels
in the control group rose from 189 mg/dL before
the study to 205 mg/dL at the end of the study.
     Effects of a Herbomineral Compound on Dia-
betes by K. N. C. Pal. Ayurved Samachar: Issue 8;
vol 10 2 Feb. 1988
Indigestion: A group of 20 general practitioners
tested a digestive herbal in their private practices
for 15 days on patients with anorexia, nausea, vom-
iting, heaviness in the chest, heaviness in the body,
burning sensation, and constipation. Patients were
clinically assessed after the 4th, 7th, 11th, and 15th
days of treatment. The herbal product included
cumin, asafoetida, cinnamon, cardamom, ginger,
pippalí, coriander (dhanyáka), musta, and triphalá.
     Significant improvement (p< 0.001) was seen
in all clinical symptoms and signs.
      Effects of Ayurvedic Drug (AB + R) in Indi-
gestion. Thakur, M. Bhatt, N.S. Mishra S. et. al.
Medicine & Surgery. May - August ’96/23
Schizophrenia: A herbal product including
£ha´kapußhpí, bráhmí, açhwagandhá, yaßhtí
madhu, vachá, and sarpagandha was administered
to 17 schizophrenia patients taking medication and
22 patients not taking any medication for six weeks.
Approximately 50% of both groups showed more
than 50% improvement on the Brief Psychiatric
Rating Scale. The herbs were relatively free from
side effects.
     Evaluation of Indigenous Psychotoropic Drugs
- A Preliminary Study. Parikh, M.D., Pradhan, P.V.,
Shah, L.P., Bagadia, V.N. Journ. Res. Ay. Sid. Vol
5; no. 1-4 pp. 12-17
Urinary Tract Infections: A total of 51 inpatients
and outpatients with various urinary tract symp-
toms (pain, burning, fever, frequency, blood in
urine) was tested for 45 days using an herbal prod-
uct that included guæúchí, haridrá, bilwa, and
karela (bitter melon). Patients were monitored ev-
ery 15 days.
     After 15 days, 50% of the patients began to show
reduction of symptoms. At the end of 30 days more
than 75% of the patients were symptom-free. By
the end of the study only 3 patients (6%) had pain-
ful or burning urination. Since modern antibiotic
therapy cannot always guarantee long-term ben-
efits, these herbs offer encouraging options to heal-
ing urinary tract infections. Further, these herbs
did not cause any side effects, even after 2 months
of use.
     Clinical Trial of Ayurvedic Drug U-144 (K-4
Tablets) in Urinary Tract Infections. Deshpande,
P.J., Singh Raman, Bhatt, N.S. The Medicine &
Surgery. Vol. 32; no. 10/11. Oct. - Nov. 1944
Liver/Bile Disorders: Forty-five persons who de-
veloped liver- and bile-related disorders following
surgery were given an herbal product containing
punarnavá, bh^i´garáj, chiráyatá, arogyavardhini,
and mandur bhasma (iron ash) for 45 days. Seven
patients had cholecystectomy, 21 previous gall
bladder operations, 12 hepatitis, and 5 T-tube bil-
iary drainage following cholecyst-ectomy. Subjects
were monitored every 15 days.
     Measurements after herbal therapy revealed
increased liver function and control of hepatitis.
Biliary flow was restored. Associated symptoms
of nausea, dyspepsia, pain, tenderness, vomiting,
belching, anorexia, vertigo, fever, swelling, con-
stipation, weakness, and flatulence were alleviated
in all subjects except for 1 symptom of jaundice
and 3 signs of weakness. Four of the five biliary T-
tube drainage cases showed definite increase in the
biliary flow.
     Clinical Effect of an Ayurvedic Drug L 2002 on
Hepatobiliary Disorders. Deshpande, P.J., Singh,
R., Bhatt, N.S. Journal of NIMA, December 1994.
More studies are available in the Ayurveda Primer
(E-Book), and online at http://ayurvedahc.com

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
580
Music Research
    The India Currents Magazine reports of scien-
tific research involving music to heal heart disease
and high blood pressure. Researchers in Berlin
played music by Ravi £hankar, Strauss, and mod-
ernist H. W. Henze for 40 heart patients. Blood
samples and stress levels of patients were measured
before and after listening to the music.
     The results were reported at the European Soci-
ety of Cardiology in Amsterdam. Strauss’ music
lowered stress hormones in the patients. However,
levels were even lower after listening to the sitar
music of Ravi £hankar. Blood pressure also reduced
after listening to his music. By contrast, the modern
music raised stress levels.
Pañcha Karma Research
     Rheumatoid arthritis: During the 1970s at
Benares Hindu University, piòæa sveda was found
to relieve pain, swelling, stiffness, and swollen
joints caused by rheumatoid arthritis within 1 week
of treatment. Patients’ body weight (formally un-
derweight) was also increased to healthier levels.
Measurements involved ease of walking, gripping,
and pressing power with both hands and body
weight.
     Chronic rheumatoid arthritis and bronchial
asthma: Two groups of patients were administered
vamana and virechana, followed by saåsarjana
diet. One group suffered from chronic rheumatoid
arthritis. The other group had bronchial asthma.
     Both groups of patients received 3 days of
snehapána (ingesting oil or ghee), whole body
sveda for the next 3 days, vamana, and virechana,
followed by the saåsarjana diet. Within one week,
post therapy measurements of physical, physiologi-
cal, and biochemical parameters of the patients
were taken.
     All rheumatoid arthritis patients showed statis-
tically significant improvements in ease of walk-
ing, and gripping power and pressing power (in
both hands) (P < 0.05). Asthmatic patients showed
a statistically significant increase in vital capacity
and length of time to hold the breath (P < 0.05).
Biochemically, a statistically significant reduction
in D-xylose (P < 0.001) caused improved gas-
trointestinal absorption capacity.
Current NCCAM-NIH Studies
     The National Center for Complimentary and
Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) is a part of the
National Institutes of Health has funded several
currently ongoing Áyurveda and yoga studies. Top-
ics include Parkinsonism, general promotion of
health, and yoga therapy for heroin addiction.
     They have a complete website covering research,
newsletter, and more, visit their website: http://
nccam.nih.gov/. Information may also be obtained
by writing or calling the NCCAM Clearinghouse;
P.O. Box 7923; Gaithersburg, Maryland 20898 Toll
Free: 888-644-6226. International: 301-519-3153
FAX: 1-866-464-3616 (Toll-Free). Email:
info@nccam.nih.gov.
Áyurveda at Columbia University
     In November 1994, the Dharma Hinduja Indic
Research Center held its first 2-day conference in
New York at Columbia University. It was entitled
Health, Science and the Spirit: Veda and Áyurveda
in the Western World. Áyurvedic Doctors from In-
dia and the U.S. met and spoke with Western allo-
pathic doctors, professors, and students from uni-
versities across the country including Harvard,
Columbia, New York University.
One aim of the conference was to have Áyurvedic
and allopathic medical professionals work together
to develop valid scientific research on healing
through Áyurvedic herbs and pañcha karma. The
scientific validation of the ancient Áyurvedic prac-
tices is slowly developing. They may be contacted
at 212-854-5300. Email: dhirc@columbia.edu.

581
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
Modern-Day Challenges
for Future Generations
     One reason Áyurveda is so effective is that it is
a living science; it addresses new diseases and pro-
vides appropriate therapies continually. The use of
mercury as a powerful rejuvenative was introduced
in the 14th century. Minerals were first used in
Áyurveda in the 16th century. To accommodate new
developments and discoveries, Áyurveda also adapts
and adjusts.
     In the early 20th century, the effects of the in-
dustrial revolution, such as water and air pollution
had a significant impact on the health of the wild-
life, nature, and humans—including infants and
fetuses. In time, a growing body of research would
show that the development and use of chemicals
(e.g., those used for pesticides and plastics) and
drugs had also added to the poisoning of the planet
and its creatures. It’s results manifested as a sharp
increase in the incidence of cancer, asthma, neu-
rological and immune disorders, and physical de-
formities in children. Research suggests that there
is a link between chemicals, environmental pol-
lutants, and certain diseases. Today depletion of
soil nutrients and erosion of soil, air and water
pollution due to unnatural farming methods and
deforestation continues.
     Modern Áyurveda must address these trends
and their consequences. Although Áyurveda can
address the symptoms, such as using herbs to re-
move toxins from the body, the scope of healing
must be expanded to address issues that currently
are being overlooked, such as the poor nutrient
quality of food, air, and water. Today, disease pre-
vention includes eating organic foods to avoid
harmful preservatives and insecticides.
     In the book, Our Stolen Future, the authors sug-
gested that the use of man-made products has con-
tributed to the ill health of wildlife and humans.
Detergents, drugs (i.e., synthetic estrogen), indus-
trial chemical waste, agricultural pesticides and
runoff, pesticides, and cooking vessels and con-
tainers made of plastics or other unnatural prod-
ucts may also be poisoning our children, unbal-
ancing their hormones, and interfering on the
genetic and neuronal levels.
     Therefore, the substances that contaminate our
food bear examination. The authors report that dam-
age from these hormone-disrupting chemicals is most
clearly seen in the offspring of women exposed to
the pollutants during the first months of pregnancy.
Áyurvedic Healing of Environmental Toxins
     If we address the three areas of the body that are
most critically affected by environmental pollut-
ants—the brain and the reproductive and immune
systems-we can apply Áyurvedic therapies dis-
cussed earlier. The following therapies are listed
according to condition—not according to one’s
doäha. Therefore, doäha must also be considered
before choosing these suggestions.
Herbs
Hormonal/Reproductive: A¤hwagandhá, yam
(váráhíkánd), £hatávarí and yogaraj guggul
Liver detox: Bhúámalakí (main herb), kuóki (for
chemical and biological poisoning), barberry,
chiráyatá, triphalá, mahásudarähan, neem, musta
and mañjiähóhá.
Toning: Ámalakí, bákuchí and bh^i´garáj
Massage
Hormones: Releases growth hormones; massage
(especially between eyebrows, neck and top of
head; just below navel [basti], reproductive organ
area [guda])
Liver: Elbow and knee joints, throat, heart and
navel
Foods
Hormones: Organic foods (has no hormones
added)-B6 vitamin (found in buckwheat, beans,
carrots, brown rice); tofu (female hormones); thy-
roid: sea vegetables, watercress oats, green foods
such as wheatgrass juice or powder.
Liver: Organic foods-cherries, figs, grapes, melons,
papayas, pears, pineapples, raspberries, artichokes,
beets, bitter melon, avocado, beans. Brussels sprouts,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
582
mung sprouts, celery, watercress, barley, corn, mung
beans, and ghee. Fenugreek, B2 vitamin (found in
millet, soy, whole wheat, wheat germ, beans, milk,
nuts, dark greens, molasses), green foods such as
wheatgrass juice or powder.
Yoga Poses
Hormones: Siddháyogásana/siddha yoni ásana,
cow pose, any of the spinal twist poses, shoulder
stand, fish pose and tortoise
Liver: Siddháyogásana/siddha yoni ásana, lotus
pose, any bow pose, spinal twist, tortoise and fish
Breathing Exercises (práòáyáma)
Hormones: Çhítkarí kumbhaka (hissing breath ex-
ercise) and solar práòáyáma
Liver: Çhítkarí kumbhaka, frontal brain cleanse
Bandhas & Múdras
Jálandhara bandha (throat lock), múla bandha,
mahá bheda múdra
Miscellaneous
Purgation for liver cleansing. Aromatherapy—iris
and gardenia for the liver.
Áyurveda and
Environmental Food Considerations
Why buy Organic?
     Organic foods are preferred for two reasons:
personal and environmental health. In both cases,
the concern is not so much for adults, but for chil-
dren and parents who plan to have children—the
concern is for future generations of people and the
future of the planet.
The Organic Trade Association offers the follow-
ing reasons one should buy organic foods:
1. Organic products meet stringent standards.
2. Organic certification is the public’s assurance
that products have been grown and handled accord-
ing to strict procedures without persistent toxic
chemicals.
3. Organic food has more flavor.
4. Well-balanced soils nourish strong healthy plants.
Many chefs use organic foods in their recipes be-
cause they taste better.
5. Organic production reduces health risks.
6. Many Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-
approved pesticides were registered long before
extensive research linked these chemicals to cancer
and other diseases. Organic agriculture does not
release additional chemicals into the air, earth, and
water.
7. Organic farms protect water resources.
8. Eliminating polluting chemicals and nitrogen
leaching in combination with soil building protects
and conserves water resources. Water makes up
two-thirds of our body mass and covers three-
fourths of the planet. In the US, the EPA estimates
that pesticides (including cancer-causing pesti-
cides) have contaminated groundwater in 38 states,
thus polluting the primary drinking water source
for more than half the country’s population.
9. Organic farmers build soil rather than deplete
it.
10. Soil is the main focus of organic farming. We
are facing the worst topsoil erosion in history ow-
ing to chemical intensive, mono-crop farming. The
Soil Conservation Service estimates that more than
3 billion tons of topsoil are eroded from US crop-
lands each year. This means that soil is eroding
seven times faster than it is being replaced.
11. Organic farmers work in harmony with nature,
respecting the balance required of a healthy eco-
system: wildlife is encouraged by including for-
age crops in rotation and by retaining fence rows,
wetlands, and other natural areas.
12. Organic farmers have led the way, largely at
their own expense, with innovative on-farm re-
search aimed at minimizing the impact that agri-
culture has on the environment.
13. Organic producers strive to preserve diversity.
The loss of a large variety of species (bio-diver-
sity) is one of our most pressing environmental con-
cerns. Organic farmers and gardeners have been

583
 Section 4: Specific Illnesses and Diseases
                                Chapter 27: Outer Healing
collecting and preserving seeds, and growing un-
usual varieties for decades.
14. Organic farming helps keep rural communities
healthy.
15. The USDA predicts that by the year 2,000, half
of the US farm production will come from 1% of
farms. Organic farming may be one of the few sur-
vival tactics left for the family farm and the rural
community.
16. Every food category has an organic alternative.
Even non-food crops are also being grown organi-
cally, including cotton.
For further information contact:
The Organic Trade Association
PO Box 1078
Greenfield, MA 01302 USA
Phone 413-774-7511
Web: http://www.ota.com
Áyurveda and
Environmental Home Safety
An Ounce of Prevention
     In addition to buying and eating organic foods,
we can further avoid polluting our home environ-
ment. Below is a list of household and office prod-
ucts that should be avoided and possible substi-
tutes for them. For further information, read Debra
Dadd’s book, Home, Safe Home. The book also
gives many homemade ingredients for most healthy
product substitutes.
Suburban homeowners use more
pesticides per acre on their lawns
than farmers use on their fields
Instead of using toxic pesticides, many pests can
be eliminated using natural products, such as cay-
enne pepper, strong mint tea, vacuuming, and keep-
ing a clean home. Check your health food store
for safe products, including termite, rat, and mice
prevention products.
stc
u
d
o
r
P
l
u
f
m
r
a
H
s
et
u
tits
b
u
S
l
u
f
p
le
H
re
zilitref
cin
a
g
r
o
-
n
o
N
,s
d
e
e
s
d
n
a
,ts
o
p
m
o
c
,re
zilitref
cin
a
g
r
O
e
sio
n
,s
p
art
,s
e
dicits
e
p
lar
uta
n/
m
e
e
n
sre
w
olf
niatre
C
.s
g
u
b
y
d
al
,stn
alle
p
er
.stc
e
s
ni
le
p
er
stn
alp
d
n
a
srellik
d
e
e
w
cix
o
T
s
n
oile
d
n
a
d
n
w
o
r
u
o
y
ta
e
d
n
a
w
o
r
G
d
e
y
ar
p
s
n
e
e
b
to
n
e
v
a
h
y
e
ht
d
e
div
o
r
p
(
.)s
e
c
n
ats
b
u
s
lu
f
m
ra
h
hti
w
s
d
o
o
f
d
ere
e
nig
n
e
ylla
cite
n
e
G
s
d
o
o
f
n
w
o
r
g
yllar
uta
N
,stn
e
g
rete
d
,stn
alle
p
o
r
p
lo
s
o
re
a
,.e.i
,stc
u
d
o
r
p
g
nin
a
el
C
,s
e
y
d
laicifitra
,e
nir
olh
c
,e
yl
,s
e
c
n
ar
g
arf
cite
htn
y
s
ain
o
m
m
a
;s
etallitsid
m
u
elo
rte
p
,e
d
y
h
e
dla
m
r
o
f
,stn
e
g
rete
d
;sre
n
a
elc
elit
,b
ut
,nis
a
b
,)sre
s
n
a
elc
e
s
o
p
r
u
p
lla
d
n
a(
,stn
atc
ef
nisid
;s
diu
qil
&
stn
e
g
rete
d
re
h
s
a
w
h
sid
,h
c
a
elb
y
r
d
n
u
al
,sre
n
a
elc
ss
alg
,sre
n
etf
o
s
cir
b
af
,sre
n
a
elc
niar
d
&
te
p
ra
c
,g
u
r
,sre
n
a
elc
w
e
dli
m
&
dlo
m
;h
crats
&
tn
e
g
rete
d
,h
silo
p
e
o
h
s
,re
d
w
o
p
g
nir
u
o
c
s
;o
o
p
m
a
h
s
y
retslo
h
p
u
sre
n
etf
o
s
reta
w
,re
v
o
m
er
to
p
s
,s
e
h
silo
p
late
m
/re
vlis
stn
eid
er
g
ni
e
d
a
m
e
m
o
H
)
d
d
a
D
y
b
e
m
o
H
efa
S
e
m
o
H
e
e
s(
lar
uta
n
ni
stc
u
d
o
r
p
e
s
e
ht
lla
y
u
b
r
o
s
m
r
o
f
s
er
ots
d
o
o
f
htla
e
h
ta

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
584
m
el
b
o
r
P
s
n
oit
u
lo
S
la
r
u
t
a
N
stn
A
,re
p
p
e
p
ilih
c
,ilu
o
h
cta
p
,tni
m
re
p
p
e
p
d
eir
d
,a
kir
p
a
p
ra
e
n
tni
m
w
o
r
g
;e
ciuj
n
o
m
el
s
e
c
n
artn
e
/s
elte
e
B
sliv
e
e
w
;stc
u
d
o
r
p
d
o
o
f
ot
fa
el
y
a
b
d
d
a
ni
s
k
c
a
s
re
p
p
e
p
k
c
alb
e
s
u
s
nib
d
o
o
f
d
n
a
s
g
u
B
stc
e
s
ni
,s
utp
yla
c
u
e
,re
d
n
e
v
al
a
k
á
s
á
v
-
k
c
o
C
s
e
h
c
a
o
r
s
utp
yla
c
u
e
,s
e
v
a
el
y
a
b
,x
ar
o
b
lio
s
a
el
F
a
k
á
s
á
v
s
eil
F
,ilu
o
h
cta
p
,re
d
n
e
v
al
,s
e
v
olc
a
k
á
s
á
v
&
sta
n
G
s
hto
M
ilu
o
h
cta
p
s
e
otiu
q
s
o
M
a
k
á
s
á
v
ilu
o
h
cta
p
,re
d
n
e
v
al
,
slerriu
q
S
re
p
p
e
p
ellih
c
d
eir
d
Personal Care
  Use natural deodorants, cosmetics, bath products,
body oils and powders, toothpaste, mouthwash,
soaps, air fresheners, hair sprays, shampoos, hair
coloring, hairspray, skin moisturizers, shaving
cream.
     Non-organic personal care products have numer-
ous toxic chemicals, including aerosol propellants,
benzyl alcohol, artificial colors, synthetic fragrance,
formaldehyde, ammonia, ethanol, glycerin, deter-
gents, plastics, paraffin, saccharin, BHA-
BHT. Substitutes found in health food stores con-
tain none of these chemical toxins.
Miscellaneous
Air purifiers: Basil or tulsí (natural negative ion
machines), cedar, frankincense, sandalwood,
agnihotra (Vedic fire rituals).
Plastic containers: Leach chemicals into the liquids.
Use glass, stainless steel or ceramic containers in-
stead.
Cooking utensils: Cast iron, stainless steel, cop-
per are best; non-stick and aluminum pans leech
toxic chemicals into the food (aluminum foil is also
not advised).
Fabrics: Use natural fibers like cotton, linen and
wool. Ideally organic, dye-free fabric is best for
the skin, and for the earth. Products include cloth-
ing, towels, sheets, bedding, blankets, and pillows.
Paper products: Computer, typing, note and bath-
room paper, and paper towels that are recycled
and acid-free is safest for the environment. The
dyes used to whiten paper also pollute the envi-
ronment.
Shopping: Carry cotton bags to the store to use
instead of paper and plastic (or at least reuse the
paper and plastic bags). Some health food stores
also sell re-useable bags to carry fruit and veg-
etables in.
Other Products: Baby products, office, art and com-
puter supplies; building & furnishing products, pet
care, recycling garbage.
Conclusion
     In summary, the underlying notion of Áyurveda
is to cause no harm to oneself, others, animals, or
to nature. This basic Vedic tenet of nonviolence is
followed in action, word and thought. This is ac-
complished by accepting all people and paths in
life and quickly leads to peace, self-worth, appre-
ciation and respect for all things. May you, dear
readers, find and live in growing health and divin-
ity, seeing the Divine in all.
C 
C 
C 
C 
C faainta; faainta; faainta;
Aum £hánti, £hánti, £hánti
Peace in the body, mind, and Soul.
Health, Peace, Bliss

Appendix 1: Sanskrit Alphabet
 585
Vowels
Pronunciation
A as in rural; Á as in father
I as in lily; Í as in police
U as in push; Ú as in rude
E as in they
AI as in aisle
O as in home
AU as in house AÒ as in thong
AÀ as in aha (accent the ‘h’)
¼ as in merrily
Ý as in marine (harder ‘r’)
Ø¼ as in revelry
Consonants
Gutterals
k
Ka
ga
Ga
Ñ
(back of
Ka      Kha       Ga       Gha       ¯a
   throat)
Palatals
ca
C
ja
J
ña
(back or          Cha      Chha      Ja         Jha       Ñya
soft palate)
Cerebrals
o
O
 z
 Z       —
(tongue on       Óa       Þha
Æa         Æha     ~a
top palate)
Dentals
ta
Ta
d
Da
na
(tongue
Ta     Tha      Da     Dha     Na
on teeth)
Appendix 1: Sanskrit Alphabet
Labials
pa
P
ba
Ba
ma
(Lips)
Pa       Pha     Ba      Bha     Ma
Consonant Pronunciation
Ka as in kite;
Kha as in inkhole
Ga as in go;
Gha as in loghouse
¯ as in pink (nasal sound)
Cha as in charge
Chha as in Curchill (hard ‘h’)
Ja as in joy
Jha as in hejhog (hedgehog)
Ñ as in hinge
Óa as in trust
Óha as in anthill
Æa as in drum
Æha as in redhorn
Ò as in one
Ta as in top
Tha as in hothouse (tongue/teeth)
Da as in dye
Dha as in adhere
Na as in nine
Pa as in poet
Pha as in uphill
Ba as in boat
Bha as in abhor
Ma as in mother
Semivowels
ya    r     la   va
Ya   Ra   La  Va
   a   [   [e   w   W   
A     Ã      I     E    U    Ú
A   Ae   ae   aE   Á     ;  
E   AI     O    AU   AN    AHA
î   ï    •a
¼      Ý     Ø¼

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
586
Sibilants (Hard) and Aspirate (Soft)
fa
Sa
sa
H
£ha    §ha
Sa
Ha
Miscellaneous Combinations
ik   kI   ku    kU    ke   kE   kaE    kae
Ki    Kí    Ku    Kú    Ke  Kai   Kau   Ko
When vowels are written with consonants
they look as above (using K as an
example, such as kit, kola, etc.)
k  + ya = !ya  (right side of ka is shortened)
k + Sa  =  xa  (kßha)
ga + d  = gd  (gda - the vertical bar is removed.
This is true for all consonants with bars cha (ca), ñya
(ña), ‘a (—), ta (ta), tha (Ta), dha (Da), na (na), pa (pa),
ba (ba), bha (Ba), ma (ma), and semi vowels ya (ya), la
(la), and va (va).
Other common combinations are
ta + r = #a
r  + W = Ü
Ta + Ra = Tra
Ra + U = Ru
ja + ña = ¿a
k + ta = ½
Ja + Ña = Jña
Ka + Ta = Kta
d + ya = Y
d + Da = Ða
Da + Ya = Dya
Da + Dha = Ddha
Many more combinations exist – beyond the scope
of this Áyurveda book. This brief introduction is
merely to offer some basic guidance to those wish-
ing to learn the alphabet and read the Sanskrit in this
book.

Appendix 2: Health Forms
 587
Appendix 2: Client Health Forms
     On the following page is a sample self-test to determine one’s mental and physical constitution or
doäha. Read the topics in bold in the left column and circle the choice that best describes you (from the
right three columns). Circle the descriptions most fitting to you. If you answer according to your  entire
life rather than your current condition, you will learn your lifelong doäha. You may again answer the
questions according to your current situation to learn your current health balance (vik^iti). Add up the
columns under the total sections. [You will also find an interactive doäha test online at our website
http://ayurvedahc.com]
     The second and third pages of this series are examples of a health-history form used by Áyurvedic
practitioners and vaidyas (Áyurvedic doctors).

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
588
Y
D
O
B
u
y
a
V
a
tti
P
a
h
p
a
K
e
m
arf
y
d
o
B
niht
m
uid
e
m
e
g
ral
slia
n
re
g
ni
F
g
nik
c
arc
r
o
niht
tf
o
s
,k
nip
,
m
uid
e
m
etih
w
r
o
k
ciht
e
slu
P
0
0
1
-
0
8
0
8
-
0
7
0
7
-
0
6
th
gie
W
y
n
o
b
r
o
w
ol
ralu
c
s
u
m
,
m
uid
e
m
ylis
a
e
s
nia
g
sle
w
o
b
e
v
o
m
-lo
ot
S
s
a
g
,d
ra
h
,lla
m
s
s
n
r
u
b
r
o
e
s
o
ol
r
o
etare
d
o
m
dilo
s
e
zis
d
a
e
h
er
o
F
lla
m
s
m
uid
e
m
e
g
ral
etite
p
p
A
elb
aira
v
p
ra
h
s
r
o
g
n
o
rts
w
ol
r
o
tn
ats
n
o
c
s
e
y
E
y
d
a
ets
n
u
r
o
lla
m
s
g
nicreip
r
o
h
sid
d
er
e
di
w
r
o
etih
w
e
cio
V
k
a
e
w
r
o
w
ol
p
ra
h
s
r
o
h
gih
la
n
ot
r
o
p
e
e
d
s
pi
L
y
r
d
r
o
niht
tf
o
s
r
o
m
uid
e
m
hto
o
m
s
r
o
e
g
ral
ts
e
h
C
n
e
k
n
u
s
,talf
etare
d
o
m
d
e
d
n
a
p
x
e
,d
n
u
o
r
)ts
o
m
u
o
y
sre
hto
b
(
er
uta
N
y
r
d
d
n
a
dlo
c
n
u
s
d
n
a
ta
e
h
p
m
a
d
d
n
a
dlo
c
nih
C
ralu
g
n
a
r
o
niht
d
ere
p
at
elb
u
o
d
,d
n
u
o
r
k
c
e
N
llat
r
o
niht
m
uid
e
m
d
e
dlo
f
,e
di
w
,gib
sla
t
o
T
y
d
o
B
D
N
I
M
C
C
C
y
r
o
m
e
M
n
o
o
s-s
a
e
di
p
s
ar
g
ot
k
ciu
q
ste
g
r
o
f
ra
elc
r
o
p
ra
h
s
-
n
ra
el
ot
w
ols
ste
g
r
o
f
re
v
e
n
tu
b
sfeile
B
g
nig
n
a
h
c
,la
cid
ar
d
etn
eir
o
la
o
g
,re
d
a
el
la
y
ol
r
o
tn
ats
n
o
c
s
m
a
er
D
s
u
oix
n
a
r
o
g
niylf
g
nith
gif
r
o
r
olo
c
ni
w
ef
r
o
citn
a
m
o
r
h
c
e
e
p
S
e
vita
klat
r
o
k
ciu
q
s
e
u
g
ra
r
o
etare
d
o
m
tn
elis
r
o
w
ols
s
e
c
n
a
ni
F
s
elfirt
n
o
s
d
n
e
p
s
y
r
u
x
ul
n
o
s
d
n
e
p
s
y
e
n
o
m
s
e
v
a
s
p
e
el
S
th
gil
etare
d
o
m
y
v
a
e
h
stib
a
H
er
uta
n
r
o
le
v
art
s
citilo
p
r
o
str
o
p
s
sre
w
olf
r
o
reta
w
d
ni
M
elb
atp
a
d
a
r
o
k
ciu
q
la
citirc
,g
nitarte
n
e
p
cig
ra
htel
r
o
w
ols
s
n
oito
m
E
s
eirr
o
w
r
o
cits
ais
u
htn
e
y
r
g
n
a
te
g
n
a
c
,
m
ra
w
d
e
h
c
atta
r
o
m
la
c
tn
e
m
are
p
m
e
T
lu
fra
ef
r
o
s
u
o
v
re
n
tn
eita
p
m
i
g
nio
g
y
s
a
e
slato
T
d
ni
M

Appendix 2: Health Forms
 589
Client Health Form
e
m
a
N
)
(
e
n
o
h
P
ss
er
d
d
A
)
(
lle
C
n
w
o
T
etat
S
pi
Z
lia
m
E
y
rtn
u
o
C
e
g
A
eta
D
re
n
oititc
ar
P
s
utat
S
latira
M
y
b
d
errefe
R
?
s
e
s
a
e
si
D
d
o
o
h
dlih
C
s
u
oire
S
ylia
d
slo
ots
f
o
re
b
m
u
N
e
d
ar
G
ts
e
h
gi
H
re
era
C
tn
err
u
C
s
b
re
H
/s
e
nicid
e
M
ytid
ere
H
/cite
n
e
G
s
e
s
a
e
sid
re
hto
M
re
hto
M
G
re
hta
F
G
re
hta
F
re
hto
M
G
re
hta
F
G
re
hto
r
B
retsi
S
s
e
vitale
R
?)
d
o
o
f
,s
g
u
r
d
,lo
h
o
cla
,.g.e(
?
s
n
oitcid
d
a
e
v
a
h
sre
b
m
e
m
yli
m
af
y
n
a
o
D
?
e
s
u
b
a
la
n
oito
m
e
r
o
la
cis
y
h
p
e
c
n
eire
p
x
e
re
v
e
u
o
y
di
D
_
_
_
_
d
o
o
G
to
N
_
_
_
_
re
era
c
K
O
_
_
_
_
re
era
c
e
ht
e
v
o
L
:n
oitc
afsita
S
re
era
C
_
_
_
r
o
o
P
_
_
_
e
g
are
v
A
_
_
_
d
o
o
G
:efi
L
laic
o
S
/yli
m
a
F
?lu
fe
s
o
p
r
u
p
efil
r
u
o
y
sI
?)
n
oitinife
d
r
u
o
y
(
la
utirip
s
efil
r
u
o
y
sI
?tisi
V
r
o
f
n
o
s
a
e
R
e
s
u
e
ciffo
r
of
si
w
ole
B
.e
g
a
p
tx
e
n
ot
n
r
u
T
_
_
K
_
_
P
_
_
V
:d
ni
M
_
_
K
_
_
P
_
_
V
:y
d
o
B
it^
k
ar
P
_
_
K
_
_
P
_
_
V
:it^
ki
V
n
a
w
S
g
o
r
F
e
k
a
n
S
:ytila
u
Q
e
slu
P
_
_
_
_
K
_
_
_
_
P
_
_
_
_
V
:n
oitis
o
P
e
slu
P
s
a
h
ä
o
d
b
u
S
s
e
slu
P
s
u
o
e
n
alle
c
si
M
ò
ár
P
a
k
a
h
c
á
P
a
k
a
d
el
K
:iti^
k
ar
P
/p
e
e
D
_
_
_
_
K
_
_
_
_
P
_
_
_
_
V
n
á
p
U
a
k
ajñ
a
R
a
k
a
b
m
ala
v
A
n
á
m
a
S
a
k
a
h
d
á
S
a
k
a
h
d
o
B
n
á
p
A
a
k
a
h
c
ol
Á
a
k
a
p
ra
T
:1
e
slu
P
la
utirip
S
n
á
y
V
a
k
ajár
h
B
a
k
a
h
ä
elh
£
:2
e
slu
P
la
utirip
S
s
utá
h
D
e
u
g
n
o
T
a
s
a
R
a
s
å
á
M
ajja
M
atk
a
R
s
a
d
e
M
ar
k
u
h
£
slia
N
ihts
A
:s
eto
N

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
590
e
u
ssI
htla
e
H
tn
err
u
C
k
c
e
h
C
9
e
u
ssI
htla
e
H
tn
err
u
C
k
c
e
h
C
9
x
ulfer
dic
A
/ytidic
A
tu
o
G
n
oitcid
d
A
d
a
e
H
ai
m
e
n
A
s
e
niar
gi
M
/s
e
h
c
a
d
a
e
H
e
c
n
eita
p
m
I
,re
g
n
A
s
dio
h
rr
o
m
e
H
aix
er
o
n
A
ain
re
H
sis
o
relc
s
oiretr
A
S
D
I
A
/
V
I
H
sitir
htr
A
m
ets
y
S
e
n
u
m
m
I
a
m
hts
A
e
cid
n
u
a
J
d
o
ol
B
y
g
ra
hte
L
er
u
ss
er
P
d
o
ol
B
e
nirc
o
d
n
E
/cilo
b
ate
M
s
e
n
o
B
e
s
u
a
p
o
n
e
M
sitih
c
n
o
r
B
htu
o
M
re
c
n
a
C
s
elc
s
u
M
ralu
c
s
a
v
oid
ra
C
m
ets
y
S
s
u
o
v
re
N
lo
rets
elo
h
C
e
s
o
N
n
oitn
etsid/nia
p
la
ni
m
o
d
b
a/cilo
C
m
utc
e
R
n
olo
C
e
vitc
u
d
o
r
p
e
R
n
oita
pits
n
o
C
y
r
otarip
s
e
R
a
e
h
rrai
D
th
gie
w
re
v
O
s
ete
b
ai
D
s
etis
ara
P
sra
E
S
M
P
a
m
e
d
E
m
sita
m
u
e
h
R
la
n
oito
m
E
s
u
ni
S
s
eig
rella
latn
e
m
n
o
riv
n
E
sre
d
r
o
sid
nik
S
y
s
p
elip
E
e
nits
etni
lla
m
S
rra
B
niets
p
E
ta
o
r
h
T
s
e
y
E
)
o
p
y
h/re
p
y
h
(
dio
r
y
h
T
re
v
e
F
sr
o
m
u
T
s
eig
rella
d
o
o
F
sre
cl
U
aigla
y
m
o
r
b
y
F
s
u
o
v
re
N
,yteix
n
A
,ra
e
F
,y
rr
o
W
re
d
d
al
B
lla
G
re
ht
O
la
nits
etnio
rts
a
G
re
ht
O

Appendix 3: Prak^iti Food Plans
 591
Appendix 3:Prak^iti Food Plans
Traditional Áyurvedic
Life Health Analysis
Váyu Doßhas
Your constitution is predominantly air. An excess
of air element creates cold, light, and dryness in the
body, colon, skin, and bones. When balanced, you
are energetic, adaptable, and cheerful. An excess of
air causes dry skin, gas, constipation, anxiety,
nervousness, and worry. The aim of Áyurveda is to
create a balance between the elements of air, fire,
and water. To bring air into balance Váyu doßhas need
to
•  Consume more steamed, heavy and moist foods.
•  Ingest herbs to help digest the heavy foods.
•  Eat smaller meals, no more than 3 to 4 hours
apart.
•  Eat sour, sweet, and salty substances that reduce
excessive air. Pungent herbs, such as ginger, are
good if combined with sweet, sour, and salty foods
and herbs.
•  It’s better not to eat alone. Have your food
cooked for you if possible.
•  Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes,
eggplant, peppers, chilies) as they may cause allergic
reactions.
•  Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains.
•  Eat in a calm to celestial frame of mind.
HERBOLOGY
DIGESTION Cardamom, coriander, cinnamon,
ginger, rock salt are among the major herbs to use.
ELIMINATION Licorice, soaked prunes, psyllium
seeds, flax seeds, bran and triphalá before sleep.
ENERGY Ginseng, comfrey root, marshmallow,
a¤hwagandhá, balá, and ¤hatávarí.
MIND Calamus, a¤hwagandhá, basil, chamomile,
bráhmí.
ANTI-RHEUMATICS Angelica, myrrh, yogaraj
guggul.
OIL and MASSAGE Sesame oil and almond oil are
heavy and warm, and therefore good for Váyu doßha.
Oil massage the feet, head, back, and lower abdomen
to reduce air. Essential oils include sandalwood,
cinnamon, and frankincense.
FRUIT Most fruit is purifying, though not grounding.
Dry fruit, melons, uncooked apples and pears, and
cranberries increase air; they are not advised (baked
apples and pears, or soaked dry fruits are alright).
The best fruits for Váyu doßhas are, lemons, limes,
grapefruit, cherries, grapes, strawberries, raspberries,
pineapples, papayas, mangos, soaked—prunes,
raisins, dates, and figs; other berries, kiwi, sweet
melons, and rhubarb. Second best are oranges, cooked
pears, cooked apples, peaches, plums, apricots,
pomegranates, and persimmons. Fruit is best eaten
between meals.
VEGETABLES also are too light for air constitutions
to live on. However, if steamed and prepared with
oils and spiced, eating them with whole grains is fine.
The cabbage family causes gas (broccoli, cauliflower,
Brussels sprouts). Other air-increasing vegetables are
cucumbers, sprouts, celery, asparagus, spinach, and
chard. The best vegetables for Váyu doßhas are sweet
potatoes, carrots, beets, cilantro, parsley, seaweed, and
small amounts of avocado. Second best are fresh corn,
green beans (well-cooked), fresh peas, zucchini,
squash, artichoke, kira, mustard greens, watercress,
bell peppers, and okra. Some practitioners
recommend moderate amounts of fenugreek greens,
cooked leeks, black and green olives, parsnip,
pumpkin, rutabaga, and watercress.
GRAINS Cooked whole grains are best. Bread is fine
if toasted (but the yeast in bread is still heavy and
hard to digest). The best grains for Váyu doßhas are
wheat, then other moist grains like basmati rice, oats,
and cous cous. Whole grain pasta is good. Dry grains
like granola and chips aggravate the air element.
BEANS Most beans cause gas, are drying, and

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
592
promote constipation. The best bean is múng. Tofu is
also acceptable, but may be hard to digest.
NUTS and SEEDS Raw or lightly roasted nuts are
heavy, nourishing and moistening. They are hard to
digest and so they are taken in small amounts at any
one time. Váyu recommendations include almonds
(peel off the skin), walnuts, pecans, pine nuts and
sesame seeds (or tahini); these should be soaked
overnight.
OILS The best are sesame oil and ghee (one teaspoon
per serving). Second best include almond, olive,
avocado, and butter.
DAIRY is good for air constitutions, though hard to
digest. Dairy is taken with spices, and milk should
be boiled then left to cool slightly. The best dairy for
Váyu doßhas include lassi (1/2 cup yogurt to 1/2 cup
water, digestive herbs, all mixed and drunk at
mealtime to aid digestion). Ghee is also excellent.
Other suggestions include yogurt, kefir, cream, sour
cream, butter, and cottage cheese. A little cheese may
be eaten (especially homemade paneer).
SWEETENERS It is best not to eat sweets during
meals. Natural sugars assist air types more than any
other constitution in tissue building and body fluid
maintenance. The best sweeteners are jaggery (guæ-
Indian), turbinado sugar, or natural sugar cane (sold
in stores as Sucanat), maple syrup, and raw sugar.
Raw honey and fruit sugar are acceptable but in
smaller amounts.
ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally it is best to avoid
animal products except when needed to regain
strength following illness. Animal products give
strength but are inharmonious on finer levels. (Ghee
and lassi are good substitutes). Next best is fish and
eggs. White chicken and turkey are also acceptable.
BEVERAGES Air constitutions require fluids. The
best liquids are dairy, fruit or vegetable juices, tonic
teas (taken with sweetener and milk), water with lime
or lemon, and sour fruit juices.
VITAMINS and MINERALS are not generally used,
but if needed, the following are best for Váyu doßhas:
oily A, D and E, sour C, zinc, and calcium. Spices
(e.g., ginger, cardamom) are taken with vitamins to
aid digestion.
Herbal Preparations: The average amount of herbs
to take is between 1/4 to 1 teaspoon of an herb or of
an herbal mixture 1/2 hour before meals. Ghee, honey,
or water may be mixed herbs (until paste) (2 parts to
one part herbs). It is also advisable to cook herbs in 1
teaspoon of heated ghee or oil, and then add them to
food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons of herbs.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, lotus,
frankincense, cinnamon, or basil can be used as oil,
incense, soap, or candles to calm the mind.
COLOR THERAPY Most colors are uplifting,
particularly white, yellow, gold, orange, and some
red. Lighter and pastel shades are preferred. Dark
grays, browns and black upset the wind element.
GEM THERAPY Emerald, jade, peridot, yellow
sapphire, topaz, and citrine set in gold.

Appendix 3: Prak^iti Food Plans
 593
CONDIMENTS A little rock salt improves di-
gestion. Other suggestions include cardamom,
fennel, ginger, cloves, coriander, cumin, basil,
cinnamon, and fenugreek.
YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good. Shoul-
der stands and back bends are also helpful if there
are no heart problems. Deep breathing promotes
calming.
MANTRAS
Ram—for Divine protection, immune boosting,
insomnia, anxiety, fear, mental disorders
Hoom—wards off negativity, helps digestion,
removes áma, and clears srotas (channels)
£hreem—for general health, overall health and
harmony, builds reproductive tissue.
MEDITATION can be done anywhere, at any time,
lying down, sitting, or walking. Mantras, thoughts,
feelings, looking at nature, thinking about God, love,
virtually anything that doesn’t cause strain or worry
are acceptable forms of meditation. Practice giving
up worry, fear, negativity, anxiety, and lack of faith.
Knowledge and devotion are the most important as-
pects to practice. If the opportunity arises, consider a
meditation practice with a qualified spiritual teacher.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Please Remember Do not force anything! If your
system tells you it wants or doesn’t want something,
countering these guidelines, by all means follow your
intuition!! The Inner Self is the best healer. Áyurveda
helps us take control of our health. Seasonal changes
may also require some modification of these recom-
mendations. Enjoy these suggestions and feel increas-
ingly healthy and harmonious.
Aum £hánti, £hánti, £hánti
Peace.
Traditional Áyurvedic
Life Health Analysis
Váyu/Pitta Doßhas
Your constitution is predominantly air and fire.
An excess of air element creates cold, light, and dry-
ness in the body, and colon, skin, and bones. When
balanced, you are energetic, adaptable, and cheerful.
An excess of air causes dry skin, gas, and constipa-
tion. Fire excess causes heat in the form of hot tem-
per, impatience, rashes, infections, ulcers, etc.
When balanced, fire helps one be more goal-ori-
ented, express leadership qualities, warmth, and gives
physical strength. The aim of Áyurveda is to create a
balance between the elements of air, water, fire, and
earth. To bring air and fire into balance one needs to:
•  Consume more cooked, moist, and somewhat
heavier foods.
•  Eat herbs to help digest the more grounding
foods.
•  Avoid hot foods (e.g., onions, garlic, red
peppers), fermented or fried foods, salt.
•  Eat smaller meals, no more than 3 to 4 hours
apart.
•   Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes,
eggplant, peppers, chilies) as they may cause allergic
reactions.
•   Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains.
•  Don’t combine fruit with other foods.
•  Eat meals in a serene, thankful state of mind.
HERBOLOGY
DIGESTION Cardamom, cinnamon, fennel, mints,
coriander.
ELIMINATION Licorice, triphalá (before sleep and
in the morning), soaked raisins.
ENERGY Comfrey root, marshmallow, balá, and
¤hatávarí.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
594
MIND Calamus, basil, chamomile, gotu kola,
a¤hwagandhá, jaóámáò¤hí (insomnia).
ANTI-RHEUMATICS Angelica, myrrh, yogaraj
guggul on occasion.
OIL and MASSAGE Sesame oil is heavy and
therefore grounding. Massage the feet, head, back,
and lower abdomen with oil to reduce air. Include
the chest and third eye. Bráhmí oil in the hair is
excellent. Mahánáráyan oil is said to help with pains,
arthritis, and other pains and injuries.
AROMATHERAPY Essential oils include
sandalwood, rose, geranium, lily.
FRUIT Most fruit is purifying, although it is not
grounding. Soak dry fruit, and bake apples and pears.
Sweet fruits of berries, cherries, coconut, fresh figs,
grapes, kiwi, mangos, sweet melons, sweet oranges,
peaches, pineapples, rhubarb, and plums are
balancing. Avocado (small amounts), watermelon
(chew and eat several of the seeds).
VEGETABLES also are too light for air constitutions
to live on. If vegetables are steamed and prepared
with oils—and spiced, eating them with whole grains
is acceptable. Most forms of squash (acorn, butternut,
scallopini, summer, winter and yellow creek neck),
artichoke, asparagus, fresh corn, cucumber, green
beans, okra, sweet potatoes, rutabaga, and zucchini
are excellent for balance. (The cabbage family causes
gas, i.e., broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts; root
vegetables like beets and carrots may cause too much
heat).
GRAINS Cooked whole grains are best. Bread is
acceptable if toasted, but yeast (contained in bread)
is not a recommended product because it is difficult
to digest. White basmati rice, wheat, oats, amaranth,
wild rice, cous cous are good. Dry grains like granola,
chips aggravate the air element. Barley is good for
reducing fire, but may create gas for the air aspect of
your constitution.
BEANS Most beans cause gas, are drying, and
promote constipation. The best bean is múng. Tofu is
also acceptable, but may be hard to digest. Aduki,
soy cheese, soy milk, and tepery beans may be taken
in moderation.
NUTS and SEEDS Raw or lightly roasted nuts are
heavy, nourishing, and moistening. They are hard to
digest, thus, small amounts should be taken at any
one time. Best is almonds (soaked overnight and
peeled) and sesame seeds in moderation (grounds air);
coconut and sunflower seeds are also good (cools fire).
OILS Best is sesame oil (for air conditions) and ghee
(clarified butter). Sunflower is better for fire-related
issues; soy and unsalted butter are also good.
DAIRY Is good very good in its organic state and/or
from raw sources. It may be hard to digest. Dairy
should be taken with spices; milk should be boiled,
then cooled. Best is lassi (1/2 cup yogurt to 1/2 cup
water; and digestive herbs, all mixed and drunk at
mealtime to aid digestion). Ghee is also excellent.
Other good dairy products includes yogurt, kefir,
cream, unsalted butter, and cottage cheese. A little
cheese is acceptable also, but only ‘renetless’ cheese
qualifies as vegetarian.
SWEETENERS It is best not to combine sweets with
other foods. Use only natural sugars which aid air
types more than any other constitution in tissue and
body fluid maintenance. Best is jaggery (guæ-Indian),
turbinado, maple syrup, or Sucanat. Raw honey (for
air conditions) is acceptable.
CONDIMENTS Best is cardamom, fennel,
coriander, cumin, cilantro, turmeric, vanilla, saffron,
rose water, mint. Cinnamon, cloves, mustard seeds,
pippalí will aggravate fire conditions.
ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally it is better to avoid
animal products except for strength when extremely
ill. It gives strength, but is difficult to digest, is toxic
and disharmonious on finer levels. Ghee and lassi
are excellent substitutes. Next best is poached or
boiled egg whites and white poultry because they are
easily digested.

Appendix 3: Prak^iti Food Plans
 595
BEVERAGES Air/Fire constitutions need fluids.
Suggestions include boiled milk, teas such as bansha
(with milk), catnip, chamomile, elder flower, fennel,
hibiscus, jasmine, lavender, lemongrass, licorice,
lotus, marshmallow, oat straw, raspberry, rose, and
saffron. All fruits, vegetables, and herbs listed above
are good as juice.
VITAMINS and MINERALS For air conditions, oily
A, D, and E, sour C, minerals—particularly zinc and
calcium. However, vitamins and minerals should be
taken with spices to help digest them. For excess fire,
B vitamins, K, calcium, and iron may be needed, but
it is better to get them from steamed vegetables.
Herbal Preparations: Take an average of between
1/4 and 1 teaspoon of an herb or of an herbal mixture,
1/2 hour before meals. You may mix them with twice
as much ghee or water (until paste). It is also advisable
to cook herbs in heated ghee or oil, and then add to
your food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons of
herbs.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, rose, gardenia,
jasmine (white flowers). Basil, frankincense, cedar,
myrrh (warming). Aromas can be used as oil, incense,
soap, candles, etc., to calm and refresh the mind.
COLOR THERAPY Most colors are uplifting,
particularly white, lighter, and pastel shades. Dark
grays, browns, and black upset air and fire elements.
White shades of green, pink, and blue (i.e., emerald,
sky blue) are also very good colors for balance. For
air, warmer colors like gold, yellow, and a bit of red
are suggested. For fire, bright, cheery greens, such as
emerald, are suggested.
GEM THERAPY White stones, such as pearl and
moonstone set in silver, are recommended for both
air and fire. For air, red, yellow, or orange stones set
in gold. For fire, green stones set in silver.
YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good; shoulder
stands (so long as there are no heart problems) and
back bends are also good. Deep breathing is calming.
MANTRAS
£hánti—for mental peace.
Ram—for Divine protection, immune boosting,
insomnia, anxiety, fear, mental disorders
Hoom—wards off negativity, helps digestion,
removes áma, and clears srotas (channels)
£hreem—for general health, overall health and
harmony, builds reproductive tissue.
MEDITATION can be done anywhere, at any time;
lying down, sitting, walking. It can be with a mantra,
with a thought, a feeling; looking at nature, thinking
about God, love; virtually anything that doesn’t cause
strain, anger; or worry that you are not meditating
properly. Practice giving up worry, fear, negativity,
anxiety, impatience, anger, harsh speech, a critical
mind, and lack of faith. Knowledge and devotion are
the most important aspects to practice.
EXERCISE Moderate; walking, swimming,
trampoline, cross-country or downhill skiing.
OIL MASSAGE Apply oils to heart, forehead (third
eye), feet, lower back and belly, neck, and shoulders.
Bráhmí oil for the head is excellent. Sesame or
Sunflower is acceptable for the body. Mahánáráyan
oil is used for pains and arthritis.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Please Remember Do not force anything! Listen to
what your system tells you. One’s intuition is, in the
final analysis, the best doctor. Enjoy these sugges-
tions and feel an increasingly healthy and harmoni-
ous life.
Aum £hánti, £hánti, £hánti
Peace

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
596
Traditional Áyurvedic
Life Health Analysis
Váyu/Kapha Doßhas
Your constitution is predominantly air and wa-
ter. An excess of air element creates cold, light, and
dryness in the body—colon, skin, and bones, caus-
ing dry skin, gas, and constipation. When balanced,
air makes one energetic, adaptable, and cheerful. An
excess of water creates moistness, coldness, and
heaviness, leading to congestion, excess weight, and
mental lethargy. When balanced, water creates loy-
alty, consistency, and comfort. The aim of Áyurveda
is to create a balance between the elements of air,
water, fire, and earth. To bring air into balance one
needs to:
•  Consume more cooked foods.
•  Take herbs that help digest food
• Eat smaller meals, 3 to 4 hours apart.
Breakfast may be skipped if so desired.
• Eat mainly pungent, hot substances that reduce
excessive air and water. Bitter foods are useful
to reduce water, but increase air. Sweet foods
reduce air but increase water. So, one must moni-
tor the effects of the foods eaten.
•  Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes, egg-
plant, peppers, chilies) as they may cause aller-
gic reactions.
•  Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains.
•   Eat in a calm to celestial frame of mind.
HERBOLOGY
DIGESTION Cardamom, coriander, cinnamon, and
ginger help digestion.
ELIMINATION Licorice, prunes, psyllium seeds,
flax seeds, bran, and triphalá can be taken first thing
in the morning. Triphalá can also be taken before
sleep.
MIND Calamus, a¤hwagandhá, basil, bráhmí, cha-
momile.

Appendix 3: Prak^iti Food Plans
 597
ANTI-RHEUMATICS Angelica, myrrh.
OIL & MASSAGE Sesame oil is suggested. Oil
massage the feet, head, back, and lower abdomen.
Essential oils include sandalwood, cinnamon, musk,
frankincense, myrrh.
ENERGY Ginseng, a¤hwagandhá, balá, and
¤hatávarí.
FRUIT The best fruits are lemons, limes, grapefruit,
apricots, berries, baked apples, cherries, peaches.
Because this is a dual doßha, all other fruit intake
should be monitored.
VEGETABLES The cabbage family causes gas
(broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts). Cucumbers,
sprouts, celery, asparagus, spinach, and chard also
increase air. Best are sweet potatoes, carrots, beets,
cilantro, parsley, fresh corn, green beans (well
cooked), fresh peas, squash, artichoke, kira, mustard
greens, moderate amounts of fenugreek greens,
cooked leeks, black and green olives, parsnips, and
pumpkin.
GRAINS Cooked whole grains are best. Bread is
acceptable if toasted, but it best avoided (it contains
yeast—difficult to digest). Basmati rice and barley
(if it doesn’t cause gas) are the best grains. All other
grains should be monitored owing to your dual doßha.
BEANS Most beans cause gas, are drying, and spoon
of an herb or of an herbal mixture should promote
constipation. The best bean is múng. Tofu is also good,
but may be hard to digest. If They can be mixed with
twice as much raw there is no gas or constipation
problem, then any honey, ghee, or water (until paste),
With meals, bean is good to eat.
NUTS & SEEDS Raw or lightly roasted nuts are
heavy, nourishing, and moistening. They are hard to
digest, thus, small amounts should be taken at any
one time. The best is 3 to 5 almonds (soaked over-
night and peeled), and sesame seeds.
OILS Best is 2 to 3 teaspoons sesame oil or ghee per
meal.
DAIRY Is good for air constitutions, though hard to
digest. It should be taken with spices. Milk should be
boiled. Lassi (1/2 cup yogurt to 1/2 cup water, or 1/4
cup yogurt to 3/4 cup water if Kapha is excessed)
mixed with digestive herbs and taken at mealtime,
aids digestion. Ghee is also excellent.
SWEETENERS It is best not to combine sweets with
other foods. Use only natural sugars which aid air
types more than any other constitution in tissue and
body fluid maintenance. Raw honey is best for Váyu/
Kapha. Turbinado sugar or Sucanat may be used if it
does not cause congestion.
CONDIMENTS The best is cardamom, asafoetida,
and fennel. Next best is ginger, cloves, coriander,
cumin, cinnamon, basil, and fenugreek.
ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally it is better to avoid
animal products except for strength when ill. It gives
strength but is difficult to digest, is toxic, and
disharmonious on finer levels. Ghee and lassi are the
best substitutes. Next best is eggs. Chicken and turkey
(white meat) are also all right.
BEVERAGES Herbal teas and vegetable or fruit
juices should be taken using the recommended fruits
and vegetables.
Herbal Preparations: Between 1/4 to 1 teaapoon of
an herb or of an herbal mixture should be taken 1/2
hour before meals and during meals. They can be
mixed with twice as much raw honey, ghee, or water
(until paste). With meals, herbs can be sprinkled on
food. They may also be cooked in heated ghee, then
added to food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons
of herbs.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
OIL MASSAGE Massage the feet, lower back, shoul-
ders, and neck before bed or exercise.
AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, lotus, frankin-
cense, cinnamon, basil and camphor can be used as
oil, incense, soap, or candles to calm and refresh the
mind.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
598
COLOR THERAPY Most colors are uplifting,
particularly yellow, gold, orange, and some red.
Lighter and pastel shades are preferred. Dark grays,
browns and black upset wind elements.
GEM THERAPY Emerald, jade, peridot, yellow
sapphire, topaz, and citrine set in gold are warming,
and thus balancing for Váyu and Kapha. Ruby and
garnet improve circulation and energy. Stones work
best when set to touch the skin.
YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good. Shoulder
stands and back bends are also good. Standing
postures are good for Kapha. Deep breathing and
alternate nostril práòáyáma are calming and
balancing.
MANTRAS
Ram—for Divine protection, immune boosting,
insomnia, anxiety, fear, mental disorders
Hoom—wards off negativity, helps digestion,
removes áma, and clears srotas (channels)
MEDITATION Meditation can be done anywhere,
at any time: lying down, sitting, or walking. It can be
with a mantra, a thought, feeling, looking at nature,
or thinking about God, or love. Virtually anything
that doesn’t cause strain or worry is useful. Practice
giving up worry, fear, negativity, anxiety, lack of faith,
attachment, or greed. Knowledge and devotion are
the most important aspects.
EXERCISE Moderate to heavy; walking is best.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * ** * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Please Remember Do not force anything! Listen
to what your system tells you. One’s intuition is the
best doctor. Please enjoy these suggestions and feel
an increasingly healthy and harmonious life.
Aum £hánti, £hánti, £hánti
Peace
Traditional Áyurvedic
Life Health Analysis Pitta
Doßhas
Your constitution is predominantly fire. An excess
of the fire element creates heat in the body, specifically
in the small intestines, liver, spleen gall bladder, blood,
and heart. When balanced, you are warm, adaptable,
cheerful, goal oriented, have leadership qualities. An
excess of fire causes heat-related behavior, such as
hot temper, being overly critical and impatient, skin
rashes, allergies, eye problems, ulcers, diarrhea. The
aim of Áyurveda is to create a balance between the
elements of air, water, and fire. To bring fire into
balance one needs to:
•  Consume more bitter and astringent energies in
the form of food, aromas, and herbs.
•  Avoid hot foods (e.g., onions, garlic, red peppers),
fermented or fried foods, salt.
•  Eat every 4 to 5 hours.
•  Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes, eggplant,
peppers, chilies) as they may cause allergic reactions.
•  Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains.
•  Eat in a calm to celestial frame of mind.
•  Increase consumption of sweet fruit juices and
herbal teas
•  Consume cold, heavy, moist, blander foods
•  Avoid alcohol and smoking because of their
heating nature
•  Emotionally cultivate clarity rather than a critical
nature
HERBOLOGY
DIGESTION: Coriander, mint, aloe, gentian,
barberry, fennel, turmeric.
ELIMINATION: Triphalá, senna, boiled milk and
ghee, rose petals, gokßhura, guæúchí.
ENERGY: £hatávarí, balá, ámalakí, saffron, aloe,
licorice, guæúchí, comfrey, Solomon’s seal,
marshmallow, dandelion, burdock.

Appendix 3: Prak^iti Food Plans
 599
MIND: Gotu kola, sandalwood, bh^i´garáj, rose,
lotus, 
jaóámáò¤hí, 
chamomile, 
betony,
chrysanthemum, hibiscus.
DETOXIFICATION (blood, liver, etc.): Guggul,
mañjißhóhá, gotu kola, musta.
HEART: Arjuna.
FRUIT Most fruit is calming and cooling,
harmonizing and thirst quenching. Apples, pears,
pomegranates are excellent. Pineapples, cranberries,
persimmons, melons, prunes, dates, figs, grapes are
also very good. Mangos, plums, and raspberries are
helpful. Sour and certain other fruits, such as lemons,
limes, apricots, bananas, cherries, papayas, peaches,
and strawberries, will aggravate heat.
VEGETABLES Most vegetables are also good for
Pitta doßha, especially if eaten raw or lightly steamed.
The best vegetables are cauliflower, cilantro, alfalfa
sprouts, sunflower sprouts, celery. Second best is
broccoli, cabbage, Brussels sprouts, asparagus,
lettuce, beans, peas, cucumbers, and okra. Finally,
parsley, bell peppers, fresh corn, and squash are
acceptable. Root vegetables (beets and carrots),
nightshades (eggplant, tomato, potato), mustard
greens, parsley, spinach, and sweet potatoes may
cause difficulty. Hot spicy foods like chilies, garlic,
onions, pickles, and radishes greatly increase the fire
element.
GRAINS Most grains are cooling for Pitta. The best
are cooked whole wheat, basmati rice, oats, barley,
granola, cous cous, and quinoa. Finally, long grain
brown rice, blue corn, and millet. Short grain brown
rice, buckwheat, corn, and rye may be too heating
and create Pitta discomfort. Whole grain pastas are
good. Yeast-free breads are good; bread containing
yeast should be toasted.
BEANS Best is múng, which does not cause gas. Most
beans are acceptable for Pitta doßha, though it is better
to cook them with cumin or cardamom to aid in
digestion. Also good are aduki, tofu, lima, kidney,
soy, split, and chick peas. Lentils and peanuts may
cause indigestion. (Some practitioners accept various
forms of lentils).
NUTS and SEEDS The best are coconut and
sunflower seeds. Seeds are a preferred source of
protein over fish and poultry.
OILS Ghee (clarified butter), sunflower, butter
(unsalted), soy.
DAIRY Ghee, boiled milk (then left to cool), yogurt
lassi (1 part organic yogurt to 1 part water), cottage
cheese (unsalted).
SWEETENERS Most sweeteners are good,
including Sucanat. It is better to avoid white sugar,
honey; and molasses in excess.
ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally, it is better to avoid
animal products except when needed for strength.
Animal products give strength but are inharmonious
on finer levels. Animal foods that balance Pitta include
egg whites, chicken, and turkey (white meat).
BEVERAGES Juice of aloe vera, apple, pear, berry,
carob, vegetables according to above section, fig
shake, milk boiled, other fruit juices mentioned above.
Teas include alfalfa, barley, bansha, burdock,
chamomile, chicory, chrysanthemum, dandelion,
hibiscus, jasmine, lavender, lemon grass, nettle,
raspberry, red clover, rose, saffron, sarsaparilla, mint.
VITAMINS: B, K, calcium, iron Take with herbs,
such as coriander, to digest vitamins.
Herbal Preparations: The average amount of herbs
to take is between 1/4 to 1 teaspoon of an herb or of
an herbal mixture with meals. You maymix with twice
as much ghee or with water (until paste). It is also
advisable to cook herbs in heated ghee or oil and then
add to your food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2
teaspoons of herbs. You may also sprinkle herbs
directly on meals.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * ** * * * * * * * * * * * * *

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
600
OIL MASSAGE Massage the feet, lower back, shoul-
ders and neck before bed or exercise.
AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, lotus, rose,
jasmine, and any white flowers (cool energies) can
be used as essential oil, incense, sachet, soap, or
candles to calm and refresh the mind.
COLOR THERAPY Green, sky blue, or white to
reduce Pitta. Reds, oranges, yellows, and bright colors
aggravate Pitta. Apply color suggestions to home and
office furnishings and clothing.
GEM THERAPY Emerald, jade, peridot, moonstone
and pearl, blue sapphire and amethyst set in silver.
YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good for Pitta
doäha. Shoulder stands (only if there is no heart
problems) and back bends are also good. Deep
breathing is calming.
MEDITATION can be done anywhere, at any time;
lying down, sitting, walking. It can be with a mantra,
with a thought, a feeling, looking at nature, thinking
about God, or love, or virtually anything that doesn’t
cause strain or worry. Practice giving up anger and
impatience. Knowledge and devotion are the most
important aspects.
MANTRAS Chanting, contemplation of ‘Who am
I?’ Practice giving up hostility, anger, and criticism.
£hanti—for peace
£hrím—for general health and harmony
LIFESTYLE Take walks by the water or in gardens
in the full moon. Work in flower gardens and prac-
tice sweet speech, forgiveness, and contentment.
Moderate exercise. Walking is best.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Please Remember Do not force anything! Listen to
what your system tells you. One’s intuition is the best
doctor. Please enjoy these suggestions and feel an
increasingly healthy and harmonious life.
Aum £hánti, £hánti, £hánti
Peace

Appendix 3: Prak^iti Food Plans
 601
Traditional Áyurvedic
Life Health Analysis
Pitta/Kapha Doßhas
Your constitution is predominantly fire and water.
An excess of fire and water elements creates cold
and heat, and heaviness and dampness in the body,
specifically in the chest, lungs, sinuses, stomach, and
small intestines. When balanced, you are adaptable
and cheerful, goal-oriented, and a leader. An excess
of fire causes heat-related issues like hot temper, being
overly critical and impatient, skin rashes, allergies,
eye problems, ulcers, and diarrhea. An excess of water
creates bronchitis, overweight, and mental lethargy.
The aim of Áyurveda is to create a balance between
the elements of air, water, and fire. To bring fire and
water into balance one needs to:
•  Consume more bitter and astringent energies in
the form of food, aromas, herbs.
•  Avoid nightshades (potatoes, tomatoes, eggplant,
peppers, chilies) because they may cause allergic
reactions.
•  Avoid hot foods (e.g., onions, garlic, red peppers),
fermented or fried foods, salt.
•  Don’t combine milk with yeasted grains.
•  Eat in a calm to celestial frame of mind.
HERBS Coriander, mint, rose petals, saffron,
turmeric, triphalá, guggul, gokßhura, ámalakí,
mañjißhóhá, arjuna, gotu kola, chamomile,
cardamom, guæúchí, jaóámáò¤hí, musta, raspberry,
¤hilájit.
FRUIT (between meals): Apples, mango, pears,
pomegranate, prunes, quince, raisins.
VEGETABLES Asparagus, bell pepper, broccoli,
Brussels sprouts, burdock root, cabbage, fresh corn,
cauliflower, celery, green beans, dandelion, collards,
lettuce, okra, parsley, peas, green peppers, squash
(scallopini, spaghetti, summer, yellow creekneck),
sprouts, watercress.
     Avoid or reduce as much as possible, ingesting
fermented foods, pickles, onions, garlic, and chilies
because they will aggravate Pitta.
GRAINS Barley is best, basmati rice, cooked oat
bran, wheat bran (moderation). Bread without yeast
(or toasted) is advised.
BEANS The best is múng, which does not cause gas.
Aduki, black, black-eyed, chana dal (garbanzos),
lima, navy, pinto, white, and túr dal are acceptable.
NUTS and SEEDS Pumpkin and sunflower in
moderation.
OILS Ghee (clarified butter) can be taken in
moderation (2 tsp./day). Sunflower in moderation.
DAIRY Ghee, yogurt lassi (1 part organic yogurt to 3
parts water).
SWEETENERS It is better to use very little. Either
raw honey or a cane sugar, such as turbinado or
Sucanat, can be used sparingly.
ANIMAL PRODUCTS Generally it is better to avoid
animal products except for strength when ill. It gives
strength but is inharmonious on finer levels. Ghee
and lassi are good substitutes. Acceptable foods
include poached or boiled egg white, and white meat
of chicken and turkey.
BEVERAGES Juice of aloe vera, apple, pear, berry,
carob, fig shake, and fruits and vegetables mentioned
above. Teas of alfalfa, barley, bansha, burdock,
chamomile, chicory, chrysanthemum, dandelion,
hibiscus, jasmine, lavender, lemon grass, nettle,
raspberry, red clover, rose, saffron, sarsaparilla, mint.
Herbal Preparations: Between 1/4 to 1 teaspoon of
an herb or of an herbal mixture should be taken 1/2
hour before meals. Twice as much ghee or water are
mixed with herbs (until paste). It is also advisable to
cook herbs in heated ghee, then add them to your
food. Teas can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons of herbs.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
602
OIL MASSAGE Massage the feet, lower back, shoul-
ders and neck before bed or exercise.
AROMA THERAPY Sandalwood, lotus, rose, jas-
mine (cool energies); mixed with frankincense, cin-
namon, basil, camphor (warm energies) can be used
as oil, incense, soap, or candles to calm and refresh
the mind.
COLOR THERAPY Reds, oranges, yellows, and
bright colors will help Kapha, but will tend to aggra-
vate Pitta. Green and sky blue are best. White and
pink reduce Pitta but will derange Kapha. Choose
colors as needed for home and office furnishings and
in clothing.
GEM THERAPY Emerald, jade, peridot, moonstone,
and pearls set in silver reduce Pitta.. Ruby and gar-
net, yellow sapphire, topaz and citrine, improve cir-
culation and energy for Kapha.
YOGA Sitting and prone positions are good when Pitta
is in excess; standing postures are best when Kapha
is aggravated. Shoulder stands (only if there are no
heart problems, blood, ear, or eye pressure) and back
bends are also good. Deep breathing is calming.
MANTRAS Chanting, contemplation on ‘Who am
I?,’ practice giving up hostility, anger, and criticism;
visualize meditating on specific deities of your choice,
such as Christ, K^ißhòa.
MEDITATION can be done anywhere, at any time,
either lying down, sitting, or walking. It can be with
a mantra, with a thought, a feeling, looking at nature,
thinking about God, or love; virtually anything that
doesn’t cause strain or worry. Practice giving up
worry, fear, negativity, anxiety, and lack of faith.
Knowledge and devotion are the most important as-
pects to practice.
EXERCISE Moderate to strong; walking is best.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Please Remember do not force anything! Listen to
what your system tells you. One’s intuition is the best
doctor. Please enjoy these suggestions and feel an
increasingly healthy and harmonious life..
Aum £hánti, £hánti, £hánti
Peace

Appendix 3: Prak^iti Food Plans
 603
Traditional Áyurvedic
Life Health Analysis
Kapha Doßhas
Your constitution is predominantly water. An excess
of water element creates cold, heavy, and dampness
in the body; specifically in the chest, lungs, and
sinuses. When balanced, you are loyal and calm by
nature. An excess of water causes water retention (e.g.,
edema, overweight), sinus problems, bronchitis. The
aim of Áyurveda is to create a balance between the
elements of air, water, and fire. To bring water into
balance one needs to:
•  Consume more steamed, light, hot, and dry
foods.
•  Take herbs to help digest the heavy foods.
•  Eat smaller and fewer meals; eat more herbs.
Breakfast may be skipped.
•  Eat pungent, bitter, and astringent foods to
reduce excessive water.
•  It is better to cook for others, especially for
Váyu individuals.
•  Do not use food as an emotional support.
HERBOLOGY
DIGESTION Hot spices: Dry ginger, black pepper,
cloves, and cinnamon improve the metabolism.
Bitters: Aloe, turmeric, barberry, and gentian reduce
the desire for sugars and fats.
ENERGY Pungent and bitter tonics: Black pepper,
cinnamon, saffron, ginger, çhilájit, guggul, myrrh,
aloe gel, or juice.
MIND Stimulants and mental clearing: musk, gotu
kola (bráhmí), basil (tulsí), guggul, myrrh, sage,
bayberry, betony.
FRUIT Generally increases water, causing mucus and
depressing the digestive fire (agni). It is better to not
combine fruits with other foods. Best are lemon,
limes, and grapefruits (which dissolve mucus and
reduce fat). They should be eaten without sugar. Other
good fruits include cranberries, apples, and dried
fruits.
VEGETABLES Most are diuretics (naturally drawing
water from the system). Steamed vegetables are
easiest on the digestive system. The best are chilies,
broccoli, cabbage, and celery. Next best are carrots,
green beans, fresh peas, beets, asparagus, lettuce,
cilantro, watercress, mustard greens, alfalfa,
sunflower sprouts, and chard. Third best are bell
peppers, cauliflower, parsley, and spinach. Other
vegetables increase water.
GRAINS are nourishing and balancing for Kapha
doßha. Whole grains of barley, quinoa, dry or popped
grains are best. Second best are corn, millet, rye, and
buckwheat. Basmati rice is alright in moderation.
Barley is a diuretic that reduces water and weight.
Avoid yeasted breads.
BEANS Most beans are good, particularly aduki,
followed by soy, lima, and lentils. Other useful beans
include tofu, múng, kidney, peanut (but not roasted),
and split peas. Múng is a pure or sattwic bean, and
will not encourage gas.
NUTS and SEEDS are eaten only in small quantities
because they are heavy and hard to digest. Sunflower
and pumpkin are acceptable. These are a good meat
(protein) substitute.
OILS in moderation: Mustard, canola, sunflower,
safflower. Corn oil is also acceptable.
DAIRY Buttermilk (lassi: 1/4 cup organic yogurt: 3/
4 cup water) with meals; soy milk and goat’s milk
are acceptable when there are no congestion or
digestive disorders.
SWEETENERS A little raw honey is acceptable.
CONDIMENTS Cardamom, ginger (dry), mustard
horseradish, turmeric, cloves. Second best
are cinnamon, coriander, basil, cilantro, and parsley.
Avoid salt because it retains water in the body (if
absolutely necessary, black or rock salt may be used
because it is the least aggravating).
ANIMAL PRODUCTS are best avoided, except if
the person is extremely weak. Animal products boost

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
604
strength, but are inharmonious, toxic, increase water,
and do not generate new tissue growth. White, lean
poultry is the least aggravating.
BEVERAGES Astringent or pungent teas (warm or
at room temperature): Alfalfa, raspberry, hibiscus, and
dandelion. Boiled, organic goat’s milk (without food)
with cinnamon and honey. Pineapple, pomegranate,
cranberry, grapefruit, lemon, and lime juices are good.
Celery and other green vegetable juices are also
helpful. Avoid wine, alcohol, ice, or any cold drinks.
Herbal Preparations: The average amount of herbs
to take is between 1/4 to 1 teaspoon of an herb or of
an herbal mixture just after meals. Twice as much
raw honey, ghee, or water may be mixed with herbs
to form a paste. It is also advisable to cook herbs in a
little oil or ghee, then add them to your food. Teas
can be made with 1 to 2 teaspoons of herbs.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
OIL and MASSAGE Warm and light oils, such as
canola, mustard, flaxseed (linseed), or dry rough
massage are advised. Rubbing alcohol mixed with
warm herbal oils (eucalyptus, frankincense, myrrh,
clove, cedar, cinnamon, mustard) is also good. These
oils stimulate and clear the mind.
AROMA THERAPY Frankincense, myrrh, cedar,
cloves, cinnamon, and musk stimulate and clear the
mind. Use as incense, soap, sachet, or candles.
COLOR THERAPY Warm, bright colors: Yellow,
orange, gold, or red. Avoid white, or pale shades of
blue, green, and pink. Use black, brown, and gray in
moderation, or not at all. Colors apply to clothing,
office, and home furnishings.
GEM THERAPY Ruby, garnet, and cat’s eye set in
gold are warming, and therefore, reduce water.
Weight-reducing gems: amethyst and lapis, set in
gold, and worn with warmer stones. Set rings or
pendants to touch the skin for the strongest effect.
YOGA Strong workouts and more standing postures,
along with headstands (if there is no heart condition).
Solar Práòáyáma and breath of fire (bhastrika)
breathing are advised.
MANTRAS Stimulating and clearing mantras: are
useful, like Aym, Hreem, Hoom are useful.
MEDITATION Devotion (bhakti) and service
(karma) harmonize one’s nature. Worship the Divine
as a particular deity or incarnation you like, e.g.,
Rama, K^ißhòa, or Christ. Renounce greed, desire,
attachment and sentimentality to clear the mind.
Chanting is excellent.
LIFE STYLE Strong and aerobic workouts, sun-bath-
ing, warm breezes, discipline, physical hardship. Stay
up at night, avoid day naps, increase mental stimula-
tion, travel, and pilgrimage. Avoid cold and damp-
ness.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Please remember do not force anything! Listen to
what your system tells you. One’s intuition is the best
doctor. Please enjoy these suggestions and feel an
increasingly healthy and harmonious life.
Aum £hánti, £hánti, £hánti
Peace

Appendix 3: Prak^iti Food Plans
 605
Tridoßha Food Plan
If persons have an equal amount of all three doßhas,
food plans depend upon whether they are healthy or
have some illness. If ill, Áyurvedic practitioners
determine the doßha or doßhas causing the illness and
suggest the food plan that reduces that excessed doßha
(i.e., a vak^iti-reducing diet). When tridoßhic persons
have no health concerns, they are able to eat all foods
in moderation.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
606
Ghee
Ghee
Lassi
Áyurvedic Vegetarian Food Pyramid

Áyurvedic Resources
607
Áyurveda Holistic Centers
Áyurveda Holistic Center (main center)
Swami Sada Shiva Tírtha, D.Sc.
82A Bayville Ave.
Bayville, NY  11709 USA
516-628-8200
Website: http://ayurvedahc.com
Sister Centers
Uniyal Clinic
Dr. Ram Chandra Uniyal
Bhai Rava Chowk
Uttarkaähi, Himalayas 249193
India
Maa Parvati Memorial Clinic &
Himalayan Vaidyasala (Pañcha Karma Spa)
Dr. J.K. Chandhok & Dr. Archana Chandhok
Main Market
Uttarkaähi, Himalayas 249193
India
Consultations
     The Áyurveda Holistic Center offers interna-
tional consultation options at our center, online con-
sultations, and by phone and fax. For more infor-
mation call or see our website. 516-628-8200. http:/
/ayurvedahc.com.
Áyurveda - Learn your constitution (doäha) and
receive suggestions for a healthier life-style (i.e., life-
balance) including herbs, nutrition, aromas, colors,
yoga, mantras, dharma/life-purpose counseling,
much more. Three half-hour sessions.
Jyotiäh Spiritual Astrology - Life readings cover
1) Medical astrology
2) Spiritual career/life-purpose (one’s God-given or
innate gifts (dharma)
3) Spiritual/healthy relationships
4) Personal spiritual insights for liberation
Áyurvedic Resources
     Therapies are offered to balance and strengthen
planetary effects; e.g., seed mantras, gems, yantras,
herbs, diet, meditation, planetary lords, colors, and
planetary trends throughout life.
Optional Readings: Dharma (adults and
children), Student’s Major, Career.
School of Áyurveda
Certification & Ph.D. Programs
     We offer a 2 year certification training program
by distance learning (using email, mail and phone)
for health professionals and those wishing to enter
the holistic health field. Upon graduation, students
with MA/MS may transfer credits towards their
Ayurvedic Ph.D. (see “Degree Programs” below).
Full information online: http://vedicschool.com
Program Information: The program is designed for
health care professionals (i.e., MD’s RN’s, phar-
macists, chiropractors, psychologists, yoga teach-
ers, herbalists, holistic practitioners, etc., or for per-
sons planning to practice Áyurveda full or part-time.
Full details: http://vedicschool.com
The teaching method includes complete theoreti-
cal, practical, and spiritual elements. Students gradu-
ate experiencing 40 mock-consultations.
Required Texts:
The Áyurveda Encyclopedia (class workbook) and
Year 1 - 2: Yoga Vani, Guru Bani, Gita, Áyurveda
        Primer CD-Rom, Upaniähads
Programs taught by
Distance Learning: Swami Sada Shiva Tirtha
Australia: 1 & 3 year certification (vedicschool.com)
Advisors: Dr. S.N. Shrivastava BAMS, Dr. R.C.
Uniyal BAMS,  Dr. J.K. Chandhok, BAMS
Gentle, natural, personal. The practitioner
integrates all forms of holistic healing through this
unique healing system.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
  608
Online: 2-Year Certification: 990 hrs. Syllabus
Year 1 Theory & Practical Consultation
Training: 11 months
Course Number and Title
AY01-1 & AY01P: Fundamentals & History of
Áyurveda [1 month]: Áyurvedic Anatomy &
Physiology, Cause of Illness, Doähas, 
Sub-
Doähas & Dhátus, Srotas, 3-Malas, 6 tastes, 10
qualities, rasa-vírya-vipaka, mental qualities: sattwa-
rajas-tamas & praòa-tejas-ojas, 13 natural urges,
external influences, Agni, áma & ojas,
Root Cause of Illness
AY02-1 & AY02P-1: Analysis & Herbology [1
month]: How to determine one’s mental & physical
doäha, prak^ti & vik^ti, 5 methods of determining
an illness (nidan-purvarupa-rupa-upashaya-
samprapti), Seasonal affect on doäha & health, 6
stages of disease development, Ayurvedic Etiology
- How to find the root-cause of disease, Ayurvedic
pulse analysis, nail, tongue, face, eye analysis, 85
herb materia medica studied in detail
AY03-1 & AY03P: Ayurvedic Nutrition & Pancha
Karma I [1 month]: 7 Doähas Food plans, Pancha
Karma Therapy Part I
AY04-1 & AY04P: Pancha Karma II and
Aromatherapy [1 month]: Abhyañga & Marma
therapies, Kerala Pancha Karma, Beauty Care,
Aromatherapy
AY05-1 & AY05P: Haóha Yoga, Práòáyáma,
Mantras, Music & Meditation Therapies [1 month]:
Ásanas, Práòáyáma, Kumbhaka, Bandhas, Mudrás,
Yoga for pregnancy & Postpartum, Yoga for
children, office, the elderly and the physically
challenged, Mantra & Chakra Therapies, Sound,
Music, Color & Gem Therapies
AY06-1 & AY06P: External Health Factors: Life-
style, Seasonal Considerations, Environmental
Therapies, Ayurvedic Psychology & Spirituality [1
month]: Seasonal, life-style & exercise
considerations. Vedic Psychology & Doäha
Personalities, Spiritual Counseling, Meditation,
Ethics & Virtue (Yama/Niyama), Service &
Devotion, Naturalness & Purity, Physical, Astral &
Causal Bodies & the 5 delight cells
AY07-1 & AY07P: The Ayurvedic View of the
Circulatory System [1 month]
AY08-1 & AY08P: The Ayurvedic View of the
Digestive System [1 month]
AY09-1 & AY09P: The Ayurvedic View of
Infections & Wounds; the Respiratory & Urinary
Systems [1 month]
AY10-1 & AY10P: The Ayurvedic View of the Ears,
Nose Throat, Mouth & Eyes & the Nervous System
[1 month]
AYLECT-1: Complete one article & one lecture
Mid-Program Exam – 1 month to complete
Year 2 Theory & Practical Consultation
Training: 11 Months
AY11-1 & AY11P: The Ayurvedic View of the Skin
System & Vedic Ethics [1 month]
AY12-1 & AY12P: The Ayurvedic View of
Neoplasm/Abnormal Growths I [1 month]:
AY13-1 & AY13P: The Ayurvedic View of
Neoplasm/Abnormal Growths II [1 month]
AY14-1 & AY14P: Ayurveda and the Female
Reproductive System [1 month]
AY15-1 & AY15P: Ayurvedic Childbirth I [1
month]:
AY16-1 & AY16P: Ayurvedic Childbirth II & the
Male Reproductive System [1 month]
AY17-1 & AY17P: The Ayurvedic View of the
Immune System [1 month]
AY18-1 & AY18P: The Ayurvedic View of the
Metabolic System [1 month]
AY19-1 & AY19P: Therapeutic Applications &
Ayurvedic Pharmacology [1 month]: 3-vital organs
(head, heart, bladder), headaches/migraines, arthritis,
rheumatism, dangerous spiritual practices,

Áyurvedic Resources
609
recipes, medicated herbal wines, mineral tissue-
building therapies, organs & herbs, herb timing,
preparations.
AY20-1 & AY20P: External-Based Therapies [1
month]: Beauty care & skin, Architecture (Vástu
£hastra & Feng Shui), Vedic astrology (Jyotiäh),
East-West language bridging, Scientific Research.
AYLECT–2: Complete one article & one lecture
Second Year Final Exam – 1 month to complete
Australia Residential Certification
Our 1 yr  certification & 3 yr diploma is nationally
accredited. Details at http://vedicschool.com
Degree Programs
     Upon graduation from this training program one
receives certification. Credits are directly transferable
toward a  Ph.D. degree in Áyurvedic medicine
through Westbrook University.
Graduates’ Comments
‘I have previously studied Western and Chinese
medicine...the Áyurvedic approach is the most ef-
fective and easy to understand.’ - Dr. F. Cassis/NY
‘The information was presented simply, spiritually,
and practically...I have already begun Áyurvedic
consultations and incorporated my other holistic
trainings...This course and the teacher were truly
an inspiration.’ - W. Lawder/NJ
‘I very much enjoy helping people, so I was search-
ing for a healing program that will help me help
others. This course have given me everything that I
was looking for.’ - T. Fyssoun/Greece
Call or email for questions and registration:
516-628-8200       mail@ayurvedahc.com
FAQ & registration: http://ayurvedahc.com
C
C
C
Ayurveda Holistic Community -online
We have grateful to now offer a free, interactive
online community where we offer Áyurveda article
and research journals, practitioner directory, e-maga-
zine, forums, dosha test, recipes, meditation room,
resources, humor, music, poetry and more. We also
offer solutions, articles, and links for environmen-
tal, social, educational, and spiritual health. http://
ayurvedahc.com
ISHTAA (International Spiritual Holistic Think-
ing Áyurveda Association)
     With the explosion of interest in Áyurveda, there
has been little discussion of spiritual, social, and en-
vironmental aspects to this science of life. To that
end we have formed an informal group for people
wishing to share ideas and activities that include
these aspects of Áyurveda.  http://ishtaa.org
International Vedic Institute
Online Continuing Education Classes
Complete classes on major health conditions (e.g.
arthritis, cholesterol). Learn which foods, herbs,
yoga, 
and 
other 
therapies 
can 
help.
http://vedicschool.com/
Other Books from the
Áyurveda Holistic Center Press
Yoga Vani:
Instructions for the Attainment of Siddhayoga
by the late Swami £ha´kar Puruähottam Tírtha,
founder of the Siddhayogashram & £ha´kar Math
in India. The topics discussed include sádhana
(meditation) experiences, how to find a guru, when
to change gurus, discussions of kuòæaliní çhakti-
pat, suähumòá, the 10 chakras, yoga, and much
more.
Guru Bani: 100 Ways to Attain Peace
by Swami £ha´kar Puruähottam Tirtha. This sequel
to Yoga Bani offers simple guidance on how to live
spiritual, ethical lives outside of meditation (for fami-
lies and monks).
Swami Nárayan Tirtha Math (aähram)
Discussion of spiritual topics.
http://www.swaminarayantirtha.org

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
  610
The Ayurveda Primer: CD-Rom E-book
Introduction, Case Studies & Research
by Swami Sadashiva Tirtha, D.Sc.
     A new appoach is taken in this introductory e-
book. Many topics are discussed by organizing the
most commonly asked questions by new-comers to
Áyurveda. All topics are covered very simply.
Seven meditation videos are included. For those
who have Adobe Acrobat you may hear the audio
glossary. $18 http://vedicvendor.com
C
C
C
Other Áyurvedic Resources
See our updated online international listings of
everything 
Áyurvedic: 
http://
www.ayurvedahc.com/klink/ayurveda
USA resources
Herbs: Bazaar of India: ayur-veda.com
Herbs: Fairdeal Distributors: lotusfair.com
Herbs: HimalayaUSA: himalayausa.com
Herbs: 
Banyan: 
banyanbotanicals.com
Organic Ghee: Purity Farms     800-568-4433
BeautyCare Training: www.melaniesachs.com
See our other online holistic resources (organic foods
and clothing, non-toxic products, Fair Trade social
entrepreneurs,  Indian music, Hinduism, Sanskrit,
more; at http://www.ayurvedahc.com/klink/
Pañcha Karma Clinics in India
     Among the respected clinics, living conditions
and prices vary. In spas offering air conditioning
and other comforts, the prices can double. General
treatments last from 2-4 weeks. Chronic or severe
conditions (e.g., paralysis) can take longer.
     Áyurvedic spas have proliferated since 2000 and
they can be found in every major city, making it
quite convenient. Kerala pañcha karma treatments
are most popular. However, with the explosion of
popularity also comes increased costs.
     It is advised to seek out local people to find a
reputable pañcha karma clinic that doesnt charge
too much.
     Our sister center in the village of Uttarkashi in
the Himalayas, has a beautiful, authentic, and
reasonably priced center across from the Ganga river.
They are a ‘Fair Trade’ spa, employing local villagers
to help raise themselves out of poverty.
     The spa also offers herb walks and Himalaya
day treks. Pickup from airport available.
Full details:
http://ayurvedahc.com/HimalayanVaidyashala.htm
or mail to:
Maa Parvati Memorial Clinic
& Himalayan Vaidaysala - Main Market
Uttarkaähi, Himalayas 249193 India
 C
C
C
The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
Available Internationally
Australia: John Reed Books  - 61-02-4997-2936
           johnreed@barcode.com.au
Canada: Mond Trading 416-504-5755
 
 
www.herbiesherbs.com
   Manda Group 416-516-0911
                       general@mandagroup.com
India: Sri Sat Guru Press - (91) 11-2743-4930
                       (hardcover) indianbookscentre.com
          Jain Books (paperback)
New Zealand: Jay Books - 04-586-0226
North Africa & Middle East:
I.P.R - Cyprus      (357) 22-357-836
iprschl@spidernet.com.cy
South Africa:
      Phambili Agencies - Germiston 011-873-3461
UK/Europe: Gazelle Books  - 44-1524-68765
           Sales@gazellebooks.co.uk
Singapore & Malaysia
         Fathima News Enterprise - (65) 6220-0532
 fneariff@singnet.com.sg
Malaysia, Brunei, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Philipines:
   Wharton Books - Singapore (65) 6276 8280
                ganesan@goodbooks.com.sg
Amazon.com (UK, Germany, France, Japan)
Amazon.com international Áyurveda Bestseller!

Curriculum Vitae
 611
About the Author
1974 Began practicing organized meditation
1975 BA - Interdisciplinary Studies
1976 Certified meditation teacher
1980 MA - Non-verbal Communications research
1988 Áyurveda certification: Áyurvedic Institute
        Jyotiäh (Vedic astrology) certification: American Institute of Vedic Studies
        Began an Áyurveda and Jyotiäh consultation practice
        Visited India; initiated into science of mysticism by his guru (spiritual teacher)
Swami Nárayan Tírtha
          Advanced Áyurveda training with Benares Hindu University professors: Varanasi, India
1989 Áyurveda certification: American Institute of Vedic Studies
         Founded the Swami Nárayan Tírtha Math (Hindu monastery) in the US
1990 Published the book, Yoga Vani: Instructions for the Attainment of Siddhayoga
        Developed an Áyurvedic herbal product line
1991 Began offering Áyurveda certification training programs internationally
         Received initiation as swami (monkhood) from his guru in India
          Advanced study with Áyurvedic doctors in the Himalayas
1995 Published the book, Guru Bani: 100 Ways to Attain Peace
1997 Created an Áyurvedic website
1998 Wrote the Áyurveda Encyclopedia
1999 Earned a Doctor of Science in Áyurvedic Medicine & Research: Westbrook University
2000 Wrote the Áyurveda Primer: Introduction, Case Studies, & Research [E-Book CD-ROM]
        Research study published in American Áyurveda Journal
        Speaker: White House Commission on Alternative Medicine, John Hopkins U., Penn State U.
        Special advisor to the Áyurveda Acupuncture Board of Accreditation of Australia
2002 Vastushastracharya certification: from All India Federation of Astrologers’ Societies
2005 Began free online interactive Ayurveda education site
            Founded ISHTAA (International Spiritual Holistic
               Thinking Ayurveda Assn. - ishtaa.org)
Swami Sadá Shiva Tírtha is listed in Natural Living
Magazine’s “Best Alternative Health Practitioners in the
Country” guide, and his center has been listed as a respected
Áyurveda resource in numerous holistic health magazines
including Yoga Journal, natural Remedies, Delicious
Magazine;and in various holistic reference books including
the merican Holistic Health Association Complete Guide to
Alternative Medicine. His website is in the top 3 most visited
Áyurveda ites. The Áyurveda Encyclopedia remains in the
internatonal top-10 bestselling Áyurveda books on
amazon.com in the US, UK, Germany, Japan, and France.
Author (left) with his Guru,
His Holiness, Sri Sri Srimat 1008
Swami Nárayan Tírthaji Maháraj

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
612
Inspiration from Tagore
God respects me when I work; but he loves me when I sing.
Those who want to help knock at the door.
Those who love find the door already open.
     I slept and dreamt life was joy.
     I awoke and saw life was service
          I served and lo, service was joy.

Glossary
 613
A
abaran concealment energy of the causal or
essential body
abhyañga massage-like therapies
agni digestive enzymes
ahimsa non-violence
ajapa the Gáyatrí mantra that brings salvation
ajírna indigestion
ájñá chakra third eye or intuitive eye
akaäha space
akshe-paka convulsions
alají a painful mouth eruption emitting discharge
alasaka a digestive disorder
alepa/átepanam medicated pastes for ulcers
allaepauk ginger jam with additional spices
álochaka Pitta one of the five Pitta subdoähas;
resides in the retina of the eyes and governs
sight.
áma undigested food toxins
ámáßhaya stomach
amla sour
amlapitta acid gastritis
anáha a digestive disorder involving áma
and/or
feces accumulation in the digestive tract
anaháta chakra fourth or heart chakra
anasarca an edema-like swelling
a´guli/a´gula finger width measurement
ani marma energy point governing muscle
tension (located just above the knees)
anjana eye salves
anjana vidhi eye therapies
anna lepa poultice used when pinæa sweda is
contraindicated or ineffective
annamaya koäha food cell
annavaha srota digestive system channels of
transport
antraja v^iddhi inguinal hernia
anupana a food medium or vehicle that
       transports herbs to the tissue levels (e.g.,
      honey)
anuvásana basti unctuous medicated enema
ap water element
apán Váyu one of the five Váyu subdoähas;
Áyurvedic Glossary
downward moving air
aparigraha not chasing after material wealth
apartarpaòa reducing or detoxifying therapies
apasmára epilepsy
arbuda cancer
ardha matsyendrásana alternate spinal twist
yoga pose
árißhóha/ásava medicated wines
arochaka anorexia
arogya health
arßhas hemorrhoids
artavaha srota uterus channels
ásana haóha yoga postures
ásava, árißhóha medicated wines
áßhaya containers within the body
áßhcotana therapy using eye drops
aähtabindu eight drops
Aähóáñga H^idayam one of the three main
ancient Áyurvedic texts
as^igdara menorrhagia
asthi bone tissue
astivaha srota bone channels
atísára diarrhea
Átreya author of Charak Saåhitá
asthápana or nirúha basti non-oily enema
aum first sound of creation
aupadravikam adhyayam eye diseases
avagáhan soaking in a tub of medicated water
avalaåbaka Kapha one of the five Kapha
subdoähas; found in the chest and creates
cohesion, softness, moistness, and liquidity,
which results in maintaining body strength.
avaleha confections
avapída nasal therapy using fresh herb juices
Áyurveda science of life and longevity
B
bahihpragña perceiving the world through
the senses
bahya kumbhaka outer breath retention

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
614
baikhari audible sounds produced by the throat
bajra náæí first subtler channel in suähumòá
bálámaya pratihedha children’s diseases
bandhas energy locks used during yoga poses
basmati rice a sweet, nutritious, and easily
digested rice
basti bladder or medicated enema- one of the five
pañcha karma therapies
basti marma energy center below the navel; gov-
erning apána Váyu, Kapha, urine function
bhagandara fistula-in-ano
bhagnam fractures
bhajans singing of religious songs
bhakti divine devotion resulting from experiencing
     the indescribable love of God
bhasma burnt metals or gems (generally for
     ingesting)
bhastra kumbhaka bellows breath exercise
bhrájaka Pitta one of the five Pitta subdoähas;
     resides in the skin. It regulates complexion
by keeping secretions from the sweat and
sebaceous glands of the skin active.
bhesan chick pea (also called garbanzo and
     channa
bhramarí kumbhaka humming-bee breath
bhuja´gásana serpent pose
bhujangini mudrá breathing exercise for
stomach diseases and digestion
bhúta vidyá Áyurvedic psychiatry
bhutagnis five digestive enzymes that metabolize
the five elements
bhúta Vidyá Áyurvedic psychiatry
bidáliká tonsillitis
bíj seed
bikßhepa hallucination energy of the causal or
essential body
bindú semen or ovum
bodhaka Kapha one of the five Kapha sub-
doähas; found in the tongue and is responsible
for taste.
Brahmá name of God of creation
brahmacharya celibacy; one who follows a
spiritual lifestyle including celibacy (certain
religious married couples have their own form
of brahmacharya)
Brahman a name for eternal, unmanifest God
brahmanáæí subtlest channel in the suähumòá
brahmarandhra area in the crown chakra
bráhmí gotu kola
bráhmí ghee a rejuvenating herbal/ghee therapy
with bráhmí as the main ingredient
Brihat Samhitá a Jyotiäh astrology text
b^iμhaòa nourishing therapies in pañcha karma
C
cala moving quality of food
chai tea
chaitanya consciousness
chakra spiritual energy centers in the body
chandrabheda práòáyáma left-nostril breathing
     exercise
channa dal chick peas or garbanzo beans
Charak pen name of author of Charak Saåhitá
(Lord Átreya)
Charak Saåhitá One of the three main ancient
Áyurvedic texts
chardi vomiting
chitrini second subtlest channel in the suähumòá
choti elá small cardamom seeds
chúròas herb powders
chyavan prá¤h herbal rejuvenative jam with
ámalakí and ghee as its main ingredients
D
danta roga tooth disorders
danta vidradhi dental abscess
dantamúla gums
dárdhya sturdiness
deha-manasa psychosomatic
dhamaní arteries
dhanurásana bow pose (yoga posture)
Dhanvantari divine father of Áyurveda
dhárá drava medicated oil for the head
dhárá karma certain pañcha karma therapies
dhárá svedhana pouring warm oil on body,
causing sweating
dháraòá God-visualization
dharma life purpose or life path; God-given
talent

Glossary
 615
dhatagnis seven digestive enzymes that
metabolize the seven tissue layers; it includes
anabolic and catabolic activity
dhátu tissue
dhúma medicated smoke therapy
dhyána fixed God-visualization
doäha humors; elemental or energetics related to
personal constitution or current health
imbalance (Váyu, Pitta, Kapha, Tridoäha)
drakßha herbal wine
drava liquid quality of food
drava svedhana see dhárá svedhana
drißhti eye
drißhti-gata-roga-vijnáñiya eye pupil
diseases
G
galaganda goiter
Ganges famous river in India believed to
believed to possess spiritual healing powers
Gangotri a holy place near the source of the
Garuda Purana ancient Vedic text that
discusses gems
Gáyatrí mantra mantra for salvation
ghee clarified butter
ghrita another word for ghee
grahaní duodenum
gomedha hessonite garnet used for healing in
Áyurveda and Jyotiäh astrology
gomukhásana cow-face yoga pose
Gorakäha Saåhitá a major haþha yoga treatise
grahaní digestive disorders
g^idhrasí sciatica
gríähma summer
gulma abdominal tumors
guæa (jaggery) a form of pure cane sugar
guòas three qualities or the fundamental laws of
nature (sattwa: creation, rajas: maintenance,
tamas: dissolution)
guru teacher; also heavy quality of foods
guói herbal pills
H
halásana plough pose
ha´g saà mantra sound of the life-breath
haóha yoga gentle stretching exercises that
improve health, mind/body coordination and
spiritual foundations
hataratnavali major haþha yoga treatise
hemanta winter season
hikká hiccup
hima cold infusions
hiranyagarbha Supreme God, golden egg,
universal consciousness, or Supreme Self
hirchula cardiac colic
h^idaya heart
h^idroga heart disease
I
iæá left or lunar channel, associated with pi´galá;
surrounding the suähumòá
J
jaggery (guæa) a form of pure cane sugar
jálandhara bandha throat lock used with yoga
postures to keep the bindú from flowing
down-out of the head
jará aging
jatharagni digestive enzymes in the G.I. level
jathara parivartanásana belly roll yoga pose
jatrúrdhva marma energy point group: those
points on the neck and head
jihwá roga tongue disorders
jñyán mudrá finger position to keep energy
from flowing out of the fingers
jwara fever
Jyotiäh Vedic astrology
K
kaki mudrá a breathing exercise- pursing lips
and inhaling; cools Pitta (heat)
kama healthy and spiritual use of the senses
kámalá roga jaundice
kaòóha roga throat disorders
kapálbháti kumbhaka frontal brain cleanse
Kapha biological phlegm; water/earth
     energetic, constitution, or humor
kapitthaparni a name for frankincense

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
616
kapotásana pigeon yoga pose
karana ¤haríra causal or essential body
karma action
karna púrana ear bath therapy
karnapálí roga ear lobes
karòa-gata-roga-vijnániya ear disorders
karpúr camphor
kása cough
kaähaya astringent
kathina hard quality of food
katti basti lower back bath therapy
katu pungent
kaumára bh^itya pediatrics; one of the eight
branches of Áyurvedic medicine
káya seka oil poured over the body (therapy)
káyachikitsá internal medicine; one of the eight
branches of Áyurvedic medicine
kayvala kumbhaka automatic still breath exercise
khara rough quality of food
kicharí grain/legume meal; usually basmati rice
and múngdal. Sometimes some veggies are
included
kledaka Kapha one of the five Kapha subdoähas;
found in the stomach, liquefying hard food
masses.
koßóhágni digestive fire/enzymes
krimi parasites
K^ißhòa a name of God
krishna-gata-roga-vijñániya chorid and iris
kriyá yoga form of yoga exercises
kßhaya atrophy
kukkutásana cockerel yoga pose
kukßhi-¤húla a Váyu digestive disorder
kumbhaka yogic breathing exercises
kuòæaliní ¤hakti spiritual life-force
kúrmásana tortoise yoga pose
kußhóha obstinate skin diseases
kwátha herbal decoction
L
laghu light quality of food
lalaná chakra energy center in the palate
la´ghana reducing therapies
lavaòa salty
laya yoga yoga stage where breathing stops
lekhana scraping therapies lepa
herbal paste or poultice
M
madát-yaya alcohol recovery
madháyamañga marma energy point group:
those points on the trunk of the body
madhura sweet
madhya medium (level)
madhyama sound (náda) rising to the heart that
is felt by the ears (but not heard)
mahá bandha great lock pose
mahá bheda yoga pose that brings life-breath
into suähumòá
mahá bheda mudrá great piercing (yoga) position
mahá marma the 3 vital organs: head, heart,
urinary bladder
mahá mudrá great sealing pose
Maharishi Kanada author of Náæívijñánam
Mahavír Hanuman the Monkey-God; Lord of
selfless service and devotion
majja marrow/bones and joint tissue
majjávaha srota marrow/joint lubrication
channels
mala waste produce (i.e., urine, sweat, feces)
máåsa muscle tissue
máåsavaha srota muscular channels
manas chakra energy center slightly above the
the 3rd eye on the forehead
manda slow quality of food; also rice water
mandágni Kapha-produced digestive enzymes
manipúra chakra energy center located at the
navel
manomaya koßha mind cell
mantra special words or sounds for health and
spiritual development
mantra yoga meditation using words or sounds
manyá marma energy points in the neck
governing lymphatic and Kapha function
marga tracts in the body
marma energy points on the body
matsyásana fish pose
matsyendrásana spinal twist
medas fat/adipose tissue
medovaha srota adipose/fat channels

Glossary
 617
mútra urine
mútravaha srota urinary channels
mithya áhar vihar improper lifestyle
mokäha Self-Realization
mridu soft quality of food
mudrás body and hand positions that channel
energy into the chakras and suähumòá
mukha roga mouth cavity
múla bandha perineum/cervix contraction used
with yoga poses
múládhára chakra energy center at the base of
the spine
múrchá fainting
múrchha kumbhaka swooning breath exercise
múrdha taila head oil
mútra urine
mútra v^iddhi scrotum fluid
mútrá-¤harkará urinary gravel
mútrá-áßhmarí urinary stones
mútrá-gháta urinary diseases
mútrá-ghátádi urine retention
mútrá-k^ichra dysuria
mútragháta urine obstruction
mútravaha srota urinary channel
N
nábhi navel
nabho mudrá yoga exercise involving head
extention and breathing
náda sound
náæí nerve channels
náæí ¤hodhana práòáyáma dual-nostril breathing
exercise
náæí sveda medicated herbal steam directed
through a tube and applied to localized body
areas
naæíprakaßham/náæívijñánam pulse diagnosis
náæí-vraòa sinus
nasikagra driähti eyes gazing at tip of nose
nasya therapies applied through the nose; one of
the five pañcha karma therapies
násá-gata-roga-vijñániya nose diseases
nayaná-bhigháta-pratißhedha externally
caused eye injury
nayana-budbuda eyeball diseases
neti pot a small vessel that looks like a miniature
watering can; used for nasal channel washing
netra basti medicated eye baths
nidána diagnosis, etiology, cause of disease
niketa abodes within the body
nilá marma energy points on the neck
niráma non-clogged (no áma) digestive system
nirbikalpa samádhi second stage of samádhi
(absorption in eternal consciousness)
nirúha basti oily enema
nirvana ¤hakti mother of the three worlds—
     experienced when crown chakra opens
niyama ethical codes of conduct; purity,
contentment, devotion, spiritual study, faith in
God; included with Yama
O
odana soft, plain basmati rice meal
ojas life sap; essence of immune system and
spiritual energy
P
páchaka agni responsible for digestion
páchaka Pitta one of the five Pitta subdoähas;
the main digestive enzymes, they are found in
the small intestine, stomach, and colon as
non-liquid heat, bile, or digestive fire. The fire
digests and transforms food, emulsifying food
fats and separating absorbable nutrients from
waste, so they may be passed to lacteals by
absorption.
pádábhyañga foot massage
padma lotus
padmásana lotus yoga pose
pañcha karma five cleansing therapies; vaman,
virechan, basti, nasya, rakta mokäha
pañchang ephemeris
panír home made Indian ricotta cheese
pantha passages within the body
páòæu-roga anemia
para náda sound evolving from kuòæaliní at the
first chakra
parißheka medicated water sprinkled over

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
618
     localized areas of the body for therapeutic
benefits
párßhva-¤húla a form of colic
paschimottanásana back stretching yoga pose
páähásana chord yoga pose
pasyanti sound only heard by advanced yogis
Patañjali author of the Yoga Sutras and
commentator on yama and niyama
payasam semi-solid pudding for pinæa sveda
peyá thin soup taken after pañcha karma
therapies
pháòóa hot infusions
pínasa rhinitis
pinæa sveda abhyañga therapy using a heated
bolus
pi´galá the right or solar nerve channel-related
to iæá; both surround the suähumná
Pitta biological bile; fire energetic, a
constitution, or humor
pizhichil abhyañga therapy involving the
continuous pouring of warm oil over the body
prabháva special effects of herbs
pradara menorrhagia
pradhama herbal evacuative nasal therapy using
pradhamana nasal therapy: herbs blown through a
tube
pradhana karma primary pañcha karma practices
pradhena non-absorbing topical pastes for Váyu
and Kapha doähas
prak^iti one’s life constitution or nature
pralaya universal sound sleep
pralepa topical pastes for Pitta doäha
prameha obstinate urinary diseases (including
diabetes)
prameha piæaká diabetic ulcer
práòa life force
práòa Váyu one of the five Váyu subdoähas;
outward moving air.
práòavaha srota channel which práòa flows
práòáyám breathing exercises
prasad food offered to God
prasádana vision-clearing eye salves
pratimarßha oil/uncting nasal therapy
pratißhyáya colds
pratyáhára withdrawal and liberation of the mind
from the senses and objects (5th stage of yoga)
praváhika dysentery
p^itivi earth
puakußha gingivitis
púja worship ritual
punster male reproductive system
puríßha feces waste product
puríshavaha srota feces elimination channels
Purußha eternal, unmanifest consciousness
purva karma preliminary pañcha karma
therapies (oleation & sudation)
púrvarupa hidden or incubatory signs of disease
pußhti nourishing
puta-páka a group of eye therapies
R
rajas/rajasic law of nature that maintains life;
one of the three guòas
raja yoga final stage of yoga; one remains ever
centered within their Self
rájá-yakßhmá pulmonary TB
rakta blood
raktaja gulma blood/ovarian tumors and cysts
rakta mokäha blood letting; one of the five
pañcha karma cleansing methods
raktavaha srota blood circulatory channels
rañjaka Pitta one if the five Pitta subdoähas;
located in the stomach, liver, and spleen, and
gives color to lymph chyle when it is
transformed into blood as it passes through
the liver and spleen.
rasa plasma; taste; also products containing
     mercury ash
rasavaha srota plasma channels
rasa dhátu plasma tissue
rasavahini capillaries
rasáyana rejuvenation
Ravi £hankar renown sitar musician
¼ig Veda One of the four main Vedic scriptures
¼ig Veda Bhasyabhumika ancient Vedic scripture
^ishi seer or sage
roga disease
rudhrapußhpa rose
rúkßhaòa drying therapies in pañcha karma
rupa form; signs or symptoms of disease

Glossary
 619
rúäha dry quality of food
S
sádhaka Pitta one of the five Pitta subdoähas;
found in the heart. It helps in performing
mental functions such as knowledge, intelli-
gence, and consciousness by maintaining
rhythmic cardiac contractions.
sádhaná meditation
sahasrára chakra energy center at the crown of
head
saibikalpa samádhi first stage of samádhi;
sattwic mind
sálamba sarvá´gásana shoulder stand pose
sáma coated tongue due to áma in the digestive
system
Sama Veda one of the four main Vedic scriptures
samádhi various stages of Self-Realization
samágni normal digestion
samána Váyu one of the five Váyu subdoähas;
equalized moving air
saånyása coma
samprapti pathogenesis; disease development
samsarajana special diet after undergoing
pañcha karma therapies
saμ¤hamana gentle reducing therapies for mild
imbalances
saμa¤hodhana strong reducing therapies for
more serious imbalances
saμtarpaòa nourishing pañcha karma therapies
samvritásamvrita ducts within the body
sanátana dharma fundamental Hindu
philosophy that states everything has its use
in its own time and place; so reject nothing
and accept everything (in its time and place)
sandhi mukti fractures
sandhigata-roga-vijñaniya eyes
sapta dhátus seven tissue layers
Saraswati Goddess of wisdom, education, and
music
sándra solid quality of food
sarva-gata-roga-abhißhyandha conjunctivitis
sarvánga dhárá whole-body abhyañga therapies
sarvánga senchana another name for káya seka
sattwa/sattwic purity; one of the three guòas
sattwavajaya holistic psychotherapy
setu bandha sarvá´gásana bridge yoga pose
¤hakti spiritual energy
¤halabhásan locust pose
 çhálákya tantra ears, nose, throat; one of the
eight branches of Áyurvedic medicine
çhalyá tantra surgery; one of the eight branches
of Áyurvedic medicine
¤hamana palliation therapy
¤háåbhaví mudrá staring at 3rd eye exercise
¤hankha marma energy point group on the legs
and feet
£ha´kar Sen author of Náæíprakaäham
sharat autumn
¤harírachidra spaces within the body
çhastra Vedic laws
¤hatapatra lotus
¤havásana corpse pose
¤heka eye sprinkling therapy
¤hikäha, díkäha, paríkäha learning, dedicated
practice, evaluation
¤hirá veins
¤hiro basti medicated oil soaking on the head
¤hiro dhárá warm oil flow to the forehead
¤hiro lepa medicated head pastes or poultices
¤hiro-roga-vijñániya head disorders
¤hiro virechana nasya nasal evacuative
therapies
shiçhira cold season
çhishya disciple/student
¤hítalí cooling breath exercise
¤hítkarí kumbhaka hissing breath exercise
£hiva one name of God in Hinduism
çhlakähna smooth quality of food
¤hlípada elephantiasis
¤hleähaka Kapha one of the five Kapha
subdoähas; located in the bone joints and
lubricates them.
¤hodhana strong reducing therapies
¤hopha/¤hotha edema
¤hrama fatigue
¤huklagata-roga-vijñániya sclerotic coat
çhukra dhátu reproductive tissue
¤hukra-¤hmarí seminal stones
çhukravaha srota reproductive system channels

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
620
¤húla colic
¤hvása breahing difficulty
siddha yoni ásana perfection pose (for women)
siddhásana perfection pose (for men)
simhásana lion yoga pose
síta cold quality of food
sneha medicated ghee and oil
snehana oil therapy (external)
snehapána internal oil therapy
snighda oily quality of food
soma spiritual nectar
soma chakra between third eye and crown chakras
srota channels or pores
srutis Vedic laws
stambhana astringent therapies
sthána residence sites within the body
stanyavaha srota breast milk channel
sthira stable quality of food
sthúla large quality of food
sthula ¤haríra physical body
súkähma subtle quality of food
sukßhma ¤haríra astral body
súrya the sun
súryabheda práòáyáma solar breathing
exercise
súryásana sun salute yoga pose
Sußhrut author of Sußhrut Saåhitá
Sußhrut Saåhitá one of the original three main
Áyurvedic texts; mainly covers surgery
sußhumòá spiritual tube within the spine. Life
force energy rises through this tube
sutrátma thread of the Self; Universal Conscious-
     ness
svara-bedha hoarsness
svedhana preliminary pañcha karma sweat
therapy
swabhavoparama recession by nature
swádhißhóhán chakra second or navel energy
center
Swami Narayan Tirtha successor of Swámí
£ha´kar Purußhottam Tírtha
Swámí £ha´kar Purußhottam Tírtha author of
Yoga Vani & Guru Bani
swapna sleep
swarasa herb juice
swastikásana auspicious pose (a yoga pose)
swabhavoparama health returns from recession
by nature, resulting from administering therapies
swádus weet
sweda sweat
swedavaha srota sweat-transporting channels
T
tadan kriyá great piercing (yoga) position
taila seka another name for káya seka
tálu vidradhi palatal abscesses
talugata roga palate disorders
tamas/tamasic one of the three guòas; lethargy
destruction property
tanmatras primal sensory energies before they
develop into the five senses
tarpaka Kapha one of the five Kapha
subdoähas; found in the head and nourishes
the sense organs.
tápa svedhana heated object placed on body to
cause sweating
tapas a form of spiritual practice
tarpaka Kapha subdosha that nourishes the
senses
tarpana soothing eye therapies
tejas mental fire
tekähna quick quality of food
tikßhna strong smoke therapies
tíkßhnágni Pitta-produced digestive enzymes
tikta bitter
til sesame seeds
timira blindness
tridosha/tridoähic a physical constitution
involving all three doähas
trißhná thirst
tur dal a legume high in protein
U
udakavaha srota water metabolism system
udán Váyu one of the five Váyu subdoähas;
upward moving air
udara roga abdominal diseases
uææíyána bandha exercise that contracts the
lower abdomen
udgharßhana body powder rub

Glossary
 621
ugrásana (paschimottanásana) back stretching
pose
ujjáyí kumbhaka conquering breath exercise
unmáda insanity
upajihviká glossitis
upanáha svedhana hot poultice applied to body
then wrapped in heated cloth
Upanishads a series of Vedic scriptures
upaähaya diagnostic tests
upaveda a secondary branch of the main Vedas
uro basti chest/heart bath
urustambha paraplegia
uähmá svedhana steam therapy
úßhná hot quality of food
uttara karma pañcha karma follow-up therapies
uttara basti upper tract medicated enema
V
vaiswanara Consciousness in the universal mate-
rial body
vájikarana aphrodisiacs
vajrolí mudrá thunderbolt yoga pose
Vala a demon who when killed was cut into
pieces that became various gems
vamaka vamana herbs that induce vomiting
vamana medicated emesis; one of the pañcha
karma cleansing processes
vamanopaga vamana herbs that enhance
vamaka herbs
varòya lepa cosmetic plasters
varßhá rainy season
vartmagata-roga-vijñániya eyelids
vasant spring
Vástu Çhastra Vedic architecture
váta-rakta (also called váta-ähonita) gout
váta-ßhonita (váta-rakta) gout
váta-vyádhi nervous system
vátáßhóhílá enlarged prostate
Váyu/Váta biological wind; ether/air element,
constitution, or humor (traditional word for
Váta)
Vedas The ancient scriptures of India
Veda Vyasa ancient sage who transcribed the
Vedas
vidradhi abscess
vigñanamaya koßha knowledge cell
vik^iti current doäha imbalance (as differentiated
from prak^iti or life constitution)
vilambiká digestive disorder due to excess Váyu
and Kapha
vilepí thick rice soup
vipáka post digestive taste
vírásana hero’s yoga pose
virat consciousness in the universal physical
body (also called vaiswanara)
virechana medicated purgation; one of the
pañcha karma cleansing processes
vírya potency (related to the taste of herbs, foods,
etc.)
víryalpata impotence
visásana alternate yoga pose for vírásana
viähada non-slimy quality of food
vißhagara-vairodh tantra toxicology; one of
the eight branches of Áyurvedic medicine
vißhamágni Váyu-produced digestive enzymes
Vißhòu maintainer of the universe (one of the
triad of Brahma , Vißhòu, Maheähwara: creator,
maintainer, and destroyer of the universe
respectively); also One name of God in
Hinduism
vißhuddha chakra 5th or throat energy center
visúchiká gastro enteritis
viswa consciousness in the individual material
body
vraòa wounds
v^iddhi enlarged scrotum
vyán Váyu one of the five Váyu subdoähas; air
movement throughout the body
vyayama exercise
Y
Yajur Veda one of the four main Vedic texts
yakrit janya raktalplata sickle cell anemia
yama codes of ethical behavior non-envy, truth,
non-stealing, continence, not desiring of
material wealth (included with niyama)
yoga uniting of mind and body, and the various
subtle energies within; also a form of stretching
postures (see haóha yoga)
Yoga Vani an instructional book for the
     attainment of Siddhayoga (a guide to Self real-
ization)

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
622
yoni mudrá hand position to awaken raja yoga
yonivyápat female reproductive
yuäha rice and split yellow múng dal soup

Bibliography
 623
Acharya PK. Encyclopedia of Hindu Architecture.
New Delhi, India: Oriental Book Reprints
Co.; 1979.
Amber B. Pulse Diagnosis. Santa Fe, NM:
Aurora Press; 1993.
Badmaev V, Majeed M. Effects of Áyurvedic Herbs.
Health Supplement Retailer Magazine. Novem-
ber 1995.
Badmaev V, Majeed M. Áyurvedic Adaptogens and
Bioprotectants. Natural Food Merchandiser’s
     Nutrition Science News Magazine. September
     1995.
Bhat MR. B^ihat Saåhita. New Delhi, India:
Moltilal Banarsidass; 1986.
Bhishagratna KL. (transl.) Sußhrut Saåhita.
     Varanasi, India: Chowkhambha Sanskrit Series;
     1991.
Brala PM, Hagen RL. Effects of Sweetness
Perception and Caloric Value of a Preload on
Short Term Intake. Physiol Behav, 30: 1, 1983
January: 1-9.
Colborn T., Dumanoski D., Myers JP. Our Stolen
Future. New York, NY: Plume/Penguin; 1997
Collinge W. The American Holistic Health
Association Complete Guide to Alternative
Medicine. New York, NY: Warner Books;
1996.
Dadd DL. Home Safe Home. New York, NY:
     Tarcher/Putnam; 1997
Dagens B. (transl.) Mayamatma. New Delhi,
India: Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Scientific
     Research; 1985.
Dash B, Kashyap L. Diagnosis and Treatment of
     Diseases in Áyurveda. (vols. 2-7) New Delhi,
     India: Concept Publishing; 1981-87.
Dash B. Massage Therapy in Áyurveda. New
Delhi, India: Concept Publishing; 1992.
Dash B, Kashyap L. Materia Medica of Áyurveda.
     New Delhi, India: Concept Publishing; 1987.
Davis P. Aromatherapy A—Z. Essex, England
     C.W. Daniel Ltd.; 1988.
Deshpande PJ, Singh R, Bhatt NS. Clinical Trial of
     Ayurvedic Drug U-144 (K4 Tablets) in Urinary
Bibliography
     Tract Infections. Medicine & Surgery. Vol 32, no
     10/11, Oct. - Nov. 1994.
Deshpande PJ, Singh R, Bhatt NS. Clinical Effect
of an Ayurvedic Drug L2002 on Hepatobiliary
Disorders. Journal of NIMA. Dec. 1994.
Devaraj TL. The Pañchakarma Treatment of
Ayurveda. Bangalore, India: Dhanwantari
Oriental Publications; 1986.
Dossey L. Healing Words. San Francisco, CA:
     Harper; 1993
Fields D. Foods That Heal. New Age Journal
July/August, 1993.
Frawley D. Áyurveda Certification Course. Santa
     Fe, NM: American Institute of Vedic Studies;
     1992.
Frawley D. Áyurvedic Healing. Salt Lake City,
     UT: Passage Press; 1989.
Frawley D, Lad V. The Yoga of Herbs. Santa Fe,
     NM: Lotus Press; 1986.
Gould KL, Ornish D., et. al. Improved Geometry
by Quantitative Coronary Arteriography After
Vigorous Risk Factor Modification. American
Journal of Cardiology. Vol 69, 10 April 1, 1992:
845 - 853
Govindan S.V. Massage for Health and Healing.
New Delhi, India: Abhinav Publications;
1996
Gray H. Gray’s Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA:
   Running Press; 1974.
Grontved A, Hentzer E. Vertigo-reducing Effect of
Ginger Root. A Controlled Clinical Study. ORL J.
Otorhinolaryngol Relat. Spec., 48: 5, 1986: 282-
6.
Gupta KRL. Science of Sphygmica or Sag Kanad
on Pulse. Delhi, India: Sri Satguru
Publications; 1987.
Guyton A. Textbook of Medical Physiology.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Co.; 1981.
Heinerman J. Encyclopedia of Nuts, Berries and
Seeds. West Nyack, NY: Parker Publishing;
1995.
India Currents Magazine. Stressed Out? Try Sitar
     Music. Dec ’95-Jan ’96: 14.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
624
Institute for Wholistic Education. Marma Point
Therapy. [video] Twin Lakes, WI: 1989.
Iyengar BKS. Light On Yoga. New York, NY:
Shocken Books; 1976.
Johari H. Ancient Indian Massage. New Delhi,
India: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers;
1988.
Johari H. Ayurvedic Massage. Rochester, VT:
Healing Arts Press; 1996.
Johari H. The Healing Cuisine. Rochester, VT:
Healing Arts Press; 1994.
Jordan S. Yoga For Pregnancy. New York, NY:
St. Martin’s Press; 1987.
Joshi SV. Áyurveda & Pañcha Karma. Twin Lakes,
     WI: Lotus Press; 1997.
Kumar AV. Principles of Ayurvedic Therapeutics.
     Delhi, India: Sri Satguru Publications; 1995.
Kushi A, Esko W, Tiwari M. Diet for Natural
Beauty. New York, NY: Japan Publications;
1991.
Lad, U & Vasant. Áyurvedic Cooking.
Albuquerque, NM: Áyurvedic Press; 1994.
Lad, V. Áyurveda; The Science of Self Healing.
Santa Fe, NM: Lotus Press; 1984.
Lidell N, Rabinovitch N & G. Shivananda
     Companion To Yoga. New York, NY: Fireside
     Simon & Schuster; 1983.
Murthy KRS. (transl.) Aßhþáñga H^idayam.
     Varanasi, India: K^ißhòadas Academy; 1991.
Merck Manual. 16th ed. Merck Research Labor-
atories: Rahway, NJ; 1992.
Mindell E. The Vitamin Bible. New York, NY:
Time Warner Books; 1991.
Murthy SK. (transl.) Aßhóáñga H^idayam.
Varanasi, India: K^ißhòadas Academy; 1991.
Murthy SK. (transl.) Mádhava Nidánam.
Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Orientalia;
     1993.
Murthy SK. (transl.) £hángadhar Saåhitá.
Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Orientalia; 1984.
Nadkarni KN. Indian Materia Medica. Bombay,
India: Popular Prakashan; 1993.
Ornish D. et. al. Can Lifestyle Changes Reverse
Coronary Heart Disease? Lancet. Vol 336, no
8708, 21 July: 129-133. 1990.
Ornish D. Reversing Heart Disease Through Diet,
Exercise, and Stress Management. Journal of the
American Dietetic Association. Vol 91, no. 2,
February, 1991: 162-165.
Pal KNC. Effect of a Herbomineral compound on
Diabetes. Ayurved Samachar Issue 8, vol 10, Feb-
ruary 2 1988.
Parikh, Pradhan PV, Shah LP, Bagadia VN. Evalua-
tion of Indigenous Psychotropic Drugs - A
Preliminary Study. Journ Res Ay Sid Vol 5, no 1-
4, 1984.
Patnaik, N. Garden of Life. New York, NY:
Doubleday; 1993.
Ranade S. Natural Healing Through Áyurveda. Salt
Lake City, Utah: Passage Press; 1993.
Rossbach S. Chinese Art of Placement. New
York, NY: Penguin Books; 1983.
Rossbach S. Interior Design. New York, NY:
Penguin Books; 1987.
Rossbach S. Living Color. New York, NY:
Kodansha, America, Inc.; 1994.
Sachs M. Áyurvedic Beauty Care. Twin Lakes,
WI: Lotus Press; 1994.
Saraswati Swami Múktíbodhándana (transl.) Haóha
Yoga Pradípiká. Bihar, India: Bihar School of
Yoga; 1985.
Savnur HV. Ayurvedic Materia Medica. Delhi,
India: Sri Satguru Publications; 1988.
Shanmugasundaram ER, Rajeswari G,
Baskaran K, Rajesh KBR,
Shanmugasundaram K, Kizar AB.
Use of Gymnema Sylvestre Leaf Extract in the
Control of Blood Glucose in Insulin-Dependent
Diabetes Mellitus. J Ethnopharmaacol 30: 3, 1990
Oct: 281-94 .
Sharadini U, Dahanukar T. Ayurveda Revisited.
Bombay, India: Popular Prakashan; 1993.
Sharma RK, Dash B. (transl.) Charaka
Saåhitá. Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit
Series Office; 1992.
Shastri Acharya Vaidyanath (transl.) Atharva Veda.
New Delhi, India: Sarvadeshik Arya Pratinidhi
Sabha.
Shub HA, Salvati EP, Rubin RJ. Conservative
Treatment of Anal Fissure: an Unselected,
Retrospective and Continuous Study. Dis
Colon Rectum 21: 8, 1978 Nov-Dec: 582-3.
Shukla DN. Vástu £hástra. New Delhi, India:

Bibliography
 625
     Munshiram Manoharlal Pub.; 1993.
Sikdar JC. (transl.) Nadivijnanam and Nadiprak-
asham Jaipur, India: Prakrit Bharti Academy;
1988.
Singh RH. Pañcha Karma Therapy. Varanasi,
India: Chowkhhamba Sanskrit Series; 1992.
Srivastava KC, Mustafa T. Ginger (Zingiber
officinale) in Rheumatism and Musculoskeletal
Disorders. Med Hypotheses 39: 4, 1992
December: 342-8.
Thakur M, Bhatt NS, Mishra S. others. Effect of
     Ayurvedic Drug (AB + R) in Indigestion.
     Medicine & Surgery. May - Aug. 1995: 25.
Thorne T. Thorne’s Guide to Herbal Extracts
(vol. 2). Royal Oak, MI: Wisteria Press;
1994.
Tirtha Swami Sada Shiva. Ayurveda Certificaton
Program. Bayville, NY: Ayurveda Holistic
Center Press; 1992.
Tirtha Swami Shankar Purushottam. Guru Bani.
Bayville, NY: Áyurveda Holistic Center Press;
1995.
Tirtha Swami Shankar Purushottam. Yoga Vani.
Bayville, NY: Áyurveda Holistic Center Press;
1990.
Tisserand M. Aromatherapy for Women.
Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press; 1988.
Tisserand R. Aromatherapy to Heal and Tend the
     Body. Santa Fe, NM: Lotus Press; 1988.
Vasu RBSC. (transl.) Gheranda Saåhitá. New
Delhi, India: Oriental Books Reprint Corp.;
1980.
Werbach M, Murray M. Botanical Influences on
Illness. Tarzana, CA: Third Line Press; 1994.
Yoga Journal. Rx: Yoga. January/February
1994: 14
Wolever TM, Vuksan V, Eshuis H, Spadaora P,
Peterson RD, Chao ES, Storey ML, Jenkins DJ.
Effect of Method of Administration of Psyllium
on Glycemic Response and Carbo-hydrate Digest-
ibility. J Am Coll Nutr 10: 4, 1991 August: 364-71.
Zhou Y, Xu R. Antioxidative Effect of Chinese Drugs.
Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih 17: 6, 1997 June:
373, backcover.

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
626

Index
 627
13 natural urges 31
5 essential elements 347, 349
5 Kaphas 17
5 material elements 347, 349
5 senses of knowledge 347
5 Pittas 17
5 Váyus 16
6 Stages of disease development 41
6 tastes 58 - 63, 121 - 125
     herbs for 67
     nutrition 59
     physical and mental properties 68
     physiology of 62
85 important Áyurvedic herbs 69
A
abaran 345
ABC Stretch - office yoga 307
abdomen/abdominal 156, 274
     colic and pain 157
congestion 83
diseases 369
disorders 74, 85, 110, 139
distention 31, 106, 196, 370
enlarged 42, 170, 190
fat 269
muscles 263, 301-304
organ protrusion 274
organs 275, 277
pain 31, 41,70, 76, 109, 111, 132, 149, 155 -
157, 192, 275
lavaò bhaskar 70
pain and cramps 109
spasm 41
tumors 52, 99, 149, 154, 189, 494, 498
walls 271
     weakness 31
abhyañga 176, 207 - 247
Kerala abhyañga 233 - 247
abnormal growths 493 - 501
abortifacient 91, 113
abortion 85, 132
abscess 82, 87 - 88, 102, 119, 123, 170, 172, 190,
Index
222, 246, 264, 326, 368, 401, 526, 553
     dental 451 - 452, 533
  ear 429
palatal 451, 533
pulse 49
skin 535
               throat 453 - 454
absorption 106-107, 138 - 139, 146, 148, 156
157
of nutrients 84, 274, 276, 292, 294 - 295
accumulation 41
aches 237, 251
waist, ribs, back, abdomen, or lower jaw 184
achyranthes aspera linn. 73
acid 34, 41, 72, 122 - 124, 131, 133, 138 - 139,
323
gastritic/gastritis 207, 379
indigestion 84, 94, 366
pulse 49
rain/water 334
stomach 130
     see also amino, antacid, hyperacidity, uric
acne 74, 88, 132, 134, 137, 147, 231, 245 - 246,
252 - 253, 326, 485, 490
aconitum felconeri stapf. 110
aconitum hetrophyleum wall. 76
acornus calamus linn. 107
acrid 74, 96
acupuncture 215 - 216, 556
adaptability 328
addiction 153 - 154, 176, 469 - 470
adhatoda vasika nees. 109
adhipati 217, 220 - 222, 224, 226, 228 - 230
adipose tissue tearing 30
adrenal 80, 136, 138, 159, 161, 207, 221, 267 -
          268, 336
aduki 141
aegle marmelos corr. 79
aerobics 174
after taste: (vipaka) 20
age
five stages 33
age reversal 35
     age/gender 128
aggravation 41

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
628
aging 75, 77, 116, 159, 161, 180, 207 - 209, 235
     264 - 266, 269, 286 - 288, 291 -294, 296 -
     297
agitation 251, 280, 328
agni 18, 34 - 35, 44, 58, 61, 82, 107, 118, 121, 124,
     127 - 128, 134, 145 - 146, 153, 155 - 157,
     251, 269, 274, 314 - 315, 323, 327, 367,
     370, 372 - 374
t^ikatu 70
SEE ALSO digestion
increasing 72
nutrition 58
suppressed 31
ahimsa 342
AIDS 75, 80, 87, 103, 265, 328, 528
air purification 173, 250, 252
ajapa 313
ajíròa
SEE indigestion
ájñá chakra 112, 259, 296, 316 -
317 akarkará 71
akaßha 348
akshe-paka
     SEE convulsions
alají 534
alasaka 186, 193, 376
Albert Einstein 8
alcohol 128, 131, 133, 142, 153, 469
alcohol addiction
and snehana/oil therapy 176
and comas 473
recovery 144, 470 - 471
     therapies 470, 472
alcoholism 75, 99, 130 - 131, 135, 146, 246
alepa/átepanam 237
alertness 294
and snehana/oil therapy 176
alfalfa sprouts 134
Ali Akbar Khan 318 - 319
alimentary canal 268, 292
alkali 171
alkaline 140
alkalinity 138
alkaloids 152
allaepauk 71
allergenic reactions 140
allergic 134
allergies 31, 84, 134, 136, 141, 157, 186, 267
respiratory 31
     dairy 146
allium sativum linn. 100
allopathic medicine, the development of 10
almond 35, 143, 149
alochaka Pitta 17
aloe barbadensis mill. 92
aloe vera (gel) 92
alopecia 77
alterative 73 - 74, 77, 79 - 80, 83, 85 87 - 88, 90
          - 97, 100 - 103, 107, 110 - 111, 113, 129
          - 130, 133 - 139, 141 - 142, 153, 156, 174
female 95
     tonic 101
alzheimer’s 192, 476
áma 34 - 35, 44, 73, 79, 83, 89, 99 - 100, 102 -
104, 115, 117 - 119, 128 - 129, 136 - 137, 130
- 156, 170, 172 - 173, 176 - 177, 180 - 181,
185, 187 - 188, 192 - 193, 208, 210, 246, 314,
353, 365, 368 369, 375, 377, 391 - 392
and svedha 180
ámalakí 62, 72 - 73, 125
ámáßhaya 35
ámaváta
     SEE arthritis/rheumatism
amenorrhea 80, 88, 92 - 93, 95, 98, 105, 192, 505
amethyst 329
amino acid 141, 207, 311
aml parni 73
amla-vetasa 73
amlapitta/acid gastritis 379
amliká 81
amoebacidal parasites 110
amoebicidal 113
anabolic metabolism 16
anáha 377
anaháta 290
anáhata chakra 317
anal fissure 95
analgesic 71, 77, 79, 85 - 87, 98, 107, 109, 113
analeptic 104
analysis chapter 37
analyzing constitutions and diseases 39
anandamaya koßha/delight cell 345
anasarca 82
Andrew Carnegie 10

Index
 629
andropogon citratus DC. 78
anemia 31, 49, 60, 70, 72, 75, 80, 82, 88, 93, 99,
     123, 131 - 135, 138 - 139, 144, 151, 154, 159,
     161, 274, 326, 328, 357
a´guli/a´gula 198, 204, 230, 234, 237
anorexia 41, 59, 68, 122, 131, 140, 145 - 148 155,
157, 161, 170, 173, 186, 188, 193, 200, 246, 363
     chyavan prá¤h 70
anesthesia 74
anger 41, 44, 60 - 61,124, 250, 274, 280, 288 -
          290, 323, 338, 341, 343
     pulse 49
angina 74, 94, 155, 359
angio-neurotic edema 440
angiomas 441
ani marma 216
animal oil 148
animal products 176 - 148
anise 155
anjana/eye salve/anjana vidhi 243, 438, 440, 450
ankles 268, 460
ankylo belpharon 441
anna lepa 237
annaja-¤húla 379
annamaya koßha/food cell 345
annavaha srota 29 - 30
anodyne 110, 114
anorexia 30 - 31, 59, 122, 131, 140, 145 - 148,
          155, 157, 161, 171, 173, 186, 188, 193, 200,
          246, 363
antacid 99, 134 -135, 145, 153, 327 - 328, 379
anterior staphyloma 443
anthelmintic 73 - 74, 76, 79, 82, 88, 92, 94 - 100,
     108, 110, 113
anti-fat 90
anti-fertility 138
anti-oxident 150
anti-poison 83
anti-scorbutic 81
anti-tumor 95, 137
anti-Váyu 92
antiallergenic 250
antibacterial 76, 106 - 107, 113,118, 251
antibilious 73, 79, 83, 989
antibiotic 88, 113, 122, 131, 146 - 147, 151
antibodies 207
anticarcinogenic 137
anticough 149
antidiabetic 110, 113
antidiarrhea 113
antidiarrhetic 82, 102
antidotes (foods) 84, 166
antidysenteric 102
antiemetic 71, 85, 113
antifungal 76, 96, 107
antihistamines 207
antioxidant 105, 136, 138, 246|
antiparasitic 74, 79, 81 - 82, 96 - 97, 100 - 111,132
antiperiodic 76, 83, 86 - 87, 92, 95, 97, 110, 114
antipoison 83
antiphlogistic 110, 114
antipyretic 77, 79, 95, 110, 114
antirheumatic 96, 107, 114
antiseptic 70, 79, 82, 94, 97, 100, 106 - 107, 114,
          122, 130, 132, 136, 150, 157 - 158
antispasmodic 74, 78, 82 - 83, 87, 89, 93 - 94, 96,
          100, 104, 106 - 109, 114, 136, 149, 155 - 158
antisyphilic 114
antiviral 97, 113, 135
antraja v^iddhi/inguinal hernia 493 ants 250
anu taila (oil) 433, 552
anupana 151
anus 266
     prolapse 85
anuvásana 169, 192 - 194
anxiety 115, 117, 122, 123, 150, 155 - 157, 171,
          196, 201, 209, 222 - 223, 250 - 251, 280, 289
           - 290, 314 - 315, 326, 338, 363, 457
anxious 127
ap 346 - 348
apámárga 73
apán/apána 16, 250, 257, 260, 269, 282, 292, 294
apána Váyu 34, 126 - 127, 315
aparigraha 342
apartarpaòa 169
apasmára
     SEE epilepsy
aperient 91 - 92, 100, 106, 114
aphrodisiac 72, 75 - 77, 80, 83, 86, 91, 93, 94,
          96, 98, 100, 102 - 103, 105, 108 - 109,
          111,  114, 130, 135, 137, 140 - 146, 148,
          152 - 153, 156 - 157, 327 - 329
appendicitis 138 - 139
appetite 70 - 72, 79, 95 - 96, 101, 115, 119, 133

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
630
          - 134, 136 - 139, 144 - 147, 155, 171, 178,
          182, 201, 274, 287, 321
     increases 71, 79, 96
     low 31, 41, 72
     pulse for loss of appetite 49
appetizer 115
apple
     baked, sour, juice, skin 129 - 130
     apple cider 152
apricots 130
arbuda
     SEE cancer
ardha matsyendrásana 269
árdrakam 71
arjuna/arjuna myrobalan 74
arka 74
arms 271, 273, 306 - 308
arochaka
     SEE anorexia
arogya 21
aromas for ¤hamana/palliation 175
aromatherapy 249
     3 doähas 251 - 252
     and chakras 253
aromatic 71, 76, 79, 88 - 89, 92, 94, 96, 105,
      107, 115
arrhythmia 30
arßhas
      SEE hemorrhoids
artavaha 30
arteries 31, 131, 208
arteriosclerosis 30, 99,148, 161, 360
     yogaraj guggul 70
arthritis 31, 42, 72, 77, 80, 87 - 88, 95, 97, 106 -
      107, 130 - 131, 133 - 139, 141, 149, 155 -
      157, 181 - 182, 186, 192, 196, 208, 250 -
      251, 267, 272, 275, 287, 309, 323, 326, 545
     herb mixtures 70
     joints 108, 156
     Pitta and Kapha 136, 139
     rheumatoid 95
     snehana/oil therapy 176
     Váyu recipe 163
artichoke 134
artificial (foods & colors) 127
asafoetida/hi´gwasták 72
ásanas 88, 257 - 311
     precautions for beginners 258
ásavas, árißhóhas/medicated wines 153, 473, 553
ascites 99, 371 - 374
asclepias curassavica, linn. 920
áßhaya 31
áßhcotana 243
a¤hoka 75
aßhtabindu 20
aßhþáñga h^idayam 6
a¤hwagandhá 35, 75
asparagus 135
asparagus adscendens roxb. 103
asparagus racemosus willd. 102
asphaltum 103
as^igdara
     SEE menorrhagia
asthápana/nirúha basti 192 - 196
asthi 25
asthivaha srota 29 - 30
asthma 30 - 31, 42, 48, 70 - 72, 74 - 75, 77, 80 -
          81, 84, 88, 91 - 95, 99 - 100, 103 - 105,
         107, 108 - 110, 116 - 117, 130 - 132, 135 -
         136, 155 - 156, 185 - 186, 193, 202, 222 -
          223, 227, 238, 266 - 267, 272, 274 - 276,
          280 - 281, 285, 287, 328, 411 - 412
     bronchial 94, 188
     chyavan prá¤h 70
     pulse 49
astral body 321, 343 - 344
astral forces 328
astringent 50, 58 - 63, 67 - 68, 72, 75 -86, 88 -
          90, 92 - 101, 104, 106 - 108, 110, 115,
          122 - 125, 129 - 158
astrological 63
astrological, gem therapies 324
astrology (Vedic/Jyotiäh) 560
athletes foot 252, 488 - 489
atísára
     SEE diarrhea
ativißhá 76
átmaguptá 91
atmospheric conditions 40
atonement 315
atonic indigestion 73, 94
Átreya 3
atrophy 474 - 475
aum mantra 313 - 317

Index
 631
aupadravikam adhyayam
     SEE eye diseases
aura 107, 129, 251, 321
auspicious pose/swastikásana 258, 263
auspiciousness 146, 153
authoritative instruction 43
automatic still breath/kayvala kumbhaka 290
autonomic nerves 292
autonomic nervous system 311
autumn 40
avagáhan 181 - 182, 234
avalambaka Kapha 17
avaleha/confections 552
avapída 197, 199 - 212
avocado 135, 149
ávipattikar churna 70
awareness 89
aym mantra 314, 316
Áyurveda 3
     therapies 65
     analysis 37
     colleges and universities 8
B
babchi seeds 76
babies
     chyavan prá¤h 70
     oranges 132
     see reproductive system
back 273, 302
     bath 244
     lower 272, 277
     muscles 269
     pain 86, 107, 132, 272, 275, 299, 303, 307
     strain 298
     materia medica 71
     upper - tension 303
     yogaraj guggul 70
back bend yoga poses 271
back stretching pose 258, 263
bacon 148
bacteria 89, 122
bael fruit 79
bahihpragña 348
bahya kumbhaka 290
baikhari 291
bajra 316
bákuchí 76
balá 76
bálámaya pratihedha
     SEE children’s diseases
balasmodendron myrrha nees 79
balding 200, 235, 241
bálopacharaòíya ahyáya
     SEE post-partum therapies
balsamodendron mukul hook. 87
bamboo manna 108
bananas 130
bandhas 260, 291, 260, 298, 582
barberry 82
barhal 62
barley 139
basil/tulsí 106, 250
basmati rice 140
basti 34, 169, 191 - 197, 228, 234, 244
basti marma 228
bath 78, 234, 244
bathing 332
bauhinia variegata linn. 90
bay leaves 155
bean sprouts 135
beans 135
beauty 234, 315, 328
beauty care 245, 557
eyes 560
face 557
skin 558
bee stings 74
beef 147
beer 153
beets 135
belching 31, 72, 84, 170,172 - 173
beleric myrobalan 78
bell pepper 135
bellows breath/bhastra kumbhaka 287
belly roll/jathara parivartanásana 276
berberis vulgaris linn. 82
beta carotene 138
bh^i´garáj 77
bhagandara/fistula-in-ano 49, 172, 182, 493
Bhagavad Gíta 342
bhagnam/fractures 74, 87, 140, 406 - 407

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
632
bhajans 318
bhakti 112, 614
bhasma 327 - 328
bhastra kumbhaka 287
bhesan 235
bhrajak Pitta 321
bhrajaka 17
bhramarí kumbhaka 288
bhuja´gásana/serpent pose 266
bhujangini mudrá 297
bhúámalakí 78
bhút^iò 78
bhúta vidyá 7
bhutagnis 18
bibhítakí 78
bidáliká/tonsillitis 78, 110, 197, 293, 533
bíj 70
bíja mantras 70, 313
bikßhepa 345
bile 71, 73 - 74, 76, 82 - 83, 85, 95, 106, 115, 119,
          124, 131 - 133, 135 - 136, 142, 150, 155 -
          156, 174, 187, 190 - 191, 195, 286 - 287,
          309, 326 - 327, 375, 396
     promote secretion of 74 pulse 49
bile flow 95
bilious fever 92
biliousness 72, 83 - 84, 99, 131, 133
bilwa 79
     oil 433
bindú 264, 267, 269, 293 - 294
SEE ALSO semen or ovum
bites, rat and snake 99
bitter 40, 73, 78 - 83, 86 - 87, 89 - 91, 93 - 97, 99,
          101 - 107, 109 - 116, 119 122 - 124
herbs 67
physical and mental properites 68
bitter melon 135
bitter tonic 73, 82 - 83, 87, 92, 94 - 95, 97, 101
black creeper 101
black magic 314
black pepper 72, 95, 156
blackberries 133
bladder 89, 94, 115 - 116, 130, 132, 136, 138,
195, 231, 353
see also gall bladder
irritable 98
 urinary 115 - 116, 130, 154, 170, 192, 222,
311, 419 - 427
inflammation 421
 pain 31, 421
bleeding 30, 72, 93, 95, 108 -109, 115, 117 - 118,
122, 130 - 131, 135, 139 - 140, 142, 145 -
147, 150, 153 - 156, 158 - 159, 169, 181,
           186, 189, 222, 237, 328, 355 - 357
chronic 146
downward 186
dysentery 75
internal 73, 197
lungs and stomach 130, 146
pulse 48
raktapitta 355
see also gums, hemorrhoids, uterine
blepharitis 440, 447
blindness 190, 445 - 447
blisters 157
bloating
distinction/chronic complications 41
due to hemorrhoids 389
  upward-moving (apána), hingwasták 70
blood 73 - 86, 89 - 102, 104 - 111, 122, 129,
       131, 133 - 139, 140 - 143, 145, 147-
          148, 150, 152 - 154, 156, 207, 209, 246,
          250 - 251, 274, 297, 321, 327, 355 - 362
     build 72, 136, 152
     circulation 95, 272, 287, 292, 294, 305 - 306,
323, 329, 335 - 336
cleanser 100, 102, 134, 136, 138, 154, 184,
250
clots 136
coagulates 85
derangement 237
discharge from stomach and bowels 97
flow 261
flower 91
glucose 140
herbs 70
high blood pressure 101, 235, 274
in urine 421
oxygenation 153, 287
parasites 193
purification 95, 111, 170
purifier 80, 82 - 83, 87 - 88, 97, 101, 132, 137,
139, 260, 336
purifier and detoxifier 97

Index
 633
rebuild 72
see also red blood cells
stools 92, 96
sugar 72, 138
thinner 132
tonic 92, 131
toxic 42, 82, 100, 130, 147, 149, 235, 246
tissue formation 88
vessels 90, 92, 252
white blood cells 70, 87, 90, 207
blood pressure 83, 130, 132, 136, 138, 149 - 150,
208, 260, 280, 284, 286, 288 - 289, 310 - 311
low/reduces 84, 96, 136, 138, 149, 156, 288 -
289
bloodletting/rakta mok¤ha 170, 172, 185, 202
bloodstone coral 327
bloodstream 176
bloody stool, urine, and vomit 96
blue sapphire 327
blueberries 133
bodhaka Kapha 17
body powder rub 244
body wastes (malas) 19
boerhavia diffusa linn. 99
boils 73, 85, 95 - 96, 98, 113, 134, 190
pulse 49
bola 79, 250
bolus 235, 237
bones 25 - 29, 31, 33, 71 - 72, 74, 77, 82, 90, 95,
          103, 105, 122, 143 - 144, 147 - 148, 150,
          159, 208 - 209, 212, 250 - 251, 264, 309,
          326, 336
breaking/broken 30, 74, 95
calcification 30
cancer 30
     deficient 28
     elderly 33
     fractures 74, 87, 140, 406 - 407
     osteoporosis 28, 72
     pain 28
     rasáyana (rejuvenative) 77, 100
     rebuild 72
     spurs 30
     tissue 244
     weak 28
     yogaraj guggul 70
boron 143
bound angle pose
     for pregnancy yoga 299
bow pose/dhanurásana 267
bowels 72, 85, 98, 133, 178
bradycardia 171
Brahmá 317 - 318, 345
brahmacharya 342
brahman 3, 13, 284
brahmanáæí 316
brahmarandhra 313
bráhmí/gotu kola 80, 173, 331
bráhmí ghee 468
bráhmí rasáyana 204
brain 72, 74, 79, 80, 83, 88, 92, 104, 106 - 108,
          111 ,116, 119, 136, 121, 136, 140 - 141,
          143, 145 - 146, 150, 158, 161, 198, 201,
          205, 207, 214, 233, 235, 238, 241, 243,
          251, 260 - 261, 265, 274, 281, 286 - 288,
          292 - 294, 305 - 306, 309 - 310, 317, 323,
          326, 336, 462, 543, 547, 548,
     tumors 498 - 499, 501
     HBP 360
     nervous system 457 - 476
      obesity 389
     sight 446
brass (cookware) 556
Brazil nuts 143
breast 136
     abscess 402
     feeding 513
     increase secretion 111
     increasing flow 102 - 103, 157
     infections 250
     inflamed or diseased 92
     milk 30, 122, 141, 146, 153, 186, 514
     no milk 30
     pain 30
sore nipples 85
stanyavaha 30
swelling 30, 142
breath/breathing 31, 107, 128, 158, 298, 328
bad 158
difficult 131, 139, 146, 151 - 153, 170, 184,186,
     193, 246, 274, 317, 411- 412
see also life-breath, kumbhaka, práòáyáma
shallow/short 31, 161

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
634
therapies 413, 416
yoga benefits 260, 263, 265, 274, 276,
bridge pose/setu bandha sarvá´gásana 273
Bright’s disease 94, 131
with edema 86
Brihat Samhitá 324
b^ihatí 80
b^iμhaòa 169 - 170, 172, 179, 198
broad bean 141
broccol 135
bronchial 100
bronchial asthma 88, 94, 143, 411
bronchitis 79 - 80, 87, 96 - 97, 99, 105, 107, 109,
111 - 112, 117, 131, 136, 145, 156, 210, 272,
274, 287
brown rice 140
brown sugar 151
bruise 88
brushing teeth 331
Brussels sprouts 135
buckwheat 140
bugs 584
bumbusa arundinacia retz. 108
burning 84, 122, 130 - 131, 137, 150, 152, 246,
286, 487
see also urine
sensations 41, 92, 132, 237
sitopaladi 70
     soles 488
burns 88, 92, 140, 142, 145, 149 - 151, 246, 252
poultice 105
bursitis 92
butter 145, 153
butter milk/lassi 128
C
cabbage 135
calamus (vacha) 107
calcification 30, 208
calcium 131, 134 - 143, 158, 162, 293
deficiency 46, 161
calf muscles 300, 302
calm 105, 141, 143 - 146, 150, 152, 156, 158, 175,
          250 - 251, 260, 285, 305, 313 - 315, 321,323,
          327 - 328, 340, 359, 363,381, 389 - 390, 469,
          475 - 476
calmative 115
calories 138
caltropis gigantea 74
camphor 250
camping 174
cancer 9, 30, 75, 77, 87, 95, 102 - 103, 106, 130
- 132, 134 - 136, 138 - 139, 142 - 143, 147,
184, 250, 280, 287, 328, 499 - 501
candida/yeast 34, 96, 131, 143, 147, 155, 390
candle flame 208
cane sugar 151
canker sores 132
canned foods 127, 147
canola 149, 173
snehana/oil therapy 176
canscora decussata roem. 102
cantaloupe 132 capillaries 31, 75
caraway 156
carbohydrates 34, 130, 135, 141
carbon dioxide 136, 211, 281, 287 - 288, 292
carbuncles 99, 190
cardamom 84
cardiac 70, 133, 246, 260
colic 378
edema 135
pain 31
plexus 270
see also heart
     stimulant 115
     tonic 80, 98
cardiovascular 131
career 57
carminative 71 - 72, 76, 78, 80, 83 - 84, 88 - 96,
           98, 100, 104 - 105, 107, 110, 115, 155 -
          158
carob 152
carrots 136
cashews 143
cassia/cassia tora linn. 81
castor oil 72, 85, 149, 173
cat’s-eye 327 - 328
catabolic 16
cataracts 190, 198, 208, 240, 446
catarrh 73, 79, 81 - 82, 89, 95, 98, 132, 139, 434
cathartic 73, 85, 92, 100, 104, 115

Index
 635
cattle 83
cauliflower 135
causal or essential body 344 - 345
cause of all disease 39 - 40
cayenne 156
cedar 83, 250 - 253
cedrus deodara 83
celery 136
celibacy 33, 271
cells 288
enzymatic and oxidation 293
knowledge, mind and delight 348
rebuild 72
centipedes 109
central nervous system 82, 159
cephalic 97
cerebrospinal fluid 111, 316
cervical adenitis 186
cervical glands
enlarged 87
cervix 298
chai 154
chaitanya 346, 348
chakra marda 81
chakras 88, 176, 215, 228, 269, 271, 281, 283 -
     284, 290, 305, 314 - 317
and gems 325
therapy 313
chalazion cysts 440 - 441
chamomile 156
chandan (sandalwood) 111, 251
chandrabheda práòáyáma 287
channa dal/chick pea/garbanzo 129, 141
channels/srotas and svedhana 180
cháògerí 81
Charak Saåhitá 6, 8, 31, 39
chardi
SEE vomiting
charisma 289
charity 33
charm 328
cheerfulness 141
cheese 145
chelates metals 130
chemicals 147, 186, 581
chemotherapy 75, 77, 87, 103
cherries 130
chest 185, 269, 272, 307
ailments 267
burning 152
pains 81
chest expansion (modified fish pose)
office yoga 306
chest stretch
pregnancy yoga 299
chest/heart bath 244
chick pea 141
chicken 148
child birth 509
ceremonies 515
difficult 81
children 85, 100, 106, 130 - 133, 140 - 141, 146 -
    149, 151,153, 328, 515, 581
colic, cramps, and diarrhea 157
coughs and colds 89, 91 - 92
laxative/purgative 83
nerves and digestion 157
newborn - colds and excess mucus 77
planetary influences 518
planetary therapies 519 - 522
sleep & indigestion 158
snehana/oil therapy 176
thrush 131
weakness 111
worms 92
yoga 304
chilies 136
chill 156
chin mudrá 259
Chinese cabbage 135
chiráyatá 82
chitrak 82
chitrini 316
chlorophyll 135 - 136
chlorosis (in young girls) 80
chocolate (and its substitute) 152
cholagogue 77, 111, 115
cholera 79, 85, 94, 133, 146 - 147, 173
cholesterol 70, 87, 100, 129, 131 - 132, 137, 138,
           140, 143, 145 - 150, 159, 161, 238, 311, 360
           - 361, 550
hyper 87
yogaraj guggul 70
choline 140

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
636
chord pose
SEE páähásana
chorid 442
choti elá 84
chronic diseases 72, 108
chronic fatigue syndrome 143, 529
chrysoberyl/cat’s-eye 328
chúròas/powders 552
chyavan prá¤h 70
chyle 15 - 16, 35
cigarette 133
cilantro/coriander leaf 83, 136
ciliary action 34
cinnamon/cinnamomum cassia blume. 107, 156,
252
circulation 73 - 74, 88, 95, 107, 112, 122, 139, 141,
          153, 155 - 157, 159, 180, 211, 235, 282, 287,
          292, 294, 302 - 305, 307, 309, 323, 326 -
          327, 335
svedhana 180
yogaraj guggul 70
circulatory 72, 74, 76 - 77, 79 - 81, 83 - 90, 92 - 97,
99 - 102, 105 - 109, 112, 152, 214, 251, 307,
315, 355 - 362
cirrhosis 77, 374
cissampelos pareira linn. 94
citrine 324
clarified butter
SEE ghee
clarity 84, 86, 287, 295, 306 - 307
clay cookware 556
clothes 332
clots 122
cloves 72, 156
co-dependency 9
coagulant 93
cobalt 135
cobra’s saffron 96
coccygeal plexus 281
cockerel pose/kukkutásana 271
coconut 143, 149
oil 173
coffee 128, 153
detoxifies caffeine 84
substitue 81, 198,
cold extremities 96, 156 - 157
cold infusions 551
cold or painful extremities 76
coldness in body 246
colds 35, 41, 70 - 72, 78 - 79, 84, 89, 92 - 93, 96,
 99, 100, 106 - 108 , 111, 131 - 132, 136 -
138, 146 - 147, 151, 156 - 158, 186, 199,
201, 250, 274, 287, 416 - 417, 432, 435
chronic 151
juice 72
colic 41, 71 - 72, 78 - 79, 81, 83, 85, 88, 91 - 92,
94, 96 - 100, 104, 108 - 109, 151, 156 - 158,
246, 377
pulse 49
colitis 70, 72, 78, 82, 130, 136, 140, 144, 156, 190,
196, 222, 267, 274
ulcerative 88, 95
colon 16, 31, 34, 72 - 73, 84, 95, 104, 106, 125,
132, 135 - 137, 156, 250, 269
inflamed or spastic 137
inflammation 72
yogaraj guggul 70
pain 190
perforation 30
triphala 70
color therapy 321 - 322
for ¤hamana/palliation 175
coma 30, 107, 108, 473
comatose 250
commiphora mukul 87
commiphora myrrha 79
communication 315
compassion 33,106, 147, 250 – 251
complexion 77, 89, 111, 122, 136, 145, 153, 171,
          176, 195, 235, 241, 244, 246
concentration 208, 294, 306 - 307 ,309 314, 317
conception 91 - 92, 506, 509
condiments 148 - 150, 152
confections 552
confidence 274
confusion 186
congestion 106 - 107, 148 - 149, 156, 170, 251,
          274
t^ikatu 70
nasal 106 - 107
sinus 106
conjunctival cyst 440
conjunctivitis 85, 92, 136, 243, 442 - 443, 444

Index
 637
catarrhal and rheumatic 95
conquering breath/ujjáyí kumbhaka 289
consciousness 315, 346, 348
constipation 30 - 31, 34, 41, 70, 72 - 73, 79, 85 -
          89, 91 - 92, 105, 110, 130 - 134, 136, 142 -
          144, 146, 149, 150, 170, 173, 182, 184, 190
  190, 192, 196, 261, 269, 272, 274, 287, 295,
  328, 382
chronic 70, 79, 150
pregnancy 252
pulse 49
snehana/oil therapy 176
constitution 39
consumption 108, 131, 145 - 146, 246
contentment 111, 315, 342
contusions 74, 97
convalescence 75, 97, 102, 130, 132, 135, 138 -
          141, 144 - 151, 157
from diarrhea 81, 84
from fever 72, 77, 87, 95, 137
from lung disease 133
from febrile or infectious disease 142
convulsions 30 - 31, 80, 89, 96, 104, 137, 155, 174,
197, 458 - 461
pulse 49
cooking 105, 127, 150, 163 - 165, 584
using gas/wood 556
cooling breath/¤hítalí kumbhaka 285
copper 106, 135, 139, 556
coptis teeta wall. 95
coral 326 327
corallium rubrum 99
cordial 80, 115
coriander/coriandrum sativum linn. 83
coriander leaf/cilantro 136
corn 136, 140, 149
corn silk 140
cornea 197, 437, 444, 446, 449 - 450
     fibers/opacities 81
     inflammation 243
     opacities/ulcers 101, 442
corpse pose/¤havásana 279, 301, 304
correct posture/pregnancy yoga 298
cortisone 267
coryza 76, 110, 197 - 198, 246, 434
therapies 416
cosmetic plasters 246
costus, kút root 94
cottage cheese 145
cough 30 - 31, 71 - 72, 74 - 76, 79 - 81, 84, 86,
88 - 94, 96 - 100, 102, 104 - 111, 130 - 134,
138 - 139, 143, 145 - 146, 149 - 153, 155 -
158, 170, 181, 184, 185, 202 - 204, 227, 250
- 251, 285, 328, 409 - 411
back 86
chronic 91 - 92, 157
chronic/children 92
dry 133, 145 - 146, 150, 155, 157
with fevers 149
snehana/oil therapy 176
dry and spasmodic 81
juice 72
nervous 104
pulse 49
therapies 416
t^ikatu 70
whooping 87, 158
coughing blood 327
counseling 339
country mallow 76
courage 328
cows 105
increase milk 85
cow’s face posegomukhásana/ 270
cow’s milk 146, 153
cowitch 91
cramping 155, 157
pain 109, 158
therapies 463
cranberries 130
cream 145
creativity 250, 263, 315, 328
crocus sativus linn. 92
Crohn’s disease 88
cross-eye 243
crown chakra 86, 313
cry 31
cucumber 137
cumin 156
curcuma longa linn. 87
cutting hair 332
cyperus rotundus linn. 96
cystitis 77, 83, 86 - 87, 89, 94, 103, 112, 141,
421 cysts 138

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
638
in the armpit after fever 535
ovarian/uterine 498
D
daily routine 35
dairy 128, 144
dandruff 550
danta roga/tooth disorders 452
danta-vidradhi/dental abscess 533
dantamúla roga
SEE gums
dárdhya 209
dáruhaldí/dáruharidrá 82
da¤hamúl 70, 91 - 92
date sugar 151
dates 130
DDT 151
de-obstruent 77 - 78, 116
deafness 31, 107, 242, 429 - 430
pulse 49
debility 75 - 76, 79, 87, 91, 95, 103 - 104, 108,
110 - 111, 131, 137 - 138, 140 - 141, 143
- 145, 147 - 148, 150 - 151, 154, 157, 327
          - 328
     da¤hmúl & chyavan prá¤h 70
decline of Áyurveda 7
decoction 105, 551
decongestant 107, 115
degenerative diseases 328
degenerative nervous disorders 315
deha-manasa 39
dehydration 136
delight 315
delight cell 345
delirium 41, 71 - 72, 104, 251
delivery (childbirth) 182, 512
discharge 108
pains 133
to facilitate 85
dementia 274
demulcent 77, 85, 89, 96, 98, 103, 105 - 108, 111,
115, 329
dentifrice 116
deobstruent 77 - 78, 116
depilatory 74
depression 21 - 22, 56, 70, 75, 80, 93, 106, 115, 152
          - 153, 155, 250, 252, 260 - 261, 275, 280,
          295, 321, 328, 380, 390, 394, 466, 474, 499,
          504, 507 - 508, 545, 550, 561, 575 - 576,
     skin depressions 485
     wound depressions 403 - 404
dermatitis 112, 132
desire for warm things 41
desires 317
desserts 128
detachment 250, 315
detergents 581
detoxification 70, 126, 131, 142, 315
devadaru 83, 250
deviated septum 432
devitalized 154
devotion 93, 106, 112, 250 - 251,
346
DGL 111
dhamaní 31
dhanurásana/bow pose 267
Dhanvantari 6
dhyána 83
dhárá drava 241
dhárá karma 233
dhárá svedhana 181
dháraòá 280
dharma 57, 339
dhatagnis 18
dhátakí 84
dhatri 73
dhátus 18, 24 - 26, 32, 35, 41 - 43, 146, 149 - 150,
152, 172, 178, 208 - 209, 234, 246
SEE ALSO tissues
dhúma 202
dhyána 280
diabetes 30 - 31, 71 - 72, 78, 82 - 83, 86 - 88,
          97,101, 103, 109 - 110, 115, 131 - 137, 140,
          146, 150 - 151, 155, 157, 161, 170, 172, 235,
          238, 250, 263, 267, 269, 272, 328, 423 - 424
     Kapha recipe 165
     mellitus 87, 185
     pulse 49
     therapies 425 - 426
     triphala 70
diabetic ulcer 426 - 427

Index
 639
diagnostic tests (upashaya) 39
diamond 327 - 328
diaphoretic 71 - 72, 74, 76, 78, 81, 83 - 84, 90, 96,
          99, 101, 106 - 107, 116, 174
diaphragm 272, 292
diarrhea 71, 73 - 74, 76, 78 - 79, 81 - 85, 88 - 90,
          93 - 96, 98, 102 - 103, 107, 111, 113, 122,
          129 - 133, 136 - 139, 142, 145 - 147 - 148,
          151, 153 - 154, 156 - 158, 170 - 171, 173,
          178, 180, 184 - 185, 190, 192, 246, 365
     chronic 79, 101
          pulse 49
     chronic, obstinate mucus and catarrhal 79
     infantile 85
     remittent and intermittent 83
     triphala 70
difficult breathing 75, 86
digestion 29 - 30, 71, 73 - 74, 81 - 82, 84, 87 -
          88, 95, 128, 131 - 132, 136, 140, 145 -
          147, 151 159, 170, 208, 235, 246, 264,
          266, 268 - 269, 274, 288 - 289, 295, 297,
          309, 314, 317, 321, 335, 363 - 391
     SEE ALSO agni
     poor/low 31, 111
     irregular 41
digestive 31, 71 - 74, 76 - 81, 83 - 100, 102, 104,
          106 - 107, 109 - 113, 122, 130 - 133, 135,
          139, 263, 268, 274, 283, 285, 293, 308 -
          310, 363 - 392
digestive enzymes 34 - 35, 92
digestive fire 18, 34 - 35, 136, 145, 269
     SEE ALSO agni
digestive organs
     soothes 108
digestive stimulant 79, 84, 89, 131, 145 - 147,
          152, 155, 172 - 173, 175
digestive system 15, 73, 112, 363
digestive-tract infections 147
digestives 116
dill 157
dioscorea bulbifera linn. 109
discharges 87
discutient 97
disease 39
     cause 21
development (6 stages) 41
disinfectant 100, 116, 131
distention 31, 41, 158, 192
     triphala 70
distilled water 154
diuretic 73, 76 - 78, 80, 83, 86 89 - 95, 97 - 99,
          101 - 103, 105 - 107, 109 -111, 116, 122,
          130 - 141, 145, 149 - 150, 153 - 154, 156,
          158
diverticulitis 30, 137
Divine light 316
Divine love 289
Divinity 33, 39
dizziness 136, 146, 153, 201
DNA 134
doäha marma 223 - 229
dogs, parasites 100
dopamine beta hydroxylase 207
doßhas 14, 23, 34, 39, 40, 42 - 43
     abhynañga pressure 209
     mantras 315
     personalities 340
     questionnaire & self-test 52
douche/urethral basti 197
drakßha 153
drava svedhana 181
dreams 251, 314
dried catkins 98
drink 31
drißhti 208
drißhti-gata-roga-vijnáñiya
     SEE eye pupil diseases
drooping shoulders 267
dropsy 289
drowsiness 97
drug addiction therapies 470
drugs 142, 470
drunkenness 157
dry 31, 41, 170
     snehana/oil therapy 176
dry mouth/skin 131
dual doßhas 62, 125
duck 148
ductless glands 274
ducts 31
dugdha 246
dullness 148
dulse 138
duodenal catarrh 73

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
640
duodenum 34 - 35, 85, 154, 365, 367, 549, 577
     ulcers 83, 89
dúrba 93
dvivraniya/inflammed ulcers 405
dysentery 73 - 79, 81, 83 - 85, 89 - 90, 92 - 96,
98, 101 - 102, 105, 109, 130, 132 - 133,
137, 141, 157, 190, 365
amoebic 79
bleeding 96
chronic 79, 81, 89
pulse 49
     with bloody stools 92
dysmenorrhea 80, 92 - 93, 95 - 96, 104 - 105, 157
503, 506, 508
neuralgic 78
pulse 49
dyspepsia 78, 81, 98 - 99, 156 - 157, 375
dysuria 81, 103, 170, 246, 419
E
ear  92, 97, 100, 156, 159, 186, 200 - 202, 241 -
          242, 274, 285, 331, 429 - 431
     earache 77, 104, 198, 202, 242, 252, 429 - 430
lobe 430 - 431
pus/malodor 430
ringing 201, 242
ringing/noise 429
oil 242
easy bridge pose/postpartum ásanas 303,
eat 31
eclipta alba hassk.\eclipta erecta linn. 77
eczema 80, 97, 132, 135, 149, 159, 161, 185, 246
edema 31, 74, 78 - 79, 81, 86 - 88, 90 - 91, 94 - 95,
          99 - 100, 103 - 104, 107, 111, 116, 122, 129 -
          131, 134 - 141, 145, 153 - 155, 157, 159,
          180, 186, 193, 198, 200, 207, 209, 237, 243,
          246, 250, 531 - 533, 534
pulse 49
therapies 532
eggplant 137
eggs 147 - 148
ego 343
eight branches of Áyurveda 6 - 7
ejaculate 31
ekánga dhárá 234
elá/cardamom 84
elasticity 268
elatarria cardamomum maton 84
elderly 75, 144, 146, 150, 153, 157, 176 - 177,
187, 199, 210
yoga 308 - 309
electrochemical balance 207
electromagnetic field 208
elements: building blocks of life 13
elephantiasis 75, 80, 91, 101, 494
elimination 109, 208, 268
emaciated 170, 199
emaciation 75, 77, 108, 111, 123, 134 - 135, 145
- 147, 152, 156, 246
embelia ribes burm. 110
emblic myrobalan/emblica officinalis 72
embryology 509
emerald 324, 327 - 329
emesis 34, 152
see vamana
emetic 74, 77, 90, 92, 99, 106 - 107, 111, 116, 122,
          156 - 157
emmenagogue 78 - 79, 92 - 93, 95 - 97, 105,
          108, 111, 116, 136, 150, 157, 329
emollient 89, 97, 102, 105, 117, 135, 137, 140,
          143, 145, 149, 151, 178, 183
emotions 61, 73, 136 - 137, 139, 141, 144, 158,
          201, 244, 250 - 251, 261, 281, 314 - 315,
          321, 323 - 324, 327 - 328, 331, 337 - 339
emphysema 136, 274
empowering herbs 70
emptiness 198, 201
endocrine 15, 268 - 269, 274, 287, 289, 293,
          296, 311, 323, 548
endometriosis 505
endometritis 87, 505
yogaraj guggul 70
endurance 147
enema/basti 34, 85, 151, 191 - 196, 228
energizing herbs 316
energy 60, 107, 131 - 132, 138, 140 - 141, 143 -
144, 147, 150 - 153, 156, 159, 172, 178, 204,
207, 210, 212, 215, 228, 240
& color therapy 321 - 323, 328
& gem therapy 324, 326
& mantras 313, 315 - 316

Index
 641
& mudrás/bhandas 291 - 292
& office yoga 296, 305, 307 - 308
& práòáyáma/kumbhaka 281 - 282, 284, 286
& yoga 259 - 260, 262, 265, 270 - 271, 273
- 274
enlarged
liver and spleen 30, 70, 371 - 372, 374
prostate 98, 149, 238, 524
mahásudarßhan 70
enteritis 81, 130
enthusiasm 315
entropion 441
environmental factors 33, 337, 581 - 582
envy 250
enzymes 18, 34 - 35, 126 - 127, 207
digestive 92
EPA 582
epiglottis 186
epilepsy 71, 80, 88 - 89, 92, 99, 102 - 104, 107,
109, 149, 186, 192, 196 - 201, 220, 224,
274, 468 - 469
and cough 109
seizures 156
epispastic 117
epsom salt 73
epstein barr 103, 265, 529
equilibrium 260
eragrostis cynosuriodes beauv. 93
eraòæa 85
errhine 117
eruptions, skin 81
erysipelas 110, 156
erythema 110
esophagus 34
essential oils 176
estrogen 109, 294, 581
eternal 39
eternal consciousness 346
ethics 341
etiology 39 - 40
eucalyptus, aromatherapy 250
euphorbia neriifolia linn. 104
evacuating nasya/¤hiro-virechana 198
evacuation 331
excretory 31, 71 - 73, 79 - 81, 84 - 85, 88 - 90,
92, 94, 96, 99 - 101, 104 - 106, 110 - 111,
271, 282 - 283, 315, 317, 332
exercise 173 - 174, 208, 354
exhaustion 75, 77, 104, 146, 152, 154, 246, 335
- 336
exhilarant 117
exorcism 155
expectorant 34, 71, 73 - 74, 79, 81, 84, 87 - 88, 90 -
          92, 94 - 98, 100, 104, 107 - 109, 111, 117,
          122, 174
     foods 131 - 132, 134, 137 - 138, 143, 149, 151,
155 - 157
external injuries 83
external causes of doßha increase 18
extracts 553
eye 31, 70, 72, 75, 79, 82, 84 - 85, 88, 92, 97, 99,
102, 112, 119, 150, 159, 170, 172, 174, 176,
190, 208 - 209, 238, 241, 243 - 245, 251, 283,
 286, 288, 437 - 450
bath/netra basti 243 - 244
bleeding/burning 243
discharges 202
drops 243, 449
foods for 131, 135 - 136, 145, 148, 151, 153,
155,
injury (external cause) 450
itching 243
 joint and binding membrane 439
lashes 441
lustre 243
observation 45
pain 203, 243, 285 paste 72
pulse 49
pupil diseases 445
redness 243
salve 104, 243, 449 -451, 466
sliminess 243
snehana/oil therapy 176
    sticky 201
     sunken 243
     swelling 444
     tearing 243
     therapy 243
     wash 83, 331
eyeball diseases 437- 439
eyelid disorders 71, 105, 197, 440 - 442

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
642
F
face 44, 197, 288
     abhyañga 245
     pain, numbness 31
     paralysis 77, 91, 145
fainting 41, 72, 137, 150, 154, 170, 246, 473
     pulse 49
faith 106, 250, 338, 342
fat 27 - 30, 73 - 75, 78, 82 - 83, 86 - 87, 90, 92, 94 -
          95, 97 - 99, 104, 106 - 107, 111, 122, 131,
          134, 139, 142, 144 - 145, 147 - 148, 151 -
          152, 156, 161, 172, 180 - 181, 190, 194 -
          195, 205, 208 - 209, 219, 222, 250, 277, 285
see also obesity
fatigue 31, 41, 75, 202, 207 - 208, 252
fatty acids 143
fava bean 141
fear 17, 19 - 22, 24 - 26, 29, 41, 49, 60 - 61, 174,
          201, 209, 280, 310, 314, 317, 319, 332, 338,
         340 - 341, 343
pulse 49
febrifuge/febrile disease 79 - 80, 82 - 83, 87, 91,
          92, 97, 99, 101, 106, 108, 117,
     convalescence 142
foods 130, 132, 135, 137, 142 - 144,
  feces 19, 28 - 30, 35, 49, 61, 68, 122, 190, 192,
          194 - 195, 208, 211, 226
     soften/lubricate passage 85
     suppression pulse 49
feet 245, 252
burning sensations 242
burning soles 461
female disorders 159, 200,
     hormones/organ debility 75, 102, 142, 222,
          283, 289, 294
     reproductive 82, 85, 88, 96 - 99, 106, 109, 116,
          251, 270, 327, 503 - 509
     snehana/oil therapy 176, 246
     See also reproductive, pituitary, endocrine,
hormone, pineal
Feng Shui 564
fennel 73, 157
fenugreek 157
fertility 148, 156, 263, 267, 315, 326 - 327
fertilizer 583
fetus 75, 103
fever 31, 41, 70, 72 - 74, 76 - 92, 94 - 102, 105 -
106, 108 - 110, 113 - 119, 122 - 123, 393
- 400
aromatherapy 250 - 251
brain 72
chakras 316 - 317
chronic 77, 81, 102, 146, 153, 190
convalescence 72, 87, 95, 97
deep seated and intermittent 77
foods 130 - 133, 135 - 139, 142, 145 -147,
149, 151 - 153, 155 -156, 158 - 159
gastric irritability 133
gem therapy 328
intermittent/remittent 79 - 83, 95
intermittent or malarial 133
pancha karma 170, 172 - 173, 174, 185 - 186,
188, 190, 192, 246
pulse 49
práòáyáma/mudrá 286, 297
teething 81
tridoßhic 199
fiber 130, 132, 134 - 135, 137 - 138, 142 - 143
fibroids (uterine/ovarian) 75, 505, 507
figs 130
filariasis 186, 494
filberts 143
finger contraction 184, 461
finger nails- observation 45 - 46
fish 148
fish pose/matsyásana 275
fistula-in-ano  49, 172, 182, 493
five elements 13, 70
five kinds of doäha development 39 - 40
five leafed chaste tree 97
five life-breaths 343
five senses of action and knowledge 343
flat bean 141
flatulence 31, 71 - 72, 83, 89, 99
flax seed oil, snehana/oil therapy176
flax seeds 143, 149
fleas 108 - 109
flesh 237
flexibility 307 - 308
flies 109, 250, 584
flora 147
flour 144

Index
 643
flower gardening 174
flu 70, 85, 96, 100, 106 - 107, 109, 111, 131, 137 -
          138, 147, 156 - 158
Kapha-type 33
fluorescent lights 321
fluoride 138
fomentation 171, 180
food 174
allergies 381
assimilation 93
aversion 198
cell 345
combinations 127
improper quantity 41
intake and doßha illness 41
plans for doähas 587
poisoning 190
quality and quantity 127
fractures 70, 74, 87, 140, 406 - 407
frame of mind 127
frankincense 250 - 252
frontal brain cleanse/kapálbháti kumbhaka 287
frozen foods 127
frozen yogurt 146
fruit 129 fruit juices
153 fruit sugar 151
fumigation
toothache 91, 92
fungus 110
G
galactagogue 85, 102 - 103, 105, 111, 117
galaganda/goiter 133, 185, 197, 533
gall bladder 95, 115 - 116, 129 - 130, 133, 135,
138, 190, 260 - 261, 311
pulse 51
recipe 164
stones 95, 103, 118, 130 - 131, 133, 136 - 139,
190, 353, 375
gandúäha 451
Ganges/Ganga 103
Gangotri 103
gangrene 135
garbanzo/chick peas 129, 141
garcinia 111
garden nightshade 89
gardenia 250 - 251
gargle 70 - 71, 79 - 80, 88, 90, 131, 133, 152,
156, 331, 451
sore mouth or spongy, ulcerated gums 88
garlic 99
Garuda Purana 326
gas 34, 41, 70, 78 - 79, 81 - 82, 88, 90, 94 - 96,
100, 104, 107, 110, 115, 122, 124, 131,
135, 141, 144, 150, 154 - 158, 176, 192,
219, 222, 224 - 225, 246, 268, 275, 292
gastric ailments 83, 89, 96, 116, 133, 207
juices 119, 121, 152
gastritis 72, 89, 96, 108, 130, 144, 277, 379
gastroenteritis 186, 367
gastrointestinal disorders 266, 276
gastrointestinal tract 155, 176
gauri 87
gauriphal 85
Gáyatrí mantra 313
gems 324 - 329
genital tract displacement 506
pain 197
genics 581, 583
gentleness 63
germicide/germifuge 81, 107, 117
ghee 71 - 72, 81, 95 - 96, 104, 127 - 128, 130,
132, 137 - 140, 143, 145 - 146, 150 - 151,
153, 155, 163 - 167, 170, 173 - 174, 176,
179, 258, 285, 309, 333 - 334
lamp 104, 321
pañcha karma 181 - 183, 187 - 188, 190, 192 -
193, 196 - 198, 200 - 205, 208, 234, 236 - 237,
243 - 246
¤hamana/palliation 174
snehana/snehapána/oil therapy 176 - 178
Gherand Saåhitá 257
ghrita
SEE ghee
g.i. tract 79, 127, 176, 131, 135, 172, 176, 180,
          184, 212, 276, 310 - 311, 390
disorders 73, 78 - 79, 93, 104, 131, 180
giddiness 41, 99, 208, 242, 246
gigantic swallowort 74
ginger 71 - 73, 250

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
644
gingivitis 533
ginseng 75, 575
glands 130 - 131, 140, 265, 267 - 271, 274, 283,
292 - 293, 296, 311
adrenal and thyroid 138
definitions 547 - 548
enlarged 92, 197
neck enlargement 90, 98
swollen 30, 75, 77, 86, 98, 104, 158, 193, 328,
390, 495
glass ingested 85
glaucoma 243, 443 - 444
glossitis - acute superficial 533
glucose 207
glucoside 108
gluten 141
glycyzrrhiza glabra linn. 111
gnats 250
goat’s head 86
goat’s milk 146, 153
goiter 70, 133, 185, 193, 197, 533 - 534
gokßhura 86
gold thread 95
gomedha/hessonite garnet 328
gomukhásana/cow face pose 270
gonorrhea 78, 89 - 92, 97, 99, 105, 112, 133, 137,
            524
epididymitis and orchitits 97
pulse 49
good conduct 35
Gorakäha Saåhitá, 257
gotu kola/bráhmí 80, 173
gout 70, 72, 81, 85 - 87, 90, 99, 110, 130 - 131,
133 - 136, 139, 141, 144, 157, 170, 190,
192 - 193, 202, 231, 235, 535
pulse 49
goya bean 141
grahaní
SEE digestive disorders
grains 139
granthi 287
hard, small, benign tumors 534
granular conjunctivitis 440
grape juice 131
grape sugar 151
grapefruit 131
grapes 131
grass 93
Graves’ disease 534
gray hair 72, 77, 94, 123, 161, 197 - 200, 208,
          235, 241 - 242, 274, 296
great lock pose/mahá bandha 264, 295
great sealing pose/mahá mudrá 264, 294 - 295
greed 201, 280
green tourmaline 324
g^idhrasí
SEE sciatica
grief 170, 317
gripe 72
griping 79, 83
gríßhma 40
groin stretch/pregnancy yoga 298
grounding 315
guava 131
guæa/jaggery 151
guæmar 23, 86
guæúchí 86
guggul 70, 87, 251
gulma/abdominal tumors 99, 154, 189, 494
gums 70, 87 - 88, 131, 133, 242, 252, 452
bleeding 72, 78, 129, 132 - 133, 159, 161
spong/bleeding 78, 80
swollen or bleeding 131
guòas 13, 20
guru 11, 126, 314, 318, 346
guru mantras 313
guru-çhishya 8
guói and vaói/pills 552
gymnema sylvestre 86
gynecological 152, 251, 503
H
hair 72, 76 - 78, 92, 97, 111, 144, 150, 159, 202,
          213 - 215, 222, 240, 332
balding/loss 31, 77, 80, 159, 161, 202, 242
dryness 241facial 246
gray 31, 72, 77, 94, 105, 123, 161, 197, 208,
274, 296
graying and falling out 197 - 201, 242, 331
growth 92, 105, 150, 159
wash 94, 97, 105
halásana/plough 274

Index
 645
ham mantra 315
hamstring 300, 302
hand cramps 275
handicapped yoga 308
ha´g saà mantra 313, 317
Hanuman 265
Haóha yoga 174, 257 - 310, 582
SEE ALSO yoga
Haóha Yoga Pradípiká 257
happiness 274, 315
happiness and unhappiness cause of health and
disease... 39
haridrá 87
harítakí 88
harmonizing 329
harmony 322
Hataratnavali 257
hate/hatred 250, 274, 280
hay fever 84, 136, 158
hazelnut 143
head 41, 95, 170, 172, 186, 195, 197 - 200, 202-
203, 238 - 242, 250, 273, 315, 543
head/neck stretches - office yoga 305
headache 31, 72, 77, 79, 81 - 82, 84 - 85, 88 - 89,
          93, 98 - 99, 106 - 108, 110, 113 - 114, 136,
          138, 154 - 158, 181, 197 - 198, 201 - 202,
          240, 242, 249 - 252, 261 - 263, 274, 276,
          285, 416, 545
pulse 49
health 7, 315
health, excess & deficiencies of the dhátus 24
healthy pulse 49
hearing 101, 197, 202, 208, 245
heart 72, 74, 77, 79, 82, 88 - 90, 92, 95, 99 - 100,
          106 - 108, 110 - 111, 115, 117, 122 - 123,
125, 130 - 133, 135 - 137, 139 - 141, 143,
148, 150, 152, 155 - 156, 158 - 159, 164 -
165, 170, 174 - 175, 186, 188, 195, 202 -
203, 205, 207 - 209, 212, 216, 218, 221 -
222, 228, 231, 244, 249 - 251 - 251, 253,
268, 270 - 272, 281 - 283, 287, 289, 290 -
292, 309, 313, 315, 317 - 318, 323, 326 -
328, 328, 542
disease 31, 72, 74, 77, 90, 94, 98, 170, 173,
184, 186, 359
pulse 49
heaviness 41
spiritual heart 315, 338, 342 - 344, 347
stimulant 76, 86
tendons 16
heartburn 34,70, 85, 90, 131, 135, 144
pregnancy 252
heat 34, 83, 85, 114, 116 - 118, 128, 131 - 132
137, 150, 154, 174 - 175, 180 - 184, 187,
227, 287, 293, 332 - 336, 342,
heat stroke 142
heaviness 41, 170, 173, 184
hemanta 40
hematemesis 101
hematuria 90, 421
hemicrania 97, 198, 202
hemiplegia 71, 101, 183, 192, 460
hemoglobin 29 - 30, 35
hemorrhage, internal 84
pulse 49
hemorrhoids 42, 70, 72 - 76, 79, 81, 82, 84 - 88,
90, 92 - 93, 96 - 100, 103 - 105, 108 - 110,
119, 130, 132 - 134, 138, 140 - 141, 145,
153, 156, 180, 182, 186, 189, 222, 246,
252, 264 - 265, 267, 274, 384
bleeding 74 - 75, 84, 88, 90, 93, 96, 105
pulse 49
hemostatic 72 - 74, 77, 79, 93, 95, 107 - 108,
117, 130 - 131, 133 - 134, 137
hepatic tonic 77
hepatitis 70, 72, 77, 88, 92, 95, 136, 374
herbology chapter 67
herbs
     exercise 336
 juice 551
mixing 553
preparation and use 551
teas 153
tonics for ¤hamana/palliation 174
traditional mixtures 70
hernia 70, 149, 157, 274
hiatal 30
inguinal 493
pulse 49
hero’s pose/vírásana 265, 300
herpes 70, 84, 92, 95, 102, 123, 130, 134 - 135,
146, 153, 170, 172, 186
genital 524

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
646
zoster 112, 186, 486
hessonite garnet 328
hiatal hernia 30
hiccup 31, 42, 88, 94, 107, 151, 155 - 156, 184,
199, 202, 285, 412 - 413
     pulse 49
hidden stages 41
high blood pressure 101, 212, 360
SEE ALSO hypertension hikes 174
hikká
SEE hiccup
hima/cold infusions 551
Himalayan cedar 83
hi´gwasták 70
hip 277, 300, 302
híra bhasma 328
hiranyagarbha 348
hirchula/cardiac colic 378
hissing breath/¤hítkarí kumbhaka 289
histaminase 207
HIV 528
hives 245
hoarseness 71, 84, 88, 131, 133, 157, 184, 197,
201, 416, 435
pulse 49
holistic 14, 39
holy basil/tulsí 106, 250 - 251
home suggestions 337, 583
homogenized 144, 146
honey 127, 151
     and ghee 151
honeysuckle 251
hoom mantra 314 - 316
hordeolum cyst 440
hormones 102, 147, 159, 207, 212, 215, 246, 252,
          260, 269, 274, 283, 294, 311, 328, 581 - 582
deficiency 109, 207
female-regeneration 75
increases 109
secretions 109, 270, 274, 286, 289, 293, 296
swelling 70
horseradish 157
horses 83
hot infusions 551
hot peppers 136
hot temper 209
hot tubs 173
h^idaya 228
h^idroga
SEE heart disease
hrím mantra 315
humming bee breath/bhramarí kumbhaka 288
humor-imbalancing priorities 33
 humus 141
hunched back 267
hundred husbands herb/¤hatávarí 102
hunger 50, 93, 146, 153
hydragogue 90
hydrocele 493
hydrochloric acid 152
hydrocotyle asiatica linn. 80
hyperacidity 70, 102, 128, 133, 135 - 136, 154,
159, 285, 327 - 328, 379
hyperactivity 250, 321, 323, 327
hypertension 100- 101, 111, 123, 130, 133 - 134,
139, 144, 159, 202, 252, 266 - 267, 274,
326, 360
SEE ALSO high blood pressure
hyperthyroidism 390, 534, 548
hypochondria 79, 80, 102, 138
hypoglycemia 130, 135, 143, 146, 161
hypotension/low blood pressure 152 - 153, 361
hypothalamus 281, 310
hypothyroid 534, 548
hysterectomy 508
hysteria 88, 93, 100, 104, 107, 109, 155 - 156, 198,
          250, 280, 327
pulse 50
I
ice bean 146
ichnocarpus fruitescens 101
iæá 257 - 258, 260, 265, 280, 283, 286 - 287, 291,
293 - 295, 316 - 317
illusion 328, 346
imagination 315
immune system 35, 70, 75 - 76, 80, 87, 99, 103, 106,
137, 144, 147, 149 - 151, 161, 207 - 209, 215,
251, 265, 287, 309, 314, 527 - 529
impatience 209
impotence 30, 76, 86, 91, 93, 100 - 102, 109, 134,
          148, 156 - 157, 328, 523

Index
 647
abhyañga 210
tonic 327
infections 83, 85, 88, 92, 95, 124, 130, 135 - 139,
          142 - 144, 147, 151 - 152, 154, 159, 161,
          207, 209, 250 - 251, 321, 323, 326, 328,
          393 - 407
infectious disease 142 - 144
inference 43 - 44
infertility 86, 91, 93, 102, 109, 134, 143, 263, 267
inflamed bowels 85
inflammation 30, 70, 76 - 81, 83, 85 - 86, 88, -
90, 97, 99, 100, 111, 129,131, 133, 143-
111, 156, 250, 267, 293, 321, 326, 336
breast 92, 252
colon 72, 137
ear 180
eyes 150, 202, 208, 243
external 78 - 79, 81, 92, 97, 114, 133, 143,
incompatible foods 41
incontinence 72, 110, 157, 197, 427
incubatory stages 41
independence 327
Indian alces 92
Indian atees 76
Indian bedellium 87
Indian gall nut 88
Indian gooseberry 72
Indian madder 95
Indian nightshade 80
Indian pennywort 80
Indian spikenard 89
Indian summer 40
Indian valerian 104
indigestion 41, 70 - 73, 76, 79 - 80, 82 - 84, 87 -
          88, 91, 94 - 96, 105, 107, 110, 123, 126,
          128, 131, 136, 141, 144 -145, 155 - 158,
          161, 166, 170, 186, 246, 264, 269, 285 -
          286, 301, 375 - 377
     atonic 88, 95
     bilious 133
     children 158
     chronic, 95
     pulse 50
     pregnancy (yoga posture for) 30
individual consciousness 348
infants 130
     abhyañga 210
     tonic 327
infections 83, 85, 88, 92, 95, 124, 130, 135 -
          139, 142 - 144, 147, 151 - 152, 154, 159,
          161, 207, 209, 250 - 251, 321, 323, 326,
          328, 393 - 407
infectious disease 142 - 144
inference 43 - 44
infertility 86, 91, 93, 102, 109, 134, 143, 263,
          267
inflamed bowels 85
inflammation 30, 70, 76 - 81, 83, 85 - 86, 88, -
          90, 97, 99, 100, 111, 129,131, 133, 143-
          111, 156, 250, 267, 293, 321, 326, 336
     breast 92, 252
     colon 72, 137
     ear 180
     eyes 150, 202, 208, 243
     external 78 - 79, 81, 92, 97, 114, 133, 143,
          156, 237
     gall bladder 95
     genital 99
     internal 99
     joints 97, 142
     kidney 94, 102
     lungs 102
     mucus membranes 85, 110
     muscles and joints 97
     nerve 76, 157
     reduces 77
     skin 92, 95, 149, 246
     stomach 72
     swellings 90, 157, 237
inflammatory bowel syndrome 88
injuries 80, 83, 95, 130, 146, 149, 152 - 153, 156
     pain 156
     swellings 92
     SEE ALSO wounds
     inositol 135
insanity 77, 80, 101 - 103, 107, 109, 145, 153,
          186, 199 - 200, 317, 465 - 468
     pulse 50
insecticidal 94, 97, 108 - 109, 156, 250
insects 108, 583 - 584
     bites/stings 74, 88, 102, 131, 133, 251
     repellent 109, 156, 250
insight 327
insomnia 31, 41, 70, 75, 92, 99, 102, 104, 123,

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
648
130, 140, 150, 156 - 157, 159, 161, 170,
176, 196, 207, 222, 233, 235, 238, 240,
250 - 251, 266, 272, 274, 280, 289, 314
instinct 293
intellect 177, 202, 343
intelligence 88, 129, 145 - 146, 152 - 153, 177,
195, 220, 246, 315, 328
intermittent fevers 74
internal organs 144
internal stye 440
intestinal 30, 110, 130, 180, 195 - 196, 214, 218,
222, 271, 277, 281, 378 - 379
     bleeding 129
catarrh 132
cleansing 72
colic 99
 disorders 79, 83, 85, 137 - 140, 159, 173, 193,
276
flora 88
flu 85
large intestine 149, 190
SEE ALSO colon
mucus membrane 78, 110
muscle sedative - promote secretion of 74
obstruction 371 - 372, 374
 organism 89
parasites 186, 190, 193, 382
perforation 30, 371 - 373, 374
problems 89
SEE ALSO small intestine
SEE ALSO ulcers
spasms 82, 151
tonic 79
tract 138
worms 92, 135, 138
intoxication 41, 81, 246
intuition 287 - 288, 290 - 291, 339
iodine 139, 161 - 162
ipomoea digitata linn. 110
iris 250 - 251, 442
iron 99, 106, 130 - 131, 134 - 141, 158, 161 - 162,
     cookware 556
irradiated 155
irritability 185, 132 - 133, 141, 159, 250 - 251, 274
     irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) See colitis
irritant 75, 118, 141,
irritation 85, 141, 148, 274
í¤habgol 88
isometrics/office yoga 305
ispaghula 89
itching 78, 81, 85, 88, 94, 123, 159, 203, 237, 244
161, 180
J
jade 324, 327
jaggery/guæa 151
jal jamní 94
jálandhara bandha 260, 293
jam 71
jaóámáòshí 89
jará 208
jasmine 250
jatharagni 18
jathara parivartanásana 276
jatrúrdhva marma 216
jaundice 73, 78 - 79, 83, 85, 87 - 89, 92, 94 - 95,
97, 99, 103, 131, 133, 136, 140, 184, 190,
328, 375
pulse 50
jaw 197, 200, 202, 242
jealousy 250
jerusalem artichoke 134
jihwá roga/tongue disorders 453
jñyán mudrá 259 - 261
jogging 174
joints 42, 70, 76 - 77, 104, 116, 142, 197, 207 -
208, 211 - 213, 215 - 216, 218 - 219, 222,
226, 230 - 231, 235, 244, 250, 276
arthritic 108, 141, 156
SEE ALSO arthritis
dislocation
SEE fractures
gout/rheumatic 90
heaviness 149
inflammation/swelling 97, 142
pain 81 - 82, 85, 95, 108, 170, 179, 182, 184
pain/swelling 157
stiffness/swelling 102, 235 joy
84, 250, 274, 315, 322
juice 84, 154
jwara

Index
 649
     SEE fever
Jyotiäh 3, 322, 324 - 325, 560
K
kákamáchí 89
kaki mudrá/¤hítalí 297
kákná¤há 90 kale 136
kama 57
kamala 100
kámalá roga
SEE jaundice
kañchanar 90
kañchanar guggul 90
kaòóha roga
SEE throat disorders
káòþkárí 91
kapálbháti kumbhaka/frontal brain cleanse 287
Kapha 14, 16 - 17, 22, 31, 34, 41, 70 - 72, 76,
79, 83 - 84, 87, 94 - 95, 99 - 100, 105, 108
- 109, 111, 146
kapikachhú 91
kapitthaparni 250
kapotásana/pigeon pose 271
kaþuká 92
karana ¤haríra/causal or essential body 344
karela 135
karma 147
karmic 33, 282, 314, 344
karna púrana 242
karnapálí roga
     SEE ear lobes
karòa-gata-roga-vijnániya
SEE ear disorders
karpúr 250
kása
SEE cough
katti basti 244
kaumára bh^itya 7
káya seka 234 - 235
káyachikitsá 6
kayvala kumbhaka 290
ke¤harája 77
kefir 146
kelp 138
Kerala 233
keratitis (xerotic) 442
khadir 507
khír 74
kicharí 63, 141 - 142, 188
kidney 77 - 78, 85 - 86, 89, 91 - 92, 94 - 95, 99,
          101 - 103, 106 - 107, 125, 130 - 132, 136,
          138 - 139, 141, 143, 145 , 148 - 150, 196,
          205, 222, 250 - 251, 260 - 261, 268, 271 -
          272, 327 - 328
     bleeding 131
calcium deposits 46
derangement 31
infections 70, 87
 stones 83, 86, 89, 95, 99, 103, 131, 133 - 136,
138 - 139, 153, 190
kidney beans 142, 166
king of the bitters 82
king of the oils 149
king of the purgatives 85
king of Váyu disorders 85
kledaka Kapha 17, 34
klím mantra 315
knee-to-chest/postpartum ásanas 303
knees 107, 304, 460
knowledge cell 345
koßóhágni 35
krím mantra 315
krimi
SEE parasites
K^ißhòa 106
krishna-gata- roga-vijñániya/chorid and iris 442
k^ißhòamul 106
kriyá yoga 294
kßham 315
kßhaya/atrophy 474 - 475
ku¤há 93
kukkutásana/cockerel 271
kukßhi-¤húla 378
kum kuma 93
kumárí 92
kumbhaka 284 - 285
kuòæaliní 262, 266, 269, 271, 287, 290 - 291,
293, 314
kuòæaliní ¤hakti 23, 260, 265, 313
kúrmásana/tortoise 270

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
650
kußhóha/skin diseases (obstinate) 479
kußhtha/ kút root 94
kuóaj 111
kuzu 138
kwátha/decoctions 551
L
labor contractions/pain 107, 252, 512
lactation 132, 252
lactose 151
lagophthalmos 441
laghu patha 94
lalaná chakra 317
lam mantra 315
lamb 148
la´ghana 169, 172
lard 148
large intestines 149
SEE ALSO colon
laryngitis 71 - 72, 79, 99, 108, 111, 138, 156, 198,
252, 454
la¤huna 100
lassi /buttermilk 128 - 129, 145
lassitude 263 - 264
lavaò bhaskar 70
lavender 250
laxative 72 - 73, 76 - 77, 79, 81, 83, 88 - 90, 92,
99, 105, 111, 118, 122, 130 - 133, 135 -
138, 140, 143 - 146, 148 - 154, 157
laya yoga 285
laziness 41
leaches 152
lecithin 140
legs 301 - 302, 307
legumes 141
lekhana/scraping 243, 449
lemon 71, 131
lemon grass 78
lentils 142
lepas/plasters 87, 98, 110, 141, 237, 246 - 247
leprosy 75, 94, 110
lethargy 122, 155, 201, 207, 209, 290
lettuce 137
leukoderma 76, 161, 185, 483
leukorrhea 76 - 77, 84, 87 - 88, 91, 93, 97, 102 -
          103, 133, 137, 143 - 144, 508
liberation 267
licorice 73, 111
life cell 345
life purpose 9
life sap 19, 23, 35 , 122
SEE ALSO ojas
life-breath 280 - 282, 290, 316 - 317
life-force 284, 287, 321
lifestyle 40, 175, 331
ligament stretching 88
light headedness 31, 42
lightening therapies 169
lily 250 - 251
lima beans 142
lime 131
linseed 143, 149
lion pose 258, 262
lips 30, 46, 149, 452
liqueurs 153
liquids 152, 246
liquor 153
lithotriptic 79, 86, 94 - 95, 98, 103, 116, 118
liver   34 - 35, 70, 72 - 73, 76 - 80, 83 - 85, 88, 95
- 99, 104, 106 - 108, 125, 130 - 136, 138 -
142, 145, 147 - 150, 152 - 153, 157, 159,
190, 202, 205, 211, 250 - 251, 260 - 261,
268 - 269, 271, 276 - 277, 286, 288, 326 -
327, 329, 336, 374, 581
enlarged 30, 70, 74, 81 - 82, 85, 90, 92 - 93,
111, 131, 133
pulse 51
recipe 164
lockjaw 197, 242, 460, 463
locust pose/¤halabhásana 266
long pepper 98
longevity 35, 73, 80, 88, 137, 146, 153, 157, 207
- 208, 234, 267, 281, 286, 317
longing 346
loss of appetite 101
loss of faith in the Divine 40
loss of sensation 101
lotus 250 - 251, 258, 260
lotus seeds 143
love 93, 103, 106, 147, 250 - 251
love and emotions 337
low blood pressure 156, 361

Index
 651
lower back 76, 156
lower back stretch office yoga 307
lumbago 70, 75, 78, 85 - 87, 93, 130, 269, 275
lumbar stiffness 246
lunar breathing 174, 287
lunar channel 286
lungs 30, 34, 70, 84, 102, 106, 108, 111, 125, 130 -
          131, 135 - 138, 143 - 146, 149 - 151, 153,
          156 - 158, 205, 214, 218 - 219, 221 - 222,
          225, 229, 250 - 251, 276, 287 - 289, 309, 328
     calcium deposits 46
SEE ALSO respiratory system; asthma
pulse 51
lust 201
luster 234
lymph 70, 76, 79, 90, 100, 134 - 135, 137 - 140,
142, 144, 158, 207, 211 - 213, 250
cancer 30
chyle - tendons 16
obstruction 30
lysine 140
M
macadamia 143
madan 62
madát-yaya/alcohol recovery 144, 470 - 473
madháyamañga marma 216 madhura 35
madhya 202
madhyama 291
magnesium 135 - 139, 141 - 144, 161 - 162
mahá bandha/great lock pose 264, 295
mahá bedha 264, 296
mahá marma/vital organs 228, 541
mahá mudrá/great sealing pose 264, 294 - 295
mahánáráyan oil 173, 176, 208, 251, 546
mahásudarähan 70
Maharishi Kanada 46
Mahavír/Hanuman 265
majjávaha srota 25, 27 - 30
malabar nut 109
malabsorption 31, 70, 74, 88, 96, 145, 147, 158,
266, 367, 380
SEE ALSO sprue malaise 31, 41
malaria 82 - 83, 86 - 87, 90, 92, 94, 97, 131, 400
malas 18 - 20, 176
male reproductive system 522
malefic planets and constellations 41
mallotus philippinensis muell, arg. 100
malnutrition and edema 141
malt syrup/maltose 151
mamírá 94
máåsavaha srota 27 - 30
manas chakra 317
manda 188
mandágni 18, 375
mandarin 134
manganese 133, 135, 138
mango 71, 132
manikya bhasma 327
manipúra chakra 269, 317
mañjißhþhá 95
manomaya koßha/mind cell 345
mantra 70, 313 - 315
mantra yoga 285
manyá 228
maple sugar 151
maple syrup 150
marga 31
margarine 149
maricha 95
benign and malignant 95
marijuana 108
marjoram 157
marma 6, 176, 215 - 232
marrow 25, 27 - 31, 42, 75, 77, 80, 84, 86, 89, 91 -
92, 95 - 97, 99, 101, 104, 106 - 108, 142 -
145, 147 - 148
massage 149 - 150, 173
SEE ALSO abhyañga masses 70, 151
mastitis 30, 142, 252
materia medica 7, 71
matsyásana/fish pose 275
matsyendrásana/spinal twist 268
maya 328, 345
mayonnaise 152 meat & fish 147
medas 25
medovaha srota 27 - 30
medical definitions 310
medicinal plasters 237
meditation 33, 57, 112, 126, 136, 143 - 144, 174,
         250 - 251, 296, 313 - 314, 319

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
652
meibomian gland infection 440
melancholy 79, 88, 107
melia azadirachta linn. 97
melons 132
memory 72, 75, 77, 80, 88, 96, 100, 102, 106 -
107, 143, 145 - 146, 153, 159, 161, 176 -
177, 208, 241, 243, 281,290, 294
meningitis 533
menopause 80, 92 - 93, 95 - 96, 102, 106, 508
spasms 104
menorrhagia 75, 78, 84, 88, 89, 91, 93, 95, 107,
197, 246, 506
menstrual 117,130, 152 - 153, 156, 197, 211,
     221, 251, 267, 274 - 275, 503 - 509
     after delivery or when scanty 109
      cramps 96, 104, 114, 149, 155, 157, 323
delayed or difficult 141, 137, 150, 155
discharge 85, 111
disorders 80, 96, 103, 158, 261, 266, 275
excess 133 - 134
irregular or excess 85, 93
pain 93, 95 - 96, 107, 156
promotes 85
regulator 87, 507
mental conditions 21 - 23, 102, 104, 147, 192,
261
disorders 155, 158, 199, 314 - 315
retardation 192
menus 163
meridian 51, 207
mesua ferrea linn. 96
metabolic 78, 107, 531 - 539
metabolism 88, 122, 152 - 153, 156, 211, 246,
293
metal toxic liver 92
methi 157
microwaves 127
migraines 70, 104, 154, 197, 201, 276, 285, 545
milk 71 - 72, 146, 145, 153
beauty care 246
milk hedge 104
millet 140
mind 35, 75, 84, 102, 106, 108, 122, 125 - 127,
          133, 136 - 137, 140 - 141, 144, 146 - 147,
          151, 158, 172, 174 - 175, 200, 250 - 251,
          286, 289 - 290, 295, 297, 304 - 305, 309, 314
          - 315, 328, 335, 343
     SEE ALSO mental
     sluggish 209
mind cell 345
mind’s heart 343
mineral pitch 103
mineral water 153
minerals 129, 131, 134 - 136, 138, 152
minerals and metals 553
miscarriage 133, 298, 506, 517
miseries 263
mißhamitita 94
mithya áhar vihar 40
moderation 67
mokßha 57
molasses 152
monk’s hood 110
monoplegia 181
moodiness 96
moonstone 324
morning sickness 133, 157 - 158
mosquitos 109, 250
moths 108, 250
moti bhasma 327
motion sickness 130
motivation 315
mountain ebony 90
mouth 44, 70, 72, 80, 95, 197, 199, 204, 252, 262,
451 - 454
dry 41, 131, 198, 240
MSG 147
mucilaginous 74, 102, 111
mucoid secretions 34
mucuna pruriens bak. 91
mucus 72, 77, 79, 81, 84, 87 - 88, 96, 99, 111,
129 - 131, 139, 142, 144 - 145, 149, 156,
158, 185, 187 - 188, 195, 198, 201 - 203,
209, 211, 281, 285, 287, 431 - 433
pulse 50
mucus membrane 34, 78 - 79, 84 - 85, 87, 89, 97,
102, 109 - 111, 122, 138, 152, 192, 434 -
436
mud-caused disorder (children) 517
mudrás 291, 294 - 297, 305, 582
mukha roga 451 - 452
múla bandha 260, 293
múládhára chakra 259, 270, 313, 316 - 317
multani methi 246

Index
 653
multiple sclerosis 30, 75, 192, 235, 265, 475 -
476
mung beans (múngdal) 129, 135, 142
múrchá
SEE fainting
múrchha kumbhaka 289
múrdha taila 242
muscles 24, 27 - 30, 75 - 77, 78, 82 - 83, 85, 90,
95 - 96, 99, 102, 104, 107, 111, 122, 130,
135 - 136, 140, 143 - 144, 147 - 150, 152,
159, 161, 172, 180, 182, 192, 198, 205, 207
- 208, 212, 235, 244, 250, 292, 308, 328,
335
muscular dystrophy 192
mushrooms 137
music therapy 313, 318 - 328
musk 252
musta 96
mustard 149, 157
mustard greens 137
mustard oil 173, 176, 209
mútra 19
mútra v^iddhi/scrotum (fluid) 493
mútrá-¤harkará
SEE urinary gravel
mútrá-áßhmarí
SEE urinary stones
mútrá-gháta
SEE urinary diseases
mùtrá-ghátádi
SEE urine retention
mútrá-k^ichra
SEE dysuria 103, 170, 246, 419
mútragháta
SEE urine obstruction
mútravaha srota 27 - 30
mutton 148
mutually contradictory foods 551
mycocardial necrosis 70 myotic 118
myrobalan 88 myrrh 79, 250 - 252
N
nábhi 217, 219, 221, 224, 226, 228, 231
nabho mudrá 297
náda 290 - 291, 294, 313 - 314, 317
náæí 31, 147, 185, 258, 260 - 261, 263, 265, 267 -
          271, 281 - 282, 284, 289, 296, 314, 316
náæí ¤hodhana práòáyáma 286
náæí sveda 182
naæíprakaßham/náæívijñánam 46 - 47
náæí-vraòa
SEE sinus
nágke¤har 96
nails 31, 76, 150
napping 128
Náráyan taila (oil) 552
narcotic 110, 153
nardostachys jatamansi DC. 89
násá-gata-roga-vijñániya
SEE nose diseases
nasal massage/passage 201, 287
nasikagra driähti 261
nasya 197 - 202
nature 39, 337
nausea 31, 34, 41, 70 - 72, 79, 83 - 85, 97, 100,
106 - 108, 122, 131 - 133, 136, 156 - 158,
161, 170, 173, 180, 186, 252
navarakizhi 235
navel 16, 315
navy beans 142
nayaná-bhigháta-pratißhedha
SEE eye injury (external cause)
nayana-budbuda/eyeball diseases 437 - 439
neck 98, 197, 202, 238, 242, 273, 306 - 307
nectarines 133
neem 97
negative ions 106, 310
negative thoughts 50, 250
negativity 201
neon lights 321
neoplasm 493 - 501
nerve 31, 70 - 71, 73 - 75, 77 - 80, 84, 86, 88 - 89,
          92, 95 - 97, 99 - 102, 104, 106 - 108, 110,
          122, 130, 140, 142, 144, 146, 148 - 151, 153,
          156 - 157, 159, 161, 192, 198, 207 - 209, 219
          - 221, 224, 226, 242, 245, 250 - 251, 261,
          263, 269 - 270, 274, 285, 287 - 289, 292 -
          293, 309, 311, 314 - 316, 321, 323, 326, 328,
          332, 336
     disorders 70 - 71, 80, 130, 157, 159, 209
     headaches 72, 99
inflammatory 77, 157

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
654
pain 77, 86, 122, 131, 155 - 156, 328
plexuses 35, 282
tonic 71, 198, 289
nervine 71, 75, 77, 80, 85 - 89, 91, 97, 99, 102, 104,
          106 - 107, 110, 118, 136, 143 - 144, 146,
          151, 153, 156, 158, 329
nervous (and nervous system) 71, 73 - 75, 77 - 80,
            82, 84 - 89, 91 - 93, 97, 99 - 104, 106 - 112,
127, 132, 136, 140, 155 - 157, 159, 161, 176,
            181, 192, 201, 207 - 208, 214, 222, 231, 233
            - 235, 238, 243, 259 - 261, 269, 273, 280,
            284, 286, 294, 314 - 316, 323, 326 - 328,
          336, 340, 457 - 476
neti pot 208
netra basti/eye bath 243 - 244
neuralgia 77 - 78, 83, 93, 104, 107, 109 - 110,
131, 156, 196, 250 - 251
neurasthenia 143 - 144, 156 - 157, 186, 328
neurolgical disorders 192
neuromuscular 235
neurosis 87, 196, 280
new-born babies abyhañga 213
newlyweds(hair oil) 241
niacin 134, 136 - 137, 140, 159
nicotine toxicity 133
nidána 39
night blindness 208, 243, 447
night sweats 158
niketa 31
nilá 217, 220 - 222, 224, 226, 228, 231
nimba/neem 97
nipples (sore) 252
niráma 150
nirbikalpa samádhi 318
nirguòæí 97
nirúha basti 192 - 196
nirvana ¤hakti 318
nitrogen 141
niyama 33, 257, 341 - 342
nocturnal emission 143
non-stealing 342
non-unctuous basti
     SEE nirúha basti
nonviolence 33
nori 138
nose 106 - 108, 110, 184, 192, 197 - 200, 202 -
          203, 238, 240, 262, 274, 327, 431 - 434
     pulse 50
nourishing 105, 140, 144 - 151,170, 172, 208
numbness 77
nursing 85
nutgrass 96
nutmeg 71, 157
nutrients 142, 146, 154, 269
nutrition 57 - 58, 67, 73, 105 - 167
nutritive tonic 72, 79, 102 - 103, 105, 109, 111, 329
nuts & seeds 142 - 144
O
oats 140
obesity 87, 92, 95, 97, 103, 110, 123, 130, 132 -
134, 148, 156, 170, 172, 185 - 186, 285,
389 - 390
pulse 50
SEE ALSO overweight
oblique abdominal muscles 302
observation 43 - 44
obstetrics 509
obstructions 97, 197, 235
odana 188
office yoga 305
oils 128, 173 - 174, 176, 207 - 210, 231 - 246
     Anu 433, 552
     Bilwa 433
     Náráyan 433
     £had Bindu 433, 552
ojas 20, 23, 34 - 35, 41, 72, 75, 87, 103, 105, 134,
142 - 146, 149 - 151, 170, 176 - 177, 188,
204, 233 - 234, 246, 249 - 251, 314 - 315,
323, 328
okra 137
oleation 149, 169, 171, 173, 176 - 179
olive 150
olive oil 173
onion 100
ophthalmia 79, 88, 92, 99, 104, 443, 451
opisthotonos 459
optic nerve 208
oranges 132
orbital cellulitis 445
orchis mascula linn. 101

Index
 655
oregano 157
organ pulse 51 - 52
organic 147, 583 - 583
organs and herbs 205, 547
origin sites 35, 176, 212
osteoarthritis 235
osteoporosis 72, 99, 192, 208
outer breath retention/bahya kumbhaka 290
outer disease pathway 32, 42, 180
ovarian fibroids 75, 505, 507
overweight 137, 139, 153, 167, 170
SEE ALSO obesity, weight
overwork 75, 104
ovum 26, 103, 264, 267, 269, 294
oxalis corniculata linn. 81
oxygen 281, 287, 292, 306
oxygenate 106, 153
ozone 106
P
pachaka agni 71
pachaka Pitta 17, 34 - 35
pádábhyañga 245
padma 250
padmásana/lotus pose 258, 260
pain 31, 41, 70 - 72, 74, 76, 78 - 79, 81, 85, 97 -
98, 102, 107 - 111, 123, 131, 136, 138, 141,
149 - 150, 155 - 158, 170, 182, 184, 186,
188, 190, 194 - 195, 197, 202, 208, 231,
237, 241 - 244, 246, 250 - 251, 274, 285,
307, 309, 316, 323, 335, 342
abdominal 41, 70, 76, 109, 111, 132, 149, 155 -
          157, 180, 192, 196, 275
     back 70, 76, 86, 123, 132, 192, 196
     childbirth 95, 98, 133, 213, 252, 299, 303
     heart 31, 93, 123, 323
     joint 70, 76, 31, 81 - 82, 85, 95, 108, 132, 141,
          157, 170, 182, 184
     menstrual 93, 95 - 96, 107, 149
     nerve 77, 86, 122, 131, 156, 328
     rheumatic 99, 109
     rib 92 - 94, 155, 186
     testes 31, 90
palate 30, 453, 533
palliation 170, 172 - 173
pallor 202
palpitations 31, 96, 104, 107 - 108, 112, 131, 140,
          155 - 156, 274, 315
pañcha karma 7, 196 - 249
pañchang 240
pancreas 34 - 35, 76 - 77, 84, 86, 95 - 96, 107, 125,
          131 - 132, 135, 139 - 140, 146, 152, 153, 221
          - 222, 229, 268 - 269, 277, 288
panír 145
panna bhasma 328
pantha 31
páòæu-roga
     SEE anemia
papaya 132
para náda 291
paralysis 71, 74 - 75, 77, 83, 88, 92, 95, 99 - 101,
          104, 110, 130, 141, 155, 176, 196, 231, 235,
          316, 459 - 460, 462 - 463
     facial 77, 91, 145, 153, 176, 197, 231, 233, 240,
          459 - 460, 462 - 463
paraplegia 181, 192, 361
parasites 70, 74, 79, 81 - 82, 87 - 88, 96 - 97, 100,
          103, 110 - 111, 113, 118, 122, 132 - 133, 135
          - 136, 138, 144, 150 - 151, 155, 186, 190,
          193, 197, 199 - 200, 251, 381
     pulse 50
parasiticide 118
parasympathetic nervous system 284, 286, 311
parathyroid 182, 274, 293, 311, 549
parißheka 181 - 183, 233 - 234
Parkinson’s 91, 192, 208, 476
párßhva-¤húla 378
parsley 137
parturifacient 118
parturition 211
paschimottanásana 258, 263
paßhana bheda 98
páähásana 268
passages 31
passion 317
pasta 141
pastes 237, 246 - 247
pasyanti 291
Patañjali 257
patchouli 250
pathogenesis 39
pathology (samprapti) 39

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
656
pathothenic acid (B5) 159
patience 317
páyasam 74, 235
peace 315, 317
peaches 132
peanuts 142, 150
pearl 324 - 325, 327
pears 133
peas 138
pecan 144
pectin 129
pelvis 83, 272, 276, 302 - 304, 505
peppermint 158, 250
perception 136, 158, 250, 281, 287, 315
perfect pose/siddhásana 258 - 259, 305
perforated colon, intestines, stomach 30
perfume 78
peridot 324
peritoneal 99
peritonitis 85
perspiration 90, 96, 133, 171
pesticides 151, 581 pets 100, 108, 554
peyá 188
pháòóa/hot infusions 551
pharyngitis 88, 156
phlegm 74, 94, 122, 131, 134, 137, 141, 149, 151,
          174, 250, 286, 289
     pulse 50
phosphorus 134 - 138, 141 - 144, 16 - 1621
phyllanthus niruri linn. 78
physical body 343 - 345, 348
picrorrhiza kurroa benth. 91
pigeon pose/kapotásana 271
pigmented patches on face 246
pills 552
pínasa/rhinitis 186, 197, 200 - 202, 433, 435
pinæa sveda 235 - 237
pudding mix 235
pineal gland 35, 207, 214, 221, 269, 274, 283, 296,
          323, 548
pineapple 133
pi´galá 257, 260, 265, 280, 283, 286 - 287, 291,
          293 -295, 316 - 317
pinguecula 442
pinon 144
pinto beans 142
piper longum linn. 98
piper nigrum linn. 95
pippalí 72, 98
pistachio 144
pitariasis 77
Pitta 14 - 18, 21 - 22, 32 - 35, 41, 70 - 73, 76 - 79,
          83 - 85, 87, 92 - 93, 95, 99, 108, 111, 128,
          130 - 132, 134 - 135, 142 - 143, 145 - 146,
          149 - 155, 158, 164, 170
pituitary 70, 109, 214, 221, 269, 274, 287, 293 -
          294, 296, 311
pizhichil 234
plantago ispagula/plantago ovata forsk. 88 - 89
plasma 24, 27 - 31, 35, 42, 73 - 74, 76 - 86, 90 -
          99, 101, 104 - 110, 116, 129 - 131, 138, 140 -
          141, 144 - 146, 148, 152, 154, 176 - 177,
          195, 205, 207 - 208, 295
plasters/lepas 87, 98, 141, 237, 246 - 247
plastics 581
plough pose/halásana 274
plumbago zeylanica linn. 82
plums 133
PMS 96, 130, 159, 161, 222, 250, 507
pneumonia, infant 92, 110
poison 77, 81, 83, 106, 110, 151, 154, 157, 171,
          176, 186, 190, 246
     animal bites 74
     metal 159
poliomyelitis 192
pollution 581 - 582
polyps 107, 192
pomegranate 133
poppy seeds 158
pork 148
post digestive/vipáka 61
post-natal depression 252
post-partum 70, 86, 95, 103, 135, 140, 142, 152,
          156, 213, 252, 301, 512
post svedhana 185
posture 298, 306 - 307
potassium 130 - 132, 134 - 135, 136, 138 - 144
potatoes 138
potency/vírya 20
poultice 78 - 79, 81, 85, 90, 96, 98, 105 - 106, 108 -
          110, 140, 142, 180
poultry 147

Index
 657
powders 552 prabháva 125
pradara
     SEE menorrhagia
pradhamana 197, 199, 201
pradhana karma 185
pradhena 237
pradhmápana 197, 199, 201
prak^iti 14, 46, 52
pralaya 345
pralepa 237
prameha/obstinate urinary diseases 72, 82, 423
prameha piæaká/diabetic ulcer 426 - 427
práò/práòa 16, 23, 58, 107, 121, 154, 249, 261,
          263, 269 - 270, 280, 282, 284, 294, 314 -
         315, 332, 348
práòa Váyu 16, 35, 238
práòavaha srota 27 - 30
práòáyám 174, 257, 280 - 287
práòic energies 259 - 260, 321
prasad 152
prasádana 243, 449
pratimarßha 198 - 199
pratißhyáya
     SEE colds
pratyáhára 280
praváhika
     SEE dysentery
pravál 99, 328 (bhasma)
prayer 33
pregnancy 70, 83, 88, 93, 103, 132, 152, 156, 213,
          252, 510 - 511
     pulse 50
     yoga postures for 298 - 301
preliminary therapies 173
premature graying 72, 161, 198, 235, 241 - 242
premonitory signs of illness (púrvarupa) 39
preservatives 127
prevention 35
prickly chaff flower 73
pride 317
p^itivi 347 - 348
progesterone 109, 294
prolapse 85, 88, 106, 122
properties of the three doßhas 16
prophylactic 94
propolis 151
prostate 30 -31, 98, 135 - 136, 138, 149, 238, 422,
          461, 501, 524
protease inhibitors 143
protein 34, 88, 129, 133, 135, 138, 140 - 143, 207
psoralea corylifolia linn. 76
psoriasis 76, 80, 88, 149, 185, 246, 481, 485, 489
psychic knots/granthis 287
     SEE ALSO granthis (tumors)
psychological diseases 321
psychology 337 - 341
psychosomatic 39, 280
psychotherapy 39
psyllium 73, 144
ptosis 441
puakußha/gingivitis 533
púja 152, 250
pulmonary 70, 98, 106
pulse 46 - 51, 250
pumpkin seeds 144
punarnavá 99
puncture vine 86
pungent 35, 67 - 68, 71, 73, 75 - 76, 78 - 79, 81, 83
          - 85, 87 - 88, 91 - 100, 102 - 103, 106 - 108,
          110, 121 - 125, 128, 130 - 142, 144 - 146,
          148 - 150, 153 - 158
punster/male reproductive system 522
pure awareness 88, 317
purgation therapy/virechana 34, 189 - 191, 197
purgative 72 - 75, 77, 83, 85, 90, 92, 96 - 97, 99 -
          100, 104, 118, 122, 149, 169 - 172, 176, 185,
          189 - 191, 246
purification therapy 172, 176 - 179
purifying mantras 316
puríßha 19
puríshavaha srota 27 - 30
purity 289, 342
purpura 93
purußha 39
purva karma 173
púrvarupa 39
pus 87, 104, 237
pußhti 208
puta-páka 448
pyorrhea 135

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
658
Q
quartan malaria 94
quartz crystal 327 - 328
questionnaires 43, 52 - 56
quinsy 533
R
radiation 130, 155
radish 138
rag (raga) 318 - 319
rainy season 40, 177
raised lotus pose 261
raisins 131
rajas/rajasic 13, 21, 141, 127, 153, 156, 210, 250,
281, 316 - 317, 322 - 323, 347
raja yoga 285
rájá-yakßhmá
SEE TB (pulmonary)
rakta 24
rakta mok¤ha 202
raktaja gulma 498 - 499
raktang 100
raktapitta 355 - 357
SEE ALSO bleeding
raktavaha srota 27 - 30
raktpunarnava 99
ram mantra 314 - 315
ranjak Pitta 17, 321
rasa 18 - 20, 24, 26 - 30, 35, 57, 59 - 60, 67, 129,
152, 195, 295, 315
minerals and metals 553
rasavaha srota 27 - 30, 295
rasavahini 31
rasáyana 7, 35, 100, 251
SEE ALSO rejuvenatives
rashes 83 - 84, 92, 122, 124, 130, 132, 135, 138,
140, 150
rasonam 100
raspberries 133
rauwolfia serpentina benth. 101
Ravi £hankar 319
raw honey 151
raw foods 126
rechanaka 100
reclining twist, postpartum ásanas 302
rectal ulcer (babies) 517
rectum 81, 85, 106
red blood cells 72, 133, 135
red coral 327
red garnet 324, 327
red hogweed 99
red raspberry 85
red spots 81
reduction therapy 169 - 171
refined food 141
refined sweets 150
reflexes 104
refrigerant 72, 78, 81, 83, 86, 92, 102, 107, 118,
          129 - 135, 137 - 139, 142 - 143, 149 - 150
rejuvenation 35, 146, 150 - 152, 157, 204, 233 -
          235, 246, 315
rejuvenatives 72, 74 - 75, 77, 79 - 80, 86 - 88, 91 -
          93, 99 - 100, 102 - 103, 105, 107 - 109, 111,
          119, 134, 142 - 146, 148, 150 - 151, 157,
          187, 251 - 252, 329, 332, 336
SEE ALSO rasáyana
renal calculi 83
reproductive 16, 18 - 19, 27 - 31, 59 - 61, 68, 581
aromas 250 - 251
gems 326 - 327, 329
herbs 71, 74 - 75, 77 - 80, 82, 84 - 86, 88 -
101, 103, 105 - 107, 109, 111, 315, 503 -
525
nutrition 122 - 124, 130, 134 - 135, 140 - 144,
148, 153, 157
pañcha karma 176, 208, 219, 221 - 222, 224
- 225, 227
yoga/práòáyám 261, 265, 267 - 268, 270 - 272,
282 - 283, 289, 295
requirements of practitioner & patient 32
research 571
reserpine alkaloid 101
reside 31
resolvent 80, 95, 118
respiratory 31, 112, 132, 138, 157, 283, 285, 287,
            292, 315, 335, 409 - 417
     herbs 70 - 71, 75 - 77, 79 - 80, 82 - 84, 86, 88 -
          91, 94 - 100, 102 - 104, 106 - 109, 111
restaurant food 127
restorative 101, 118
retarded 71
retching 71

Index
 659
reticular activating system 310
rheum emodi wall 73
rheumatic conjunctivitis 95
rheumatism
foods 130 - 131, 135, 139, 141, 149, 157
herbs 70 - 73, 75, 77 - 78, 80, 82 - 83, 85 - 88,
90 - 94, 96 - 100, 102, 106 - 107, 109 - 110,
pañcha karma 186, 192, 231, 235, 237 - 238,
250, 265, 267, 269, 272, 275, 287, 545 -
546
pulse 50
rheumatoid arthritis 95, 272, 275
rhinitis 186, 197, 202, 433, 435
rhubarb 73
riboflavin 135 - 136, 140
ribs 92, 94, 209, 264, 401
rice 140
rickets 136
ricinus communis linn. 85
¼ig Veda Bhasyabhumika 284
rigidity 41
ringworm 78, 144
ritual 250
rock candy 71, 152
rock salt 71, 152
roga 21
root cause 10
root chakra 315
ropana 243, 449
rosacea 246
rose 251
rosemary 158, 251
rough chaff tree 73
roundworm 91, 130, 144
royal jelly 151
rubefacient 95, 104, 118
rubia cordifolia linn. 95
rubus wallichii 85
ruby 324 - 327, 329
rudhrapußhpa 251
rúkßhaòa 169 - 170
rupa 39
rutabaga 139
rye 140
S
sacred creeping grass 93
sadhaka Pitta 17
sádhaná 33, 57, 63, 112, 126, 129, 282, 284 - 285,
          290 - 292, 294 - 295, 309, 316 - 317, 332,
          338, 342, 346
sadness 346
safflower 150, 173
saffron 71, 93
sage 158, 252
sahasrára chakra 265, 313, 316, 318
saibikalpa 64
salad 150
sálam-mi¤hrí 101
sálamba sarvá´gásana 273
salep orchid 101
saliva 35, 41, 152, 211
salivation 186
salt 127, 152
salty taste 40, 67 - 68, 122 - 125
sáma 150
samádhi 21 - 22, 64, 281, 290
samágni 18
samána Váyu 16, 35, 269, 282
saånyása/comas 30, 107 - 109, 473
samprapti 39
samsarajana 189 - 190
saμ¤hamana 173, 175
saμa¤hodhana 172
saμtarpaòa 169
samvritásamvrita 31
sanátana dharma 7
sandalwood 251
sandhi mukti/fractures 74, 87, 140, 406 - 407
sandhigata-roga-vijñaniya 439
sapta dhátus 144
Saraswati 315, 317
sarca indica linn. 75
sárivá 101
sarpa-darußhtrika 86
sarpa-gandha 101 sarsaparilla 101
sarva-gata-roga-abhißhyandha
     SEE conjunctivitis
sarvánga dhárá 234
sarvánga senchana 234
satiated pulse 50
sattwavajaya 39

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
660
sattwic/sattwa 13, 21, 35, 44, 63 - 64, 210, 215, 246,
251, 281, 317, 322, 347
     foods 126 - 127, 129, 134, 136, 139, 140 - 144,
          146 - 147, 150, 152 - 154, 156 - 157
herbs 72 - 73, 75, 80, 84, 86, 93, 99, 103, 105 -
108, 111, 114,
saussurea lappa clarke. 94
saxifraga ligulata wall 98
scabies 104
scalds 88, 105
scalp cracking 242
scapula 197
scarlet fever 83
schizophrenia 238
sciatica 70, 76 - 77, 81 - 82, 85 - 86, 99, 139, 157,
192, 194, 196, 263, 272, 275, 287, 461, 463
     pulse 50
scleritis 442
sclerotic coat 441
scorpion stings 81
scraping 449
scrofula 98 - 99, 170
scrotum enlarged 184, 192, 493
fluid 493
scurvy 79, 81, 98, 131 - 132, 135
sea salt 152
sea vegetables 138
seasons 32 - 33, 35, 40, 128, 332 - 335
seated twist - postpartum ásanas 302
seated wall-leg stretch - postpartum ásanas 301
secretions 74, 86 - 87, 92, 158
sedative 74 - 75, 89 - 90, 101 - 102, 104, 110 -
          122, 135, 138, 144, 150, 157, 201
suppressing natural urges 29, 31
seed mantra 70, 313
seers 328
self-absorption 318
Self-Realization 10 - 11, 33, 124, 257 - 258, 281,
284- 285, 294, 314, 316, 318, 338 - 339, 342,
346
self-test 52 - 56, 583
self-worth 338
semen 75, 78 - 79, 109, 130, 132, 141, 143, 145,
- 146, 157, 170, 184, 189 - 190, 192, 205,
218, 226, 246, 264, 267, 294, 317, 344 -
345, 420, 522 - 523
seminal 86, 89, 93, 157, 420
senility 80, 109, 260, 274
senna 73
sense organs 234
senses 31, 147 - 148, 151, 172, 197, 199 - 204,
206, 211, 226, 233 - 235, 242, 250, 344
serenity 238, 322
serotonin 141
serpent pose/bhuja´gásana 266
sesame 105, 144, 150, 173, 176, 209
sesamum indicum DC. 105
setu bandha sarvá´gásana 273
seven body constitutions 6
seven doßha categories 17
seven tissues (dhátus) 18 - 19, 144, 146
sexual debility 75, 77, 101 - 103, 133 - 134, 137,
144, 148, 274 - 275, 328
£had bindu taila (oil) 433, 552
shaking 315
¤hakti 23, 296, 313 - 314
¤halabhásan/locust pose 266
¤hálákya tantra 7
¤halyá tantra 7
¤ham mantra 315
¤hamana 169 - 170, 172 - 173, 179, 198
¤háåbhaví mudrá 262
¤hankha marma 216
£ha´kar Sen 46
¤ha´k puähpí 102
¤harat 40
¤harírachidra 31
¤hastras 147, 317
¤hatamúlí 102
¤hatapatra 250
¤hatávarí 35, 102
¤havásana/corpse pose 279
¤heka (eye sprinkling) 449
shellfish 148
¤hikäha, díkäha, paríkäha 318
¤hilájit 23, 103
¤hirá 31
¤hiro basti 240 - 241
¤hiro dhárá 238 - 240
¤hiro lepa 238
¤hiro-roga-vijñániya/head disorders 543
¤hiro virechana nasya 198
¤hiähira 40, 170, 333
¤hítalí/cooling breath 174, 285 - 286

Index
 661
¤hítkarí kumbhaka 289
£hiva 88, 317
¤hlípada/elephantiasis 494
¤hleßhaka kapha 17
shock 107, 156
¤hodhana 169 - 170, 172 - 173, 176, 179, 233
¤hopha/¤hotha
SEE edema
shoulder 197, 269 - 271, 275, 299, 302, 307
shoulder stand/sálamba sarvá´gásana 174
¤hrama 208
¤hrím mantra 315
¤huklagata-roga-vijñániya/sclerotic coat 441
¤hukra 25 - 26, 145 - 146, 149, 315
¤hukra-¤hmarí/seminal stones 420
¤hukravaha srota 27 -30
¤húla
SEE colic
¤hum mantra 315
¤huòþhí/¤huòþha/ginger 71
¤hvása
SEE breahing difficulty
¤hweta musali 103
sialagogue 71, 118
sickle cell anemia 358
sida cordifolia linn. 76
siddha yoni ásana 259, 305
siddhásana 258 - 259, 305
Silk Road 8
silver cookware 556
simhásana 258, 262
singers 262
sinus 94, 98, 156 - 158, 176, 180, 186, 201, 209,
220, 241, 249 - 250, 274, 276, 287, 331,
401- 402
congestion 95, 106, 156, 274, 276
dryness 202, 433
     headache 108, 262 - 263, 276
pulse 50
sinusitis 108, 138, 201, 287
síta 20
sitopaladi 70
six seasons 333
six stages of disease development 41 - 42
six tastes 20, 121
skeletal disease 95
skin 31, 122, 251, 264, 295, 328, 479 - 490
food 130 - 136, 138 - 140, 143 - 146, 148 -
151, 157, 159, 161
     herbs 70, 74 - 78, 80 - 84, 87 - 92, 94 - 101, 103
          - 106, 108 - 109
pañcha karma 170 - 172, 176, 178, 180, 185 -
     186, 189, 191, 197 - 198, 202, 209, 212, 235,
     237 - 238, 245 - 246
skull, veins, joints, ligaments, tendons 197
sleep 41, 77, 146, 158, 199, 203, 208 - 209, 235,
245, 294
sleepy 34
slimming, snehana/oil therapy 176
slipped discs 269
sluggishness 34, 277, 287
small caltrops 86
small intestine 34, 41, 89, 92, 190, 211, 216
smallpox 189
smell 197, 202, 432 - 434
smoke inhalation therapy 202
smoking 142, 202, 469 - 470
snake bites 110
sneezing 31, 106, 203, 432
sneha, medicated ghee and oil 198, 552
snehana 149, 169, 171 - 173, 176 - 179, 235
snehapána 176 - 178
Snigdhajíra 88
snuff 71 - 72, 107, 197 - 200, 202
snuhí/thohar 104
soda 153
sodium 135 - 136, 139, 161 - 162
solanum indicum linn. 80 solanum
nigrum linn. 91
solanum xanthocarpum schrad 91
solar breathing/súryabheda práòáyáma 128, 286
solar channel 286
solar plexus 268, 292, 315 soma 332
soma chakra 317
sonph 157
sore mouth, gargle 88
sore throat 71, 79, 83, 85, 88, 90 - 92, 96, 110 -
          111, 131, 133, 136, 156 - 158, 186, 252, 262,
          266
soreness from nursing 302
sores 78, 83, 85, 87, 92, 94 - 96, 136, 140, 142, 144,
149 - 151, 158
sorrel 81
sorrow 317

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
662
Soul 317
sound/náda 290 - 291, 294, 313 - 319
sour 20, 67 - 68, 122 - 125
sour cream 146
soy 142, 150
spaces inside the body 31
spasmodic hysteria 89
spasms 71 - 72, 74, 78 - 79, 81 - 83, 87, 89, 93 - 94,
96, 100, 102, 104, 106 - 109, 111, 136, 149 -
151, 155 - 158, 182, 202, 218, 233, 244, 250
speakers 262
spearmint 158, 250
special properties 62
speech 197, 314 - 315, 317, 328
sperm in bladder 30
spermatorrhea 91, 99, 103, 110, 137
sphatika bhasma 328
spices 127, 148 - 150, 155 - 158
spinach 138
spinal marrow 104
spinal twist/ofice yoga 306
spinal twist pose/matsyendrásana 268
spine 208, 244, 268, 272 - 273, 275, 299 - 300,
306
curvature 271
spirit, sun & moon/red & white 257
spiritual Áyurveda 8, 343
body 346
dangerous practices 547
healing 112, 321
heart 344
lacking 57
perception 328
spleen 72, 76, 84 - 85, 88, 92 - 93, 95 - 98, 104,
107, 125, 131 - 132, 137, 140, 145 - 146, 153,
164, 323, 326, 336, 355, 372, 401, 547
     enlarged 30, 42, 70, 77, 81 - 83, 85, 90 - 92,
111, 131, 142, 182, 356, 358, 370 - 371,
374, 465, 495, 499, 537
     pañcha karma 170, 172, 189, 190, 202, 205,
218, 221 - 222, 226 - 228
     pulse 50
     yoga 260 - 261, 269, 277, 286, 288, 297
split peas 142
spogel seeds 88
spongy gums 80, 88
sprains 78, 88, 97, 149, 184, 250, 277
spreading hogweed 99
spring water 154
sprinkling 183, 234
sprue 79, 367
spurs 30
squash 138
srotas 23, 26 - 31, 43, 147 - 149, 153, 155 - 156,
          158, 170, 194, 233, 335
srutis 346
stability 315, 317
stabilizing 139, 145
stagnant food 73
stagnation, yogaraj guggul 70
stambhana 169, 171
stammering 461
stana vidradhi/breast abscess 402
standing bow pose 272
steam therapy 173, 181, 211
sternum pain 244
steroids 111, 127, 144, 146
sthána 31
sthapani 225, 226, 228, 230
sthula ¤haríra 343
stiffness 70, 169, 171, 180, 182, 184, 197, 208,
218, 220, 246, 275, 298, 308 - 309, 323,
          331, 335
     joints 102, 235
neck 102, 186, 197, 199, 201, 331, 459
     thighs 139, 170, 172, 181, 460
stimulant 70, 71, 75, 77 - 79, 81 - 84, 86 - 89, 93-
          97, 100, 104, 107 - 108, 110, 118,
     food 124, 131 - 134, 136 - 138, 146, 149, 152 -
          154 - 158
stomach 30, 34 - 35, 41, 45, 52, 70 - 74, 79, 82 -
          86, 92 - 93, 98, 102, 110 - 111, 126 - 127,
          130 - 137, 139 - 140, 145 - 146, 151 - 152,
          185, 250, 260 - 261, 269, 297
stomachic 72 - 74, 76, 78 - 79, 82 - 84, 86, 92 - 94, 96
- 97, 99, 102, 104 - 105, 107, 119, 131, 157
stones 79, 136
stool 18 - 20, 92, 96, 129, 132, 139, 142, 144
strain 31, 170
strawberries 134
strength 89, 103, 106 - 108, 122 - 124, 127, 130, 132,

Index
 663
136 - 143, 145 - 149, 152 - 158, 176, 195, 209,
246, 265, 315
stress 104, 130, 207 - 209, 212, 280, 306 - 308, 315
stretch marks 149, 252
strokes 130
study of scriptures 342
sthula ¤harír 343
stunted growth 130
stupor 72, 202
sturdiness
SEE tissues
styptic 90, 119
subconscious 280
subtle body 88
sucanat 151
sudation/svedhana 180
sudorific 96
suffering 346
sugar 72, 86, 110, 121 - 123, 128, 129 - 134, 139 -
143, 145 - 148, 150 - 153, 155, 166, 170, 175
metabolism 92, 132 - 133, 151
sukßhma ¤haríra/astral body 321, 343 - 344
sulfur 135 - 136, 139, 142 - 143
summer heat 85
sun overexposure 74
sun salute pose/súryásana 277 - 279
sunbathing 173 - 174
sunburn 149, 246, 252
sunflower 150, 176
sunflower seeds 144
sunstroke 112, 131 - 132, 142
supple body 146
suppressed emotions 31
suppressing natural urges 29, 31, 50
suppuration 81
surgery 8, 182
survana vasant malti 475, 527
Súrya 287, 322
súryabheda práòáyáma 286
súryásana/sun salute pose 277 - 279
Sußhrut Saåhitá 6
sußhumòá 23, 257, 260, 264 - 265, 269, 282, 290
- 296, 313 - 314, 316 - 317, 338
svara-bedha
SEE hoarsness
svedhana 169, 171, 173, 176, 180 - 185
swabhavoparama 39
swádhißhóhán chakra 259, 317
swádu 20
Swámí £ha´kar Purußhottam Tírtha 67, 317
Swami Náráyan Tirtha 113
swapna 209
swarasa/herb juice 551
swastikásana 258, 263
sweat 19, 27 - 30, 82, 122, 173, 182 - 185, 245
SEE ALSO svedhana
sweet 20, 67 - 68, 122 - 126
sweet potato 111, 138
sweeteners 150
swelling 70, 75, 78 - 79, 85, 88, 90, 92, 97 - 98,
          104, 109, 136, 142, 149, 157, 193, 195, 197,
          229, 235, 237
swollen 131, 142, 158
glands 30, 77, 86, 328
prostate 30 - 31
testes 77, 90
swooning breath/múrchha kumbhaka 289
sympathetic nerves 287
sympathetic nervous system 284, 286
synovial fluid 207
syphilis 74, 97 - 98, 101, 104, 109, 524
syrup 71, 150 - 151
systemic diseases 235
T
T.S. Elliot 316
tadan kriyá 296
tagara 104
tahini 35
taila seka 234
tálu vidradhi/palatal abscesses 533
tálugata roga/palate disorders 453
tamarind 111
tamas/tamasic 13 - 14, 21 - 23, 44, 100, 104, 127,
          134, 137, 141, 144, 147 - 148, 152, 155,
          157, 210, 215, 280 - 281, 316 - 317, 322 -
          323, 346 - 347
tangerine 134
tanmatras 344
tannic acid 133
tápa svedhana 180
tapas 342

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
664
tapeworm 100, 110 133, 144
tarpaka 17
tarpana 448
taste 20, 23, 35, 40 - 43, 50, 57 - 63,67 - 68, 84,
100, 121 - 126, 202, 204, 206, 220, 243, 246,
283, 317
TB 70, 90 - 92, 98, 100, 109, 130 - 131, 135, 139,
146, 153, 170, 193, 222, 287, 328
pulmonary 134, 145 - 146, 153 - 154, 185,
414 - 415
tea 154
     substitue 81
teeth 28, 72, 77, 105, 130 - 131, 136, 144, 150,
198, 200 - 204, 208, 242, 451 - 452, 516
tejas 23, 249, 314, 321, 323, 328, 347 - 348
tejbal 105
temper 274
tension 122, 149, 287 - 290, 302 - 303, 305 - 308
terminalia arjuna 74
terminalia belerica roxb. 78
terminalia chebula retz. 88
testes/testicles: pain or swollen 30 - 31, 90, 97
testosterone 260, 294
tetanus 80, 110, 184, 459
tetany arthritis 182
thalmus 310, 548
thiamine 140
thighs 139, 170, 172, 184, 299 - 301
thinking 314
third eye/spiritual eye/ájñá 228, 259, 296, 315 -
          - 146, 150, 152 - 154, 170 - 174, 177, 193,
          199, 203, 251, 286, 537 - 539
pulse 50
thoracic life-force 293
thorax 271
Thoreau 11
threadworms 109
three agnis 18
three causes of illness 40
three desires 33
three disease pathways 42
three kinds of diseases 43
throat 28, 30, 34, 50, 59, 68, 315, 434 - 436, 453
- 454, 533
food 122, 131, 139, 145 - 146
herbs 70 - 72, 79, 87, 110
pañcha karma 170, 172, 197, 199, 203, 220,
226, 228, 233, 238
yoga 262, 274, 293
SEE ALSO sore throat
thrush 529
thunderbolt pose/vajrolí mudrá 266
thyme 158
thyroid 109, 135, 138 - 140, 268, 274, 276, 283,
293, 311
pulse 50
thyroxine 293
tikßhna 202
tíkßhnágni 18
til/tila (sesame seeds) 62, 105, 144, 150
timira/blindness 190, 445 - 446
tinctures, acetic 152
tingling sensation 197
tinnevelly nilavembu 82
tinnitus - see ear ringing tinosporia
cordifolia miers 86
tissues 30 - 31, 250, 267, 293, 295, 309, 314, 327,
331 - 332, 335 - 336, 547
food 122 - 124, 127, 129 - 132, 134, 136, 140
          - 148, 150 - 152, 159, 178
     herbs 70, 72, 74 - 75, 87, 93, 97, 104, 108
  pañcha Karma 169, 171 - 174, 176, 178, 185,
          222, 233 - 234, 244, 246
tow contraction 184
tofu 142
tomatoes 139
tongue 28, 30, 44 - 45, 71, 131, 289, 331, 453
tonic 119, 183, 185, 246, 250 - 251
food 130 - 138, 140 - 146, 148 - 152, 157, 173
- 174
herbs 70 - 80, 82 - 92, 94 - 95, 97 - 99, 101 -
     103, 105 - 106, 108 - 111
toning 169, 172, 179
tonsillitis 78, 110, 197, 293, 533
tonsils 71
tooth 70 - 72, 80, 130 - 131, 452
toothache 71, 81, 91 - 92, 94, 105, 110, 156
147, 151, 154 - 157, 202, 252, 452
toothache tree 105
tortoise pose/kúrmásana 270
toxic 151 - 152, 190
bile pulse 50
toxins 34, 274, 280, 321, 331 - 332, 391 - 392
     foods 126 - 127, 135, 139 - 140, 142, 146 -

Index
 665
          148, 151 -152, 154, 581
     herbs 83, 87, 89, 95, 104
     pañcha karma 169 - 172, 174, 176 - 177, 180,
          183 - 185, 187, 190 - 191, 194, 196, 199,
          204, 207 - 209, 211 - 212
     SEE ALSO detoxification
trace minerals 106, 141
trachea 34
trachoma 440
tracts 31
transfer point (marmas) 228
transmutes sexual energy 108
traumatic injuries 80, 95
travel excess 170
tráymán 106
tremors 27, 31, 100, 150, 176, 315, 461
tribulis terrestris linn. 86
trichiasis districhisis 441
tridoßhic 18, 41
t^ikatu 70
triphalá 70, 79, 88
triphalá guggul 70
trißhná
SEE thirst
triv^t 191
trout 148
true guru 346
truth 11, 338, 342
tryptophan 207
tuberculosis 87, 98
     SEE ALSO TB
tulsí/tulasí 107, 250
tumburu 105
tumors 28, 30 - 31, 50, 59, 145, 197, 250, 421 -
          422, 494 - 498
     abdominal 99, 154, 186, 189, 494
     benign 95, 138, 184, 534
     brain 501
     breast 30, 96, 222
     foods 122 - 123, 131, 134 - 135, 137, 143,
          145, 147, 151, 154
     herbs 77, 87 - 88, 90, 92, 94 - 95, 97 - 98, 100
     malignant 60, 95, 147
     muscle 28, 30
     ovarian 75, 498
    pañcha karma 176, 180, 185, 192, 197, 201,
          246,
     uterine 30, 75, 498
     yoga 264, 267, 297
tur dal 129
turbinado sugar 151
turkey 148
turmeric 87
turnips 139
turpentine 83
tvak 107
typhoid 79, 89, 132, 400
thyroid 50, 70, 109, 135, 138-140, 207, 221, 311,
         323, 360, 548, 549
    cancer 501
    yoga poses  268, 274, 276, 293
    SEE ALSO glands, hyperthyroid, hypothyroid,
        and sparathyroid
U
udakavaha 27 - 30
udán Váyu 16
udara roga/abdominal diseases 369
uææíyána bandha 260, 291 - 292
udgharßhana 244
ugrásana/paschimottanásana 258, 263
ujjáyí kumbhaka 289
ulcerations 73, 94
ulcerative colitis 88, 95 (see also colitis)
ulcers 30, 111, 252, 274, 280, 327 - 328, 391, 405,
          577
     duodenal 83, 89
     food 122, 128 - 131, 134 - 138, 140, 142, 155,
          158
     herbs 70, 72 - 76, 78, 80 - 85, 87, 89 - 90,
          92, 97 - 99, 102, 104 - 105, 108, 111
     pañcha karma 190, 209, 237 - 238, 246
unctuous 195
universal consciousness 348
unmáda
SEE insanity
upajihviká/glossitis 533
upanáha svedhana 180
Upaniähads 13
upaähaya 39
upper torso 306
upward bow/urdhva dhanurásana 272

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
666
urethra 83, 89, 94, 130, 197, 421 urethritis
99, 112
uric acid 98, 139, 147
urinary/urine 19, 27 - 31, 50 - 51, 76, 85, 110,
          146, 182, 195, 197, 211, 269, 274, 419 - 427
     bladder 30, 133, 170, 421 - 422, 542
bleeding 86, 96, 135
burning 77, 86, 130, 132, 136, 141
difficult 30 - 31- 81, 106, 149, 184
difficult, painful, or burning 74, 137, 151, 157
- 158, 419
excess 133, 423
food 122, 124, 130 - 133, 135 - 139, 141, 146
149, 151 - 152, 154 - 155, 157 - 158
gravel 98, 131, 420
herbs 70, 72 - 74, 76 - 78, 80, 82 - 88, 93 - 94
96, 98 - 99, 101, 103, 105 - 107, 109 - 111
increase flow 86, 110
involuntary 84
obstructions 30, 184, 421
painful 30 - 31, 73, 86, 111, 141
passage ulcers 97
retention or excess, 141, 197
scanty 82
slow elimination 421
stones 30, 79, 86, 130, 135, 192, 419 - 420
urinary tract 130, 133, 136 - 139, 158, 267
uro basti 244
urogenital 78, 83, 136, 246, 251, 315
urticaria 156 - 157, 404
urustambha/paraplegia 181 - 182, 192, 361
uähmá svedhana 181
úßhná 21
uterine/uterus 27 - 28, 30, 75, 77, 86, 93, 95, 97,
          107, 205, 222, 250 - 251, 274, 301 - 302,
          503, 505, 508, 511
     bleeding 75, 85, 131, 505
     contractions 107, 310
     tumors and cysts 30, 498 - 499
     prolapse 85, 106, 197
uttara karma 204
uttarabasti 193
uvulitis 78, 186, 197
V
vachá 107
vaginal 95, 98, 132, 190, 246, 508
vaginitis 92, 112
vagotonic 94
vaikrant bhasma 328
Vaiswanara 348
vájikarana 7
vajra náæí 270
vajrolí mudrá 266
Vala 327
valerian 89, 104
valeriana wallichii DC. 104
vam mantra 315
vamaka 186
vamana/vaman 34, 185 - 190, 203
vamanopaga 186
vaμ¤ha (lochana) 108
váráhíkand 108
varicose veins 272, 274, 280, 301
varòya lepa 246
varßha 40, 333
vartmagata-roga-vijñániya/eyelids 72, 105, 197,
          440 - 442
vásá/vásáka 109
vasant 40, 333
Vástu £hástra 322, 563
Váta
SEE Váyu váta-ßhonita or
váta-rakta
SEE gout
váta-vyádhi
SEE nervous system
vátári 85
vátáßhóhílá
SEE prostate (enlarged)
vatsnábh 109
Váyu 14 - 21, 25 - 27, 29, 31 - 35, 40 - 42, 44 - 48,
          50 - 51, 495
food 123 - 124, 126 - 127, 129 - 132, 134, 137,
141 - 143, 145 - 155, 158, 163
herbs 70 - 72, 79, 84 - 86, 88, 92, 94, 98, 100,
103 - 105, 108, 111,
Veda Vyasa 3
Vedantic 346
Vedas 3, 13, 346

Index
 667
Vedic Astrology/Jyotiäh 3, 322, 324 - 325, 560 -
563
vegetable asphalt 103
vegetable juice 154
vegetables 129, 134 - 139
vegetarianism 63, 128
veins 31
velvet leaf 94
venereal diseases 74, 80, 86, 92, 98, 135, 524
vermicide 120
vermifuge 97, 99, 120
vertebrae 267, 269, 298
vertigo 72, 99, 104, 155, 174, 462
vessels and cooking 556
viæa´ga 110
vidárí-kanda 110
vidradhi
SEE abscess
vigñanamaya koßha/knowledge cell 345
vigor 134, 148, 235, 293
vik^iti 14, 35, 43 - 46, 48 - 49, 52, 56
vilambiká 376
vilepí 188
vinegar 152
viola odorata linn. 106
vipáka 20, 61, 124
viral disorders 186
vírásana 265
virat 348
virechana 34, 189 - 191, 197
virtue 250
viruses 130, 133 - 134, 250
vírya 20, 60, 123
víryalpata
SEE impotence
visásana 265
visceral obstructions 95
visceral organs 271, 281, 287
vißhagara-vairodh tantra 7
vißhamágni 18
Vißhòu 106, 317
vißhuddha chakra 317
vision 111, 130, 137, 145, 150, 157, 197, 243
visúchiká/gastro enteritis 186, 376
viswa 348
vital breath 27 - 30
vital force, deranged 31
vital organs 541
vitality 132 - 134, 273 - 274, 287, 292, 295, 315,
321, 323, 326, 328, 332
lower 41, 154, 323
vitamin 129, 131, 134, 137 - 140, 142, 151 - 152,
158 - 160
 A 132, 135 - 139, 141 - 144, 159 - 160
B-complex 135 - 138, 140 - 144, 159 - 160
C 72, 130 - 132, 134 - 140, 159 - 160
D 135, 159 - 160
E 135, 138 - 140, 150, 159 - 160
vitamin deficiencies 138
vitex negundo linn. 97
vitiligo
SEE leukoderma
voice 46, 79, 95, 109, 145, 150, 153, 158, 176,
195, 197 - 202, 242, 246, 262, 293, 355
vomiting 28, 30 - 31, 34, 41 - 42, 50, 364
babies 516
 food 130 - 132, 134, 140, 150 - 151, 154 - 158,
161
herbs 71 - 72, 76, 78 - 79, 83 - 85, 88, 96 - 97,
99, 107 - 109
pañcha karma 170 - 171, 173, 185 - 189, 246
pregnancy 83
vraòa
     SEE wounds
v^iddhi/enlarged scrotum 184, 192, 493
vulnerary 77, 88, 92, 120
Vyán Váyu 16, 110
vyayama/exercise 173 - 174, 208, 335 - 336
W
walks 174
wall relaxation pose/postpartum ásanas 302
wall squatting pose/pregnancy yoga 299
wall-boat/postpartum ásanas 303
wall-single leg stretch/pregnancy yoga 300
walnuts 144
Walt Whitman 13
warts 104, 479
waste 31, 235, 288
wasting 50, 80, 92, 94, 99, 101, 103, 109, 130 -

The Áyurveda Encyclopedia
668
131, 144, 149, 264, 328, 474
SEE ALSO TB (pulmonary)
water 154, 331
metabolism 23, 27 - 30, 74, 152, 315
   retention 95, 136, 139, 172
watercress 139
watermelon 132
weakness 99, 101, 111, 126, 130, 147, 152, 159,
161, 170, 266
digestion 132, 146, 151, 153 - 154, 157 - 158
weeds 584
weight 41, 68, 73, 90, 109, 111, 127, 130 - 131, 135
- 137, 139 - 140, 143, 147, 153, 167, 170, 195,
209 - 210, 252, 310 - 311, 323, 326, 335- 336,
358, 363, 389 - 390, 435, 474, 513, 574
wheat 140
wheezing 285
white blood cell count - increases 70, 87, 90, 207
white flour 141
white leadwort 82
white musali 103
white sugar 150, 152
whooping cough 87
wide leg spine twist - pregnancy yoga 300
wild violet 106
will 315
wine 153, 470 - 473, 553
winter cherry 75
wisdom 88, 317
withania somnifera dunal. 75
women 241, 503 - 511
woodfordia floribunda salisb. 84
worms 72, 77, 81 - 82, 88, 88, 90, 92, 96 - 100,
          108, 110, 113, 117, 120, 132, 136, 155 - 156,
         176, 179, 198 - 199, 202
      intestinal 92, 110, 135, 138
     ringworm 78, 81, 144
round 91, 100, 130, 144
tapeworm 100, 133, 144
worry 123, 155, 251
wounds 77, 82, 84 - 85, 88, 94, 96, 105, 149 - 151,
          199, 403 - 407
wrinkles 149, 198, 208, 235, 243, 261, 274 - 275,
          288, 296
wrists 271, 273
X
x-ray radiation 130
Y
yakrit janya raktalplata/sickle cell anemia 358 -
359
yam 109, 138 - 139
yama and niyama 33, 257, 341 - 342
yaßhóímadhu/licorice 111
yawn 31
yeast infections 34, 96, 143, 147
SEE ALSO candida
yellow sapphire 324 - 325, 327 - 328
yellow topaz 324, 329
yoga 88, 141, 143 - 144, 153, 155, 174, 257 - 311
children 304
digestive disorders 309 - 310
elderly & handicapped 308 - 309
office 305 - 308
post-partum 301 - 304
pregnancy 298 - 301
SEE ALSO haóha yoga
Yoga Vani 291, 338
yogaraj guggul 70
yogic 223
yogic diet 150
yogis 105
yogurt 147, 153
yoni mudrá 260, 296 - 297
yonivyápat 503 - 506
SEE female reproductive
young 145, 170
yuäha 188
Z
zanthoxylum alatum roxb. 105
zinc 46, 137, 158, 161 - 162
zircon ash 328
zucchini 138

Index
 669
“Oh, East is East, and West is West,
and never the twain shall meet,
Till earth and sky stand presently at
God’s great Judgment Seat.
But there is neither East nor West,
border, nor breed, nor birth,
when two strong men stand face to face,
though they come from the ends of earth!”
Kipling - The Ballad of East and West

Heo{th
The
ffurveda
loedia
\atural Secrets 
to
Herrlinq, 
Prcr 
ention, 
& Lonq'er 
itr
'l'hrs 
lrook 
contrrins 
rrll thc ingretfients 
tirr rr herrlthr 
litc,
" ...t1;t uro.tl toutltt'tl.r{,ri.i/i 
i,. rlr,tr' ,ttt,l u.t(t' li'i(,n(ll\, 
t'(;;t)ut.t'( 
1100f\.
rttt.lIttt';'ttl,t 
tt;'rtilttl,lt 
trttl,t\'..\',:ttltl I'irtl,,t l.,,t.r,lrtttt 
u! (tll tt,q/i'///.rr,/'./r'r
l,t t t t t r l, i l i t t., t ft i.s l ft o rr t t r o l,, t n tl rt l i, t l, l t t'r fi, t.t t t tt...
ltrrt;'ilt.t;;'(.\'tu'n 
uttlitttl tt'tttt:f tttiott.s 
,ttttl tt ;'rtlttrtl'/,,,q/,,.'.'ili't'. 
"
Joseph [o zzct, M.D
D rector Columbio Presbytericrn 
Center [or Meditotion cnd Hec,iing
Heolthcore Proiect Director/Dhcrrom Hinciuicr 
lndic Resecrch Center
" ...trtt\';loltttii,t 
i.r tt,tith';;1t,11 
yl,is l,r,rtl; 
it
l'l,t,tpl', trt,ljt 
i:,r l,oll; itt itstll...l trirtl; 
t!tt t'igllt-;:'ttl; i()ut'!'( 
0tt.lj,trt';.rtl,t
'ttttl tl;t it)ut';i( l(\'l l,rtrtl'7i',r.t 
tt0l (i'(n tfrt.st rrt l,"itt,l ,t.r trttttpt'tllrn.ti;'t
rt.t tltt . Iytrt';'t,l,r l:,ttl,tlrtpttli,t...\'0tr 
(l(tinilt'll, tt,,t,l ll:i.r l,,trtl;.
'I 
l;t tlrltfl, tut(l /t/(!.t;; 
rtl'irtlitrttr,tfiott 
ttt'ttilrthlt l.,Lt't ;::ill unth)rtl,tL'(lly
,r',1r'f.t.1'ou.torttttl;irt,q 
tt,::'0t) ll;is,ttttitttt l.,t,tlitt!.il,.i/r,zr. 
"
Alternotive Heolthcore Monogement Morch 1999
The most complete ond in depth book on Ayurvedo with photogrophs of
85 moior Ayurvedic herbs, ond 89 photogrophs on
Ayurvedic hotho yogo poses for generol heolth, pregnoncy, ond senrors.
Ayurvedo is the science of heoling, prevention ond longevity.
Heoling is unique occorciing to personcrl 
constitutior.r 
(dosho), treoting the
root-couse of disorders crnd offering inexpensive theropies free from side effects
lior frrnriIies, 
nrctlicrrl 
rrntl 
hoIistic 
I)r'rcriti( 
)ncr\.
lthrit'ntrtcirt 
\ r'nt(l 
l)l'otcs:ol'r,
'lBN 
" irril J. - ..
lil ll il ri llllllll[ 
ilrilltilt
S39 95 US